COLTON MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances 
of the City of Colton, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 8, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
> 
PREFACE 
The Colton, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1974, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 8, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the Ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of the City Attorney. 
The code is organized by subject Matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number Designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine Vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses Following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an Ordinance disposition table, Following the text of the code, listing by number all Ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 8, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. O-01-19, passed February 5, 2019 . 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO Use YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the Laws of the City as accessible as possible to City officials, City Employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation Uses a unique and versatile numbering Structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each Part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which Ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which May contain Ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later Use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one Ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing Material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive Ordinance Material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "Ordinance history note," which lists the underlying Ordinances for that section. The Ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and Year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 8, a secondary Ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent Ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume Preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code User to those portions of the State statutes that are applicable to the Laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help Users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 8, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific Ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very Useful table tells you the status of every Ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by Ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the Ordinance. If the Ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the Ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the Ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes Used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 8, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 8, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for Use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each Ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the Ordinance number, adoption date, description of the Ordinance and the disposition within the code of each Ordinance. By Use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent Ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which Uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code User the date of the most recent supplement and the last Ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that Must be pulled from the code and the new pages that Must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 8, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later Use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your Ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail Attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard Copy, send two copies of all Ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 to 50022.8 inclusive and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the "Colton Municipal Code" as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the "Colton Municipal Code." 
(Ord. 1473 § 1, 1975)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code Shall be known as the "Colton Municipal Code" and it Shall be sufficient to refer to this code as the "Colton Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the Violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at Law or equity. It Shall be sufficient to Designate any Ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any Part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Colton Municipal Code." Further reference May be had to the title, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Colton Municipal Code" and such references Shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. 
(Ord. 1473 § 2, 1975)  
1.01.030 - Codification authority. 
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal Ordinances and certain of the administrative Ordinances of the City of Colton, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 to 50022.8 inclusive and 5002.10 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 1473 § 3, 1975)  
1.01.040 - Ordinances passed prior to code adoption. 
The last Ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 1466, passed October 1, 1974. The Following Ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 1466, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a Part of this code: Ordinances 1468 and 1471. 
(Ord. 1473 § 4, 1975)  
1.01.050 - Reference applies to amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Colton Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any Ordinance of the City of Colton, California, the reference Shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 1473 § 5, 1975)  
1.01.060 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein Shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 1473 § 6, 1975)  
1.01.070 - References to specific Ordinances. 
The provisions of this code Shall not in any manner affect Matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, Ordinances which are therein specifically Designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference Shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 1473 § 7, 1975)  
1.01.080 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any Ordinance or Part or portion of any Ordinance of the code Shall in any manner affect the prosecution for Violations of Ordinances, which Violations were committed prior too the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, Fee, or penalty at said effective date of this code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, Fee, or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such Ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such Ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, Fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any Violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any Ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining Shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1473 § 8, 1975)  
1.01.090 - Effective date. 
This code Shall become effective on the date the Ordinance adopting this code as the "Colton Municipal Code" becomes effective. 
(Ord. 1473 § 9, 1975)  
1.01.100 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such Decision Shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The Council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original Ordinance or Ordinances Shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1473 § 10, 1975)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
The Following words and phrases whenever Used in the Ordinances of the City Shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the Use of such words or phrases: 
A.  "City/Town" means the City of Colton, California, or the area within the territorial limits of the City of Colton, California, and such territory outside of the City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
B.  "Computation of Time" means the time within which an Act is to be done. It Shall be computed by excluding the first Day and including the last Day; and if the last Day be Sunday or a legal Holiday, that Day Shall be excluded. 
C.  "Council" means the City Council of the City of Colton, California. "All its members" or "all Councilmen" means the total number of Councilmen provided by the general Laws of the State of California. 
D.  "County" means the County of San Bernardino, California. 
E.  "Law" denotes applicable Federal Law, the constitution and statutes of the State of California, the Ordinances of the City of Colton, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which May be promulgated thereunder. 
F.  "May" is permissive. 
G.  "Month" means a calendar Month. 
H.  "Must" and "Shall." Each is mandatory. 
I.  "Oath" Shall be construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by Law, an affirmation May be substituted for an Oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" Shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
J.  "Ordinance" means a Law of the City; provided that temporary or special Law, administrative action, order or directive, May be in the form of a resolution. 
K.  "Owner" applied to a Building or land includes any Part Owner, joint Owner, Tenant in common, joint Tenant or Tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a Part of such Building or land. 
L.  "Person" means natural Person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, Business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or Employee of any of them. 
M.  "Personal Property" includes money, Goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
N.  "Preceding" and "Following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
O.  "Property" includes real and Personal Property. 
P.  "Real Property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Q.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a Street between the Curb line and the adjacent Property line intended for the Use of Pedestrians. 
R.  "State" means the State of California. 
S.  "Street" includes all Streets, Highways, avenues, lanes, Alleys, Courts, places, squares, Curbs, or other public ways in this City which have been or May hereafter be dedicated and open to public Use, or such other Public Property so Designated in any Law of this State. 
T.  "Tenant" and "Occupant," applied to a Building or land, includes any Person who occupies whole or a Part of such Building or land, whether alone or with others. 
U.  Title of Office: Use of the title of any officer, Employee, Department, board or Commission means that officer, Employee, Department, board or Commission of the City. 
V.  "Written" includes printed, typeWritten, mimeographed or multigraphed. 
W.  "Year" means a calendar Year. 
X.  All words and phrases Shall be construed and understood according to the common and Approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as May have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the Law Shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Y.  When an Act is required by an Ordinance the same being such that it May be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement Shall be construed as to include all such Acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 1454 § 1, 1974)  
1.04.020 - Grammatical interpretation. 
The Following grammatical rules Shall apply in the Ordinances of the City: 
A.  Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words Used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
D.  Use of Words and Phrases. Words and phrases not specifically defined Shall be construed according to the context and Approved usage of the language. 
(Ord. 1454 § 2, 1974)  
1.04.030 - Prohibited Acts include causing, Permitting. 
Whenever in the Ordinances of the City any Act or omission is made unlawful, it Shall include causing, allowing, Permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such Act or omission. 
(Ord. 1454 § 3, 1974)  
1.04.040 - Construction. 
The provisions of the Ordinances of the City, and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 1454 § 4, 1974)  
1.04.050 - Repeal Shall not revive any Ordinances. 
The repeal of an Ordinance Shall not repeal the repealing clause of such Ordinance or revive any Ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 1454 § 5, 1974)  
1.04.060 - Time period for review of final Decisions. 
The City Council has adopted California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, which defines the time period in which judicial review May be requested for certain final administrative Decisions and orders under California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. Pursuant to Section 1094.6(f), the City Clerk Shall provide Notice to any Party to a final Decision indicating that the time within which judicial review Must be sought is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. 0-6-92 § 1, 1992)  
Chapter 1.08 - TRANSFER OF FUNCTIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - City Council. 
Wherever the Ordinances or resolutions of Colton refer the board of Trustees, the reference Shall be construed to be to the City Council. 
(Ord. 1456 § 1(a), 1974)  
1.08.020 - Chief of Police. 
Wherever the Ordinances or resolutions of Colton refer to the marshal, the reference Shall be construed to be to the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 1456 § 1(b), 1974)  
Chapter 1.16 - PRISONER LABOR 
Sections: 
 
1.16.010 - Authority. 
Under and pursuant to Section 36904 of the Government Code of the State, the legislative body of the City authorizes the Use of Persons imprisoned in the City Jail for Violation of a City Ordinance to labor on Public Property or works within the City. 
(Ord. 1058 § 1, 1960)  
1.16.020 - Prohibitions. 
Such Persons Shall not: 
A.  Be compelled to work more than eight hours in any single twenty-four hour period; 
B.  Receive compensation or remuneration of any type; 
C.  Be forced to labor at Hazardous or degrading work; 
D.  Perform labor which Shall deprive any Person or Persons from regular employment with the City. 
(Ord. 1058 § 2, 1960)  
1.16.030 - Chief of Police to supervise. 
The labor so performed Shall be under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police of the City or a duly authorized Employee thereof so Designated by the Chief of Police, who Shall also prescribe rules and regulations necessary and convenient to further the purposes of this chapter and authority hereby granted. 
(Ord. 1058 § 3, 1960)  
1.16.040 - Prisoner not considered Employee. 
No prisoner laboring under the provisions of this chapter Shall be considered an Employee, nor Shall any such prisoner come within the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Insurance and Safety Act of 1917, now codified as Division IV and Division V of the Labor code of the State, Sections 3201, 6302, et seq. 
(Ord. 1058 § 4, 1960)  
Chapter 1.20 - USE OF CITY SEAL 
Sections: 
 
1.20.010 - Designated. 
The seal of the City is the same as that heretofore Used: In a circle the words, "City of Colton California" and in the center of such circle the words, "Incorporated 1887." 
(Ord. 0-08-01 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.20.020 - Custodian. 
The City Clerk is the custodian of the seal of the City. 
(Ord. 0-08-01 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.20.030 - Unlawful Use of official indicia. 
It is unlawful for any Person to knowingly or wilfully Use, or cause the Use of, a Copy or replica of the seal of the City, the original or a Copy or replica of City letterhead stationery, Business cards, or any other official indicia of the City or any City Department or office for any private or Commercial Purpose. 
(Ord. 0-08-01 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.20.040 - Purposes defined. 
"Private purpose," as that phrase is Used in this chapter, means and includes, but is not limited to: (1) the promotion, support or endorsement of or opposition to any candidate for a public office or the support or endorsement of or opposition to any ballot measure, initiative, referendum, or any other Matter voted upon at a public election; (2) the promotion, support or endorsement of a Person, issue or cause; or (3) the promotion, support or endorsement of any religious, charitable or otherwise not for profit organization, entity or cause. "Commercial Purpose," as that phrase is Used in this chapter, means and includes, but is not limited to, the promotion, support or endorsement of any group, entity, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or association which is for profit and/or connected in any way with trade, commerce, or Business. 
(Ord. 0-08-01 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.20.050 - Penalty for Violation. 
Any Person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter (as determined by the City Council), Shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon a conviction thereof Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six Months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 0-08-01 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.20.060 - Penalty supplemental to other penalties and remedies. 
The penalties imposed by the provisions of this chapter Shall be supplemental and in addition to any other penalties or remedies which May be imposed or provided by other Laws or Ordinances, such as disciplinary action, removal from public office, judicial order or judgment, or other Matter. 
(Ord. 0-08-01 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 1.24 - GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.24.010 - Authority. 
The Ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted under the authority of Government Code Section 36503.5(a). 
(Ord. 1682 § 1, 1985)  
1.24.020 - When held. 
The General Municipal Election of the City Shall be held on the same Day as the Statewide General Election, namely, on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in each even-numbered Year. 
(Ord. 1682 § 2, 1985)  
1.24.030 - No limitation on authority of Council. 
This chapter Shall apply to General Municipal Elections held in 1986 and subsequent Years; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter Shall limit or otherwise affect the authority of the City Council to change the Day of the General Municipal Election in the manner Permitted by Government Code Section 36503.5 or any other relevant statute. 
(Ord. 1682 § 3, 1985)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL  
Chapter 2.02 - ELECTION OF CITY COUNCILMEMBERS BY DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-09-18, § 1, adopted Nov. 6, 2018, amended former Ch. 2.02, §§ 2.02.010—2.02.080, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 2.02 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 0-3-92, 1992; Ord. No. 0-3A-92, 1992; Ord. No. 0-20-1, § 1, 2001; Ord. No. 0-18-06, §§ 1, 2, 2006. 
 
2.02.010 - Purpose and number of districts. 
The purposes of this chapter are to establish fair representation on the City Council by the establishment of four electoral districts to assure that the needs of all areas of the City are represented by the City Council at all times and to provide for the position of Mayor elected by the City at-large. The City Council districts shall be drawn with the underlying purpose of creating neighborhoods to bring people together and shall additionally be drawn to create districts as nearly equal in population as possible according to the latest Federal decennial census. District boundaries may be amended from time to time by City Council ordinance as provided by law to assure continued fair representation. 
(Ord. No. O-09-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
2.02.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as set forth in this section: 
"By District" means the election of members of the City Council only by voters residing in the district in which such Councilmembers also reside. 
(Ord. No. O-09-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
2.02.030 - Manner of election. 
One member of the City Council shall be elected by each district established by this chapter as identified and described in Sections- 2.02.080 and 2.02.090 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-09-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
2.02.040 - Adjustment to councilmember terms of office. 
All incumbent City Councilmembers shall be entitled to fulfill the balance of their existing terms of office to which they were elected by their respective six districts at either the November 8, 2016 or November 6, 2018 General Municipal Election, or to which they were appointed to such an office in lieu of an election pursuant to existing law. To effect that policy, the following special rules shall apply to future terms of office in order to match the timing of future elections with the reduction in districts from six to four: 
A.  November 6, 2018 General Municipal Election: Districts 1, 2 and 4 shall be subject to election. The term of office for each Councilmember in Districts 1, 2 and 4 shall be four years and shall expire in 2022. 
B.  November 3, 2020 General Municipal Election: Districts 3, 5 and 6 shall be subject to election. The term of office for each Councilmember in Districts 3, 5 and 6 shall be two years and shall expire in 2022, after which the incumbent Councilmember may elect to run for election in his or her new District of residence in the election to be held in November of 2022. 
C.  November 8, 2022 General Municipal Election: As of this election, Districts 1 through 6 shall cease to exist as six separate electoral districts. Instead an election shall be held for the Office of City Councilmember amongst duly-nominated and qualified candidates residing in and being voted upon by registered voters residing within the four Electoral Districts 1 through 4, as identified in Section 2.02.090 of this chapter. The term of office for each Councilmember in Electoral Districts 1 and 2 shall be two years and shall expire in 2024. The term of office for each Councilmember in Electoral Districts 3 and 4 shall be four years and shall expire in 2026. 
D.  November 5, 2024 and Future General Municipal Elections: Elections shall be held for the Office of City Councilmember amongst duly-nominated and qualified candidates residing in and being voted upon by registered voters residing within their respective Electoral Districts 1, 2, 3 or 4, as identified in Section 2.02.090 of this chapter. The term of office for each Councilmember shall be four years. General elections shall be staggered so that Councilmembers from Electoral Districts 1 and 2 are elected in November, 2024, 2028, 2032, etc., and Councilmembers from Electoral Districts 3 and 4 are elected in November, 2026, 2030, 2034, etc. 
(Ord. No. O-09-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
2.02.050 - Reserved.  
2.02.060 - Term of office for mayor. 
The term of office for the Mayor shall be four years. The Mayor shall be elected at the November 6, 2018 General Municipal Election and at each general municipal election in every fourth year following that election. 
(Ord. No. O-09-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
2.02.070 - Eligibility of city councilmembers district residency required. 
A Person is eligible to hold office as a member of the City Council if he or she resides in the geographical area making up the District from which he or she is elected and if he or she is registered to vote in that District at the time nomination papers are issued to the Person. 
(Ord. No. O-09-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
2.02.080 - District numbers and boundaries until November 8, 2022 election. 
Until the November 8, 2022 General Municipal Election, there shall be six Districts in the City described in the map which is set forth in this chapter as Exhibit "1", attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference, and which are more particularly described as follows: 
A.  District 1. All that land located in the City lying within the Following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the Ellen Street and the City of Colton Corporate Boundary, Thence easterly along Ellen Street to Watwood Street, Thence southerly along Watwood Street to Johnston Street, Thence easterly on Johnston Street to Grand Avenue, Thence southerly along Grand Avenue to Citrus Street, Thence westerly along Citrus Street to Grand Avenue, Thence Southerly along Grand Avenue to Long Beach Drive, Thence westerly along Long Beach Drive to Latham Street, Thence southerly along Latham Street to Laurel Street, also being a point in the City of Colton Corporate Boundary, thence easterly and southerly along the City of Colton Corporate Boundary, Following its various courses to its intersection with Agua Mansa Road, Thence easterly along Agua Mansa Road to Rancho Avenue, Thence southerly and easterly along Rancho Avenue to La Cadena Drive, Thence southerly along La Cadena Drive to the north line of the San Bernardino County Rood Control District Right-of-Way as described in Official Records 7556-795, PCL. 61 Records of San Bernardino County, State of California, Thence southerly and westerly along said north line through its various courses to its intersection with the City of Colton Corporate Boundary at Riverside Avenue, Thence, northerly and easterly along the City of Colton Corporate Boundary to the Point of Beginning. 
Excluding all unincorporated areas within this District boundary. 
B.  District 2. All that land located in the City lying within the Following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the City of Colton Corporate Boundary with Ellen Street Thence easterly along Ellen Street to Watwood Avenue, Thence southerly along Watwood Avenue to Johnston Street, Thence easterly along Johnston Street to Grand Avenue, Thence southerly along Grand Avenue to Citrus Street, Thence westerly along Citrus Street to Grand Avenue, Thence southerly along Grand Avenue to Long Beach Drive, Thence westerly along Long Beach Drive to Latham Street, Thence southerly along Latham Street to Laurel Street, also being a point in the City of Colton Corporate Boundary, thence easterly and southerly along the City of Colton Corporate Boundary, Following its various courses to its intersection with Olive Street, Thence easterly along Olive Street to Pennsylvania Avenue, Thence southerly along Pennsylvania Avenue to B Street, Thence easterly along B Street to La Cadena Drive, Thence northerly along La Cadena Drive to Olive Street, Thence easterly along Olive Street to 10th Street, Thence northerly along 10th Street to La Cadena Drive, Thence northeasterly along La Cadena Drive to Laurel Street, Thence westerly along Laurel Street to the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railroad, Thence northeasterly along said Railroad to City of Colton Corporate Boundary at Mill Street, Thence northerly and westerly along the City of Colton Corporate Boundary to the Point of Beginning. 
C.  District 3. All that land located in the City lying within the Following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of Mill Street, also being the City of Colton Corporate Boundary, with the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railroad, Thence Following the City of Colton Corporate Boundary through its various courses easterly and southerly to Fairway Drive, Thence westerly along Fairway Drive to Mt. Vernon Avenue, Thence northerly along Mt. Vernon Ave. to C Street, Thence westerly along C Street to 10th Street, Thence northerly along 10th Street to B Street, Thence westerly along B Street to La Cadena Drive, Thence northerly along La Cadena Drive to Olive Street, Thence easterly along Olive Street to 10th Street, Thence northerly along 10th Street to La Cadena Drive, Thence northeasterly along La Cadena Drive to Laurel Street, Thence westerly along Laurel Street to the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railroad, Thence northeasterly along said Railroad to the Point of Beginning. 
D.  District 4. All that land located in the City lying within the Following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the City of Colton Corporate Boundary and Agua Mansa Road, Thence northerly along the City of Colton Corporate Boundary through its various courses to Olive Street, Thence easterly along Olive Street to Pennsylvania Avenue, Thence southerly along Pennsylvania Avenue to B Street, Thence easterly along B Street to 10th Street, Thence southerly along 10th Street to C Street, Thence easterly along C Street to Mt. Vernon Avenue, Thence southerly along Mt. Vernon Avenue to Fairway Drive, Thence easterly along Fairway Drive to the Warm Creek Flood Control Channel, Thence southerly along the Warm Creek Flood Control Channel to the Interstate 10 Freeway, Thence westerly along the Interstate 10 Freeway to Mt. Vernon Avenue, Thence southerly along Mt. Vernon Avenue to M Street, Thence westerly along M Street to Fogg Street, Thence southerly along Fogg Street to Congress Street, Thence westerly along Congress Street to 8th Street, Thence southerly along 8th Street to Fogg Street, Thence westerly along Fogg Street to La Cadena Drive, Thence southerly along La Cadena Drive to Rancho Avenue, Thence westerly and northerly along Rancho Avenue to Agua Mansa Road, Thence westerly along Agua Mansa Road to the Point of Beginning. 
E.  District 5. All that land located in the City lying within the Following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the City of Colton Corporate Boundary and Interstate 10 Freeway, Thence westerly and northerly along the City of Colton Corporate Boundary to its intersection with the Interstate 215 Freeway, Thence leaving said Colton corporate boundary, southerly along the Interstate 215 Freeway to the Reche Canyon Flood Control Channel, Thence easterly along the Reche Canyon Flood Control Channel to its intersection with the northerly prolongation of Meadow Lane, Thence southerly along Meadow Lane to Washington Street, Thence easterly along Washington Street to Center Street, Thence southerly along Center Street to Barton Road, Thence southwesterly along Barton Road to its intersection with the City of Colton Corporate Boundary, Thence southerly along the City of Colton Corporate Boundary through its various courses to the Riverside County Line, also being City of Colton Corporate Boundary, Thence easterly along City of Colton Corporate Boundary to the Loma Linda City Boundary, also being City of Colton Corporate Boundary, Thence northerly along the City of Colton Corporate Boundary through its various courses to the Point of Beginning. 
Excluding there from all unincorporated area lying within the District boundary. 
F.  District 6. All that land located in the City lying within the Following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the most southwesterly corner of the City of Colton, Thence easterly and northerly along the City of Colton Corporate Boundary, also being the boundary between San Bernardino County and Riverside County, through its various courses to its intersection with Barton Road near Hilltop Drive, Thence leaving said Colton Corporate Boundary northeasterly along Barton Road to Center Street, Thence northerly along Center Street to Washington Street, Thence westerly along Washington Street to Meadow Lane, Thence northerly along Meadow Lane and its northerly prolongation to the Reche Canyon Flood Control Channel, Thence westerly along Reche Canyon Flood Control Channel to the Interstate 215 Freeway, Thence northerly along the Interstate 215 Freeway to its intersection with the City of Colton Corporate Boundary, Thence westerly along the City of Colton Corporate Boundary through its various courses to the intersection of Fairway Drive with Auto Plaza Drive, Thence leaving said Colton Corporate Boundary westerly along Fairway Drive to the Warm Creek Flood Control Channel, Thence southerly along the Warm Creek Flood Control Channel to the Interstate 10 Freeway, Thence westerly along Interstate 10 Freeway to Mt. Vernon Avenue, Thence southerly along Mt. Vernon Avenue to M Street, Thence westerly along M Street to Fogg Street, Thence southerly along Fogg Street to Congress Street. Thence westerly along Congress Street to 8th Street, Thence southerly along 8th Street to Fogg Street, Thence westerly along Fogg Street to La Cadena Drive, Thence southerly along La Cadena Drive to the north line of the San Bernardino County Flood Control District Right-of-Way as described in document recorded in Official Record No. 7556-795 PCL 61, Records of San Bernardino County, State of California, Thence southerly and westerly along said north line through its various courses to its intersection with the City of Colton Corporate Boundary at Riverside Avenue, Thence southerly and westerly along the City of Colton Corporate Boundary to the Point of Beginning. 
Excluding there from all unincorporated area lying within the District boundary. 
All calls to a roadway or drainage device shall be to the centerline unless otherwise noted. 
(Ord. No. O-09-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
2.02.090 - Adjusted district numbers and boundaries for November 8, 2022 election and future elections. 
A.  For the November 8, 2022 General Municipal Election, Districts 1 through 6, as defined in Section 2.02.080 (A) through (F), shall cease to exist as six separate electoral districts, and shall be replaced by four Districts 1 through 4, as those Districts are described in the map which is set forth in this chapter as Exhibit "2", attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference, and which are more particularly described as follows: 
1.  District 1. All that land located in the City lying within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the Rancho Ave. and the City of Colton Corporate Boundary, thence southerly along Rancho Ave. to Citrus Street, thence easterly along Citrus Street to Pennsylvania Ave, thence southerly on Pennsylvania Ave to Olive St., thence westerly along Olive St. to the City of Colton Corporate Boundary approximately 175 feet west of the intersection of Olive St. and Rancho Ave., thence counter-clockwise along the Corporate Boundary to Agua Mansa Road, thence easterly along Agua Mansa Road to Rancho Avenue, thence southerly and easterly along Rancho Avenue to La Cadena Drive, thence southerly along La Cadena Drive to the north line of the San Bernardino County Flood Control District Right-of-Way as described in Official Records 7556-795, PCL. 61 Records of San Bernardino County, State of California, thence southerly and westerly along said north line through its various courses to its intersection with the City of Colton Corporate Boundary at Riverside Avenue, thence, clockwise along the City of Colton Corporate Boundary to the point of beginning. 
Excluding all unincorporated areas within this District boundary. 
2.  District 2. All that land located in the City lying within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the Rancho Ave and the City of Colton Corporate Boundary, thence southerly along Rancho Ave to Citrus Street, thence easterly along Citrus Street to Pennsylvania Ave, thence southerly on Pennsylvania Ave. to Olive St., thence easterly along Olive St. to Pennsylvania Ave.; thence proceeding southerly along Pennsylvania Ave. to B St.; thence proceeding easterly along B St. to La Cadena Ave; thence proceeding northerly along La Cadena Ave. to Olive St.; thence proceeding easterly along Olive St. to 10th St.; thence proceeding southerly along 10th St. to B St.; thence proceeding easterly along B St. to Colton Ave.; thence proceeding northeasterly along Colton Ave. to Mt. Vernon Ave.; thence proceeding southerly along Mt. Vernon Ave to Fairway Dr.; thence proceeding easterly along Fairway Dr. to the City of Colton Corporate Boundary; thence proceeding counterclockwise along the Corporate Boundary to the point of beginning. 
Excluding all unincorporated areas within this District boundary. 
3.  District 3. All that land located in the City lying within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the City of Colton Corporate Boundary and Agua Mansa Road, thence northerly along the City of Colton Corporate Boundary through its various courses to Olive Street, thence easterly along Olive Street to Pennsylvania Avenue, thence southerly along Pennsylvania Avenue to B Street, thence easterly along B Street to Colton Ave; thence proceeding northeasterly along Colton Ave to Mt Vernon Ave; thence proceeding southerly along Mt. Vernon Ave. to Fairway Dr; thence proceeding easterly along Fairway Dr. to the City of Colton Corporate Boundary; thence proceeding counter-clockwise along the Corporate Boundary to Interstate 215; thence proceeding southerly along the Interstate 215 Freeway to Washington St.; thence proceeding westerly along Washington St. to Santo Antonio Dr.; thence proceeding northerly along Santo Antonio Dr. to Porta Mediterranean; thence proceeding westerly along Porta Mediterranean to Porta Roma; thence proceeding northerly along Porta Roma and its northerly extension about 115 feet to the drainage canal thence westerly along the drainage canal and southwesterly along the south line of the San Bernardino County Flood Control District Right-of-Way as described in Official Records 7556-795, PCL. 61 Records of San Bernardino County, State of California, thence southerly and westerly along said south line through its various courses to its intersection with the Burlington Santa Fe Railroad; thence proceeding southerly along the Railroad to the Corporate Boundary; thence proceeding clockwise along the Corporate Boundary to the intersection of the Corporate Boundary with the north line of the San Bernardino County Flood Control District Right-of-Way as described in Official Records 7556-795, PCL. 61 Records of San Bernardino County, State of California, northerly and easterly along said north line through its various courses to its intersection with La Cadena Dr.; thence proceeding northerly along La Cadena Dr. to Rancho Ave; thence proceeding northwesterly along Rancho Ave. to Agua Mansa Rd.; thence proceeding westerly along Agua Mansa Rd. to the point of beginning. 
Excluding all unincorporated areas within this District boundary. 
4.  District 4. All that land located in the City lying within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the City of Colton Corporate Boundary and Interstate 215 Freeway; thence proceeding southerly along the Interstate 215 Freeway to Washington St.; thence proceeding westerly along Washington St. to Santo Antonio Dr.; thence proceeding northerly along Santo Antonio Dr. to Porta Mediterranean; thence proceeding westerly along Porta Mediterranean to Porta Roma; thence proceeding northerly along Porta Roma and its northerly extension about 115 feet to the drainage canal thence westerly along the drainage canal and southwesterly along the south line of the San Bernardino County Flood Control District Right-of-Way as described in Official Records 7556-795, PCL. 61 Records of San Bernardino County, State of California, thence southerly and westerly along said south line through its various courses to its intersection with the Burlington Santa Fe Railroad; thence proceeding southerly along the Railroad to the Corporate Boundary; thence proceeding counter-clockwise along the Corporate Boundary to the point of beginning. 
Excluding all unincorporated areas within this District boundary. 
B.  All calls to a roadway or drainage device shall be to the centerline unless otherwise noted. 
C.  All future general municipal elections for City Councilmembers shall be conducted by the four electoral districts (Districts 1 through 4) as those Districts are described in the map which is set forth in this chapter and which are more particularly described in subsection (A) above. 
D.  The City Council may, from time to time, by ordinance, adjust the boundaries of Districts 1 through 4, as required by law or as desirable in order to create electoral districts as nearly equal in population as possible according to the latest Federal decennial census to assure continued fair representation within the City of Colton. 
(Ord. No. O-09-18, § 1, 11-6-2018) 
EXHIBIT 1 
Map of Current City of Colton Electoral Districts (6) 
(until November 8, 2022 General Municipal Election) 
  
EXHIBIT 2 
Map of Future City of Colton Electoral Districts (4) 
(effective November 8, 2022 General Municipal Election) 
   
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
 
2.04.010 - Meetings. 
Regular meeting of the City Council Shall be held in the Council Chambers in the City Hall on the first Tuesday and third Tuesday of each Month. The closed session portion of the meeting Shall begin at five p.m. The open session portion of the meeting Shall begin at six p.m. Whenever either the first Tuesday or third Tuesday so appointed is a legal Holiday, then the regular meeting of the City Council Shall be held in the Council Chambers in the City Hall, beginning at five p.m. for closed session and at six p.m. for open session, on the Wednesday Following that Tuesday, or at such other time as the City Council May determine by Resolution. 
(Ord. 0-10-03 § 1, 2003)  
2.04.020 - Selection of Mayor Pro Tempore. 
A.  The City Council Shall select a member of the City Council to serve as Mayor pro tempore by a majority vote of the City Council at a regular open meeting. Candidates Shall be nominated solely by City Council members and the City Clerk Shall record the nominations. All nominations for Mayor Pro Tempore having been made and recorded, the City Council Shall vote electronically. Commencing January 1, 2003, the Mayor Pro Tempore Shall serve for a term of one Year or until the expiration of his or her term of City Council office, whichever occurs sooner. The Mayor Pro Tempore Shall not serve two consecutive terms. The City Council member serving as Mayor Pro Tempore immediately prior to January 1, 2003 Shall not be eligible to serve again as Mayor Pro Tempore until January 1, 2004. 
B.  The City Council May also Designate a long-standing member of the City Council to the position of Mayor Pro Tempore emeritus. The position of Mayor Pro Tempore emeritus Shall be ceremonial with no additional duties beyond those as a member of the City Council. 
(Ord. 0-07-02 § 1, 2002; Ord. 0-1-99 § 1, 1999)  
2.04.030 - Gift disclosure requirements. 
A.  Prior to rendering a Decision in any proceeding involving a license, Permit, contract or other entitlement pending before the City Council, any Council member who has received been promised a gift or gifts aggregating fifty dollars or more in value within the Preceding twelve Months from a Party or participant in the proceeding Shall disclose that fact either orally or in writing during open session. This disclosure Shall be made Part of the official public record of the proceeding, either as Part of the minutes of the meeting or as a separate writing filed with the City. 
(Ord. 0-16-01, 2001)  
2.04.040 - Executive Administrator to the Mayor and Council. 
The City Council shall have the authority to appoint, supervise and remove the Executive Administrator to the Mayor and Council, who shall serve at the will and pleasure of the City Council in accordance with the Compensation and Benefits Resolution for Non-Represented Confidential Group Employees of the City of Colton, but who shall be a member of the civil service system as provided for in Chapter 2.48 of the Colton Municipal Code. Actions of the City Council taken pursuant to this section shall be by at least a majority vote (at least four) of the entire membership of the City Council; provided, however, that any termination decision shall be by at least a super majority vote (at least five) of the entire membership of the City Council. The employee shall take direction from the Mayor and each Council Member individually. If a title change is implemented for the position of Executive Administrator to the Mayor and Council, the provisions of this section shall apply to such position even before an amendment to this section may be adopted. The City Council may also enter into an employment contract with the Executive Administrator to the Mayor and Council, and the terms of said employment contract shall take precedence over any differing or conflicting provisions of the Compensation and Benefits Resolution for Non-Represented Confidential Group Employees of the City of Colton. 
(Ord. No. O-09-12, § 1, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. O-25-16, § 1, 11-23-2016)  
Chapter 2.06 - CLOSED SESSION 
 
2.06.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish enforceable rules and regulations relating to closed sessions of the City Council, City Committees and Commissions that are subject to the provisions of California Government Code Sections 54950 et seq. (the Brown Act) and the redevelopment agency that will assure the confidentiality of all Matters discussed and considered in such closed session meetings and the confidentiality of all documents and records that May be discussed in such closed sessions in a manner that is consistent with the regulations imposed upon the City, City Committees and Commissions and the redevelopment agency by the Brown Act and other applicable California Law. 
(Ord. 0-31-96 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 0-25-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
2.06.020 - Closed session procedures. 
The Mayor, Mayor Pro Tempore, chairperson or vice chairperson, as applicable, Shall be responsible for ensuring that procedural requirements, other than requirements for Notice, are fulfilled when a closed session of the City Council, Committees or Commissions, or the redevelopment agency, respectively, is held pursuant to the provisions of the Brown Act. The City Clerk or the assistant secretary, in coordination with the City Attorney or general counsel, Shall be responsible for fulfilling any Notice requirements relating to closed sessions held by the City Council, City Committees or Commissions, or the redevelopment agency, respectively. 
(Ord. 0-1-99 § 2, 1999: Ord. 0-31-96 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 0-25-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
2.06.030 - Protection of privileged information and records. 
No Person attending a closed session of the City Council, a City Committee or Commission or the redevelopment agency held pursuant to the provisions of the Brown Act Shall disclose to any Person the content or substance of any discussion which May have taken place, nor publish or describe or release any document or the contents thereof which May have been distributed during the closed session nor so disclose any document which has been determined to be confidential pursuant to the provisions of the California Public Records Act (Government Code Section 6250 et seq.) or pursuant to advice of legal counsel, unless the City Council or the redevelopment agency board as a body Shall authorize disclosure of such information by majority vote. 
(Ord. 0-31-96 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 0-25-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
2.06.040 - Enforcement. 
If any Person attending a closed session is reported to have violated the provisions of this chapter, the Matter Shall be referred to the City Attorney and the Chief of Police for investigation, and if sufficient evidence exists that this chapter has been violated, the City Attorney and the Chief of Police Shall report their findings to the City Council as a body in closed session as a Matter of potential litigation. The City Council May then take such action as it deems appropriate and as is consistent with Law, including without limitation, censure or sanction of the individual involved or directing the City Attorney to refer the Matter should be referred to the District Attorney for criminal prosecution. The direction of the City Council given in closed session Shall be publicly announced at the end of the meeting during which the closed session is held, or at the beginning of the next public session of the City Council as the Council Shall direct in accord with the requirements of the Brown Act. 
(Ord. 0-31-96 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 0-25-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
2.06.060 - Penalties. 
Any Person violating or causing the Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon prosecution by the District Attorney and conviction thereof Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the City Jail or the County Jail for a term not to exceed six Months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 0-31-96 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 0-25-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
Chapter 2.08 - ELECTION CANDIDATE FILING FEE 
 
2.08.010 - Amount. 
A filing Fee of twenty-five dollars is established for candidate's nomination papers for elective offices at municipal elections held in the City. 
(Ord. 1437 § 1, 1973)  
2.08.020 - Payment. 
The filing Fee Shall be paid to the City Clerk by each candidate for an elective office at the time the candidate's nomination paper is filed with the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 1437 § 2, 1973)  
2.08.030 - Moneys deposition. 
The City Clerk Shall pay to the City Treasurer all Fees received which Shall be deposited in the General Fund. 
(Ord. 1437 § 3, 1973)  
Chapter 2.12 - COMPENSATION OF CITY OFFICIALS—BONDS 
 
2.12.010 - City Clerk. 
As consideration for those duties required by State Law to be performed by the City Clerk, the City Clerk Shall be paid a salary of three hundred seventy dollars per Month, payable at the time and in the manner that other salaries of the City are paid. The City Council May also, in its sole discretion, assign to the City Clerk, through the adoption of a job description, any other supplemental duties reasonably related to the elected City Clerk position, and May provide by Resolution for the oversight of such supplemental duties and for supplemental compensation to be paid for such supplemental duties. The City Council May also provide for such duties to be terminated in any manner it deems necessary. The City Clerk's acceptance and performance of the supplemental duties and supplemental compensation Shall not give the City Clerk tenure at the City or otherwise confer regular employment status upon the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 0-20-07 § 1, 2007: Ord. 1572 § 1, 1979: Ord. 829 § 1, 1952)  
2.12.020 - City Treasurer. 
The Treasurer of the City Shall be paid a salary of two hundred twenty-five dollars per Month payable at the time and in the manner that other salaries are paid. The City Council May provide by Resolution for supplemental compensation. 
(Ord. 1572 § 2, 1979: Ord. 829 § 2, 1952)  
2.12.030 - City Council members. 
The salary of each member of the City Council is fixed at four hundred dollars per month. In addition, each member of the City Council shall receive an auto allowance of two hundred twenty dollars per month. 
(Ord. 0-24-88 (part), 1988: Ord. 1460 § 1, 1974: Ord. 1266 § 1, 1966) 
(Ord. No. O-05-09, § 1, 8-4-2009; Ord. No. O-01-11, § 1, 3-15-2011)  
2.12.040 - Clerk and Treasurer to give bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of their offices, the City Clerk and City Treasurer Shall each execute a bond to the City. The penal sum of the bond Shall be in a reasonable amount recommended by the City Attorney and fixed by the City Council, by Resolution, and May be changed during their terms of office. Premium on these bonds, if executed by a surety company authorized to do Business in the State, Shall be paid by the City out of its General Fund. 
(Ord. 1492 § 1, 1976: Ord. 609 § 3, 1940: Ord. 234 § 3, 1907)  
2.12.050 - Mayor. 
The salary of the Mayor of the City is fixed at four hundred dollars per month. In addition, the Mayor shall receive an auto allowance of two hundred twenty dollars per month. 
(Ord. 0-24-88 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. O-01-11, § 2, 3-15-2011)  
Chapter 2.16 - CITY MANAGER 
 
2.16.010 - Office created. 
The office of the City Manager is created and established. 
(Ord. 891 § 1 (part), 1956)  
2.16.020 - Appointment—Removal—Procedure. 
The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term, and her or his compensation fixed, by ordinance or resolution of the City Council at an open session. The City Manager holds office at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed by majority vote at any time and in any manner. 
The City Council may provide a City Manager with greater procedural protections against removal in a contract approved in open session by majority vote of the City Council. 
(Ord. 891 § 1 (part), 1956) 
(Ord. No. O-12-14, § 1, 11-4-2014)  
2.16.030 - Eligibility. 
A.  Residence in the City shall not be required as a condition of the appointment. 
B.  Within three months following the date of hire, the City Manager shall reside within a geodesic distance of fifty miles from City Hall. Following the three-month period, the failure of the City Manager to reside within this distance shall entitle the City Council to declare the office of City Manager vacant by reason of resignation. The City Council may, at its discretion, contract around this requirement when hiring or renewing the contract of the City Manager. 
C.  No Person elected as a Councilman of the City shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one year has elapsed after such Councilmember ceases to be a member of the City Council. 
D.  The City Manager shall be a citizen of the United States, not less than thirty Years of age, and shall be a Person of demonstrated administrative ability with experience in responsible executive positions, and he or she shall be chosen by the City Council solely upon the basis of her or his executive and administrative qualifications as determined by the City Council. 
(Ord. 891 § 2, 1956) 
(Ord. No. O-12-14, § 2, 11-4-2014)  
2.16.040 - Bond required. 
The City Manager Shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be Approved by the City Council in such sum as May be determined by the City Council and Shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the City Manager as herein prescribed. Premium on the bond, if executed by a Surety Company authorized to do Business in the State, Shall be paid by the City out of its General Fund. 
(Ord. 891 § 3, 1956)  
2.16.050 - Absence. 
In case of the absence or disability of the City Manager, the City Council May Designate, under such terms and conditions as it May provide, some duly qualified Person to perform the duties of the City Manager during the period of absence or disability of the City Manager; subject however, to said Person furnishing a corporate surety bond conditioned on faithful performance of the duties required to be performed as set forth in Section 2.16.040. 
(Ord. 891 § 4, 1956)  
2.16.060 - Compensation and reimbursement. 
A.  The City Manager Shall receive such compensation as the City Council Shall from time to time determine and fix by Resolution, and said compensation Shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the City Council Shall Designate. 
B.  The City Manager Shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him under direction or Approval of the City Council in the performance of his duties, or incurred or paid when traveling on Business pertaining to the City under direction or Approval of the City Council. Reimbursement Shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim setting forth the sums expended for which reimbursement is requested has been presented to the City Council, and when the City Council has duly Approved and allowed same. 
(Ord. 891 § 5, 1956)  
2.16.070 - Powers and duties. 
The City Manager Shall be the administrative head of the government of the City, except as otherwise provided in Sections 2.16.010 through 2.16.120. He Shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereof, it Shall be his duty and he Shall have the power: 
A.  To see that all Laws and Ordinances of the City are duly enforced, and that all Franchises, Permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed; 
B.  To appoint, on the basis of merit and, when necessary for the good of the City, demote or remove all department heads of the City, except as otherwise provided in this section, and except as he may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint and remove subordinates in such department or office. 
1.  Persons appointed or promoted to the following department head positions on or after June 5, 2001, shall serve at the will and pleasure of the City Manager and may be terminated from City employment by the City Manager without proof of cause or other justification and without right of appeal or hearing: 
a.  Assistant City Manager; 
b.  Finance Director; 
c.  Community Development Director; 
d.  Human Resources Manager; 
e.  Police Chief; 
f.  Fire Chief; 
g.  Parks, Recreation and Family Services Director; 
h.  City Engineer; 
i.  Utility Director; 
j.  Redevelopment Agency Director; 
k.  Librarian; 
l.  Public Services Manager; 
m.  Assistant Utility Director; 
n.  Community Childcare Director. 
2.  Any person appointed or promoted to a new department head classification created by Resolution on or after June 5, 2001, shall also serve at the will and pleasure of the City Manager and may be terminated from City employment by the City Manager without proof of cause or other justification and without right of appeal or hearing. 
3.  Department heads appointed or promoted to their Department Head positions prior to June 5, 2001, Shall have the right to be terminated only under the provisions of this municipal code as it existed at the time of their appointment to the position, unless they modify the terms of their employment pursuant to a contract as described below. 
4.  The City Manager is empowered to enter into contracts on behalf of the City with department heads establishing terms and conditions of employment. Said employment contracts shall take precedence over and supersede any otherwise applicable Ordinance, Resolution, rule or regulation, previous or current, including, but not limited to, Subsection 2.16.070(B). 
5.  The City Manager has authority to negotiate the terms and conditions of employment contracts with department heads pursuant to the established limitations and ranges within the executive unit memorandum of understanding ("MOU") which is in effect at the time of such negotiations. 
6.  In addition to the limitations and ranges of the executive unit MOU, the City Manager has authority to negotiate with department heads to increase certain benefits in employment contracts. Specifically, the City Manager may: 1) allow up to one additional week of accrued vacation over and above the amount specified in the executive unit MOU; and 2) negotiate a "bank" of sick leave and vacation time which new department heads receive upon beginning employment with the City. The negotiated amounts for a beginning "bank" of sick leave shall not exceed one hundred hours and for vacation time the amount shall not exceed eighty hours. Any employment contract provisions under negotiation that exceed these amounts or that exceed the limitations and ranges in the existing executive unit MOU shall be submitted to the City Council for approval. 
7.  Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to give the City Manager the right to appoint or remove the Executive Assistant to the Council/Office Manager, City Clerk, City Treasurer or the City Attorney. 
C.  To control, order and give directions to all heads of Departments, and to subordinate officers and Employees of the City through their Department Head; 
D.  To transfer Employees from one Department to another and to consolidate or combine offices, positions, Departments or units under his direction; 
E.  It is provided, however, that in adopting Sections 2.16.010 through 2.16.120 the people of the City do not intend to abandon the civil service system of the City heretofore established as same now exists, or May hereafter be amended; and, except for the immediate effect of the provisions of the Laws of the State relating to such Matters, appointments to municipal service and suspensions and dismissals therefrom Shall be made in accordance with such civil service rules and regulations. 
F.  The City Manager May recommend to the City Council, setting forth reasons therefor, the abolition, suspension or consolidation of the duties and functions of any of the heads of Departments, Chief officials, subordinate officers and Employees of the City. The City Council May thereafter, at any time, abolish, suspend or consolidate any such duties or functions in accordance with such recommendations or as it May determine, and thereafter remove the Person or Persons affected from the employment of the City whose duties are thus abolished, suspended or consolidated; 
G.  To supervise in general the operations of all Departments of the City Securing special services as required; 
H.  To attend all meetings of the City Council unless excused therefrom by the Council, except when his removal is under consideration by the Council; 
I.  To recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures and Ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient; 
J.  To keep the City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the City; 
K.  To prepare and submit to the City Council the annual budget; 
L.  To purchase or approve the purchase of all supplies for all of the Departments or divisions of the City. No expenditure Shall be submitted or recommended to the City Council except on report or Approval of the City Manager; 
M.  To make investigations into the affairs of the City and any Department or divisions thereof, and any contract, or the proper performance of any obligations running to the City; 
N.  To investigate all complaints in relation to Matters concerning the administration of the City government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the City, and to see that all Franchises, Permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully performed and observed; 
O.  To exercise general supervision over all public Buildings, public Parks and other Public Property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council; 
P.  To devote his entire time to the duties of his office and the interests of the City; 
Q.  To provide leadership for civic movements designed to benefit the Residents of the City when so authorized by the City Council; 
R.  To prepare and to submit to the City Council, as of the end of the fiscal Year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City for the Preceding Year. However, such financial reports Shall be in addition to the regular report of the City Clerk to the State and any reports required by the Laws of the State, and Shall in no way interfere with or affect said reports of the City Clerk and others mentioned herein; 
S.  To prepare and submit to the City Council an organization chart showing the current organization plan for all Departments of the City government; 
T.  To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as May be delegated to him from time to time by Ordinance or Resolution of the City Council; 
U.  The City Manager Shall be an ex officio member of all boards and Commissions appointed by the Mayor or the City Council pursuant to Law, with a right to participate in all deliberations or actions by his voice, but without a vote. 
(Ord. 0-24-01 § 1, 2002; Ord. 0-09-01 § 1, 2001; Ord. 891 § 6, 1956) 
(Ord. No. O-09-12, § 2, 9-18-2012)  
2.16.080 - Limitations of power. 
The City Manager, among other limitations, Shall have no power to: 
A.  Expend any sum of money, except in accordance with the Approved budget or with prior Approval of the City Council; 
B.  Create or abolish any municipal office except with the Approval of the City Council; 
C.  Increase or decrease the salary or emoluments of any City Employee except with the Approval of the Council; 
D.  Sell, lease or encumber any real estate belonging to the City; 
E.  Grant, cancel or revoke any Franchise. 
(Ord. 891 § 7, 1956)  
2.16.090 - Participation in political campaign prohibited. 
The City Manager is forbidden to take any Part in any political campaign, or to take any Part in Securing contributions for any political campaign or candidate. This section pertains only to municipal elections. 
(Ord. 891 § 8, 1956)  
2.16.100 - Merit system. 
The exercise of the powers and duties of the City Manager herein and the provisions of Sections 2.16.010 through 2.16.120 Shall be subject to any and all Ordinances or Resolutions adopted by the City Council providing for any merit system for the officers and Employees of the City, which Ordinances or Resolutions May deal with the classification of Employees, their appointment, transfer, promotion, demotion, dismissal, removal, suspension and reinstatement as Employees of the City. In the event any such additional Ordinances or Resolutions dealing with the Matter set forth in this section are adopted by the City Council, copies thereof Shall be filed with the City Manager. 
(Ord. 891 § 9, 1956)  
2.16.110 - Orders and directions. 
The City Council and its members Shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the City Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the City Council nor any member thereof Shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 891 § 10, 1956)  
2.16.120 - Exclusion from Civil Service System. 
Nothing in Sections 2.16.010 through 2.16.120 is to be in any way construed as including or considering the City Manager as included in the civil service system now in effect in the City, and the office of City Manager Shall be and is omitted and not included in any civil service system and Shall remain excluded therefrom. 
(Ord. 891 § 11, 1956)  
2.16.130 - Transfer of functions. 
The City Council finds it necessary and convenient in the public interest to terminate and rescind certain duties heretofore assigned to the City Clerk and to reassign any and all duties and obligations thereof pertaining to personnel; the issuance of Business Licenses; the financial affairs and records of the municipally owned Cemetery; the collection of various Fees including, but not limited to, Hotel-Motel and Business Licenses; the maintenance of records and the keeping of balances in finance books for all Fees collected. 
These duties are reassigned to the City Manager who May delegate the ministerial aspects thereof to other officers and Employees of the City to perform and Discharge the same subject to Approval of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1408 § 1 (part), 1972)  
Chapter 2.17 - FINANCE DIRECTOR 
 
2.17.010 - Office created. 
The Office of Finance Director of the City of Colton is hereby created and established. The Finance Director Shall be appointed by the City Manager and Shall serve at the will and pleasure of the City Manager in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.16.070 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-01-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
2.17.020 - Powers and duties. 
The Finance Director Shall, under the supervision of the City Manager, perform the Following duties: 
A.  Plan, direct and maintain the accounting and auditing activities for the City government and each of its offices, Departments and agencies; 
B.  Supervise and be responsible for the preparation of all vouchers and warrants for the disbursement of all public monies and have control over all expenditures to insure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; 
C.  Assist the City Manager in preparing a proposed budget of the City for the ensuring fiscal Year; 
D.  Require reports of the receipts and disbursements from each receiving and expending agency of the City government to be made daily or at such intervals as he May require; 
E.  Submit to the City Manager a Monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the City; and submit to the City Manager and City Council as of the end of each fiscal Year, a complete financial statement and report for the Preceding Year; including opening and closing fund balances in the City Treasury; 
F.  Supervise the keeping of current inventories of all Property of the City; 
G.  Estimate, plan and program the City's financial activities; 
H.  Such other powers and duties as May be imposed by Ordinance or Resolution of the City Council or as the City Manager May determine including, but not limited to, Property management purchasing and collection. 
(Ord. 0-01-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
2.17.030 - Eligibility. 
Residence in the City at the time of appointment of the Finance Director Shall not be required as a condition of appointment. 
The Finance Director Must be a citizen of the United States, not less than twenty-five Years of age and have a combination of professional experience and training in municipal finance and accounting. 
(Ord. 0-01-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
2.17.040 - Transfer of duties. 
In accordance with Section 40805.5 of the Government Code, the finance and accounting duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code of the State of California are hereby transferred to the Finance Director. In accordance with Section 37209 of the Government Code, the finance and accounting duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Article 1, Chapter 4 of Part 2 of Division 3 of the Government Code are hereby transferred to the Finance Director. 
(Ord. 0-01-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
2.17.050 - Department created. 
A Finance Department is hereby created which Shall be under the direction and control of the Finance Director, subject to the general administrative direction of the City Manager. The Finance Director, subject to the Approval of the City Manager, Shall organize and maintain such divisions in said Department as, in his judgment, the operation May require, and Shall be responsible for the general supervision and control of all divisions of said Department. 
(Ord. 0-01-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 2.18 - ELECTRICAL UTILITY DIRECTOR 
 
2.18.010 - Duties. 
The Electrical Utility Director of the City is authorized to negotiate and execute, on behalf of the City, agreements with privately owned, Federally owned, State owned and locally owned utilities and agencies located in the States of California, Nevada, Arizona, Utah, Oregon, Washington, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, New Mexico and Texas for the purchase and Sale of natural Gas, economy energy, replacement energy, replacement capacity and transmission service to deliver such energy and natural Gas to Colton or such other location as May be appropriate without competitive bidding. 
(Ord. 0-04-03 § 1, 2003: Ord. 1697 § 1, 1985)  
Chapter 2.19 - PROFESSIONAL SERVICES CONTRACTS AND SETTLEMENT AGREEMENTS 
 
2.19.010 - Authorization to execute contracts. 
A.  This section applies to any settlement agreement between the City and existing or terminated Employees' contract or agreement ("contract") between the City and the provider of Professional Services, including medical, dental, or vision, which services are provided to the City's Employees as Part of the City's benefits packages. Contract Shall be effective unless Approved by the vote of the City Council or otherwise Approved in a manner with this section. 
B.  In accordance with California Code Section 40602, the Mayor Shall execute all contracts made or entered into by the City, unless another City officer or Employee is authorized to execute such contract pursuant to this code or Ordinance adopted by the City Council. The Human Resources Director is authorized to Sign the Following types of contracts made or entered into by the City: 
1.  Contracts Approved by a majority vote of the City Council; 
2.  Settlement agreement contracts Approved by a majority vote of the City Council; 
3.  Amendments to contracts where such amendments are Approved by a majority vote of the City Council. 
C.  All contracts executed by the Human Resources Director Shall be attested to by the City Clerk. 
D.  No Person other than the Mayor, the City Manager or other Person expressly authorized by this Code or other Ordinance May bind the City. Any purported contract not executed in conformity with this Code or chapter is void and Shall not be the subject of implied ratification or estoppel, unless expressly ratified by Resolution duly adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 0-16-98 § 1, 1998)  
Chapter 2.20 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.20.010 - Membership. 
The Fire Department Shall consist of a Fire Chief, an Assistant Chief and as many other officers and firemen as May be deemed necessary for the effective operation of the Department. 
(Ord. 1001 § 1, 1958)  
2.20.020 - Fire Chief—Appointment—Qualifications. 
The Fire Chief Shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Fire Department and Shall be appointed by the City Manager and confirmed by the City Council for an indefinite period of time and with tenure of office depending upon his good conduct and efficiency in accordance with existing civil service regulations. He Shall be technically qualified through training and experience and have the ability to command men. 
(Ord. 1001 § 2, 1958)  
2.20.030 - Fire Chief—Officers and firemen—Appointment. 
The Fire Chief, in accordance with civil service regulations, Shall appoint all of the officers and firemen. Such appointments Shall be, insofar as possible, Following fair and impartial competitive examination. All officers Shall be accountable to the Fire Chief or his Representative. 
(Ord. 1001 § 3, 1958)  
2.20.040 - Fire Chief—Member removal authority. 
The Fire Chief Shall strictly carry out the enforcement of rules and regulations of the Department as referred to in Section 2.20.080 and is authorized to suspend or remove from service any officer or fireman as provided in the Ordinances and regulations governing civil service and the Department. 
(Ord. 1001 § 4, 1958)  
2.20.050 - Fire Chief—Annual report. 
The Fire Chief Shall be responsible to the City Manager, and Shall, on or before July 1st in each Year, submit to him a tentative budget for his Department and Shall make a complete annual report and such other reports as May be required concerning the Fire Department in general giving suggestions and recommendations for major Improvements and listing other data so as to maintain a Complete Record of the activities of the Department. 
(Ord. 1001 § 5, 1958)  
2.20.060 - Premises to Permit reoccupancy. 
All Premises on which fires occur Shall be left in a condition which will most readily Permit reoccupancy. Such Premises Shall also be left in such condition that they will not rekindle or cause further damage to life or Property. 
(Ord. 1001 § 6, 1958)  
2.20.070 - Fire Chief—Inspection authority. 
The Fire Chief and his duly appointed Representatives are authorized, empowered and required to inspect from time to time, but not less frequently than twice Yearly, all Buildings and Premises other than Dwellings and to order such changes or eliminations of Hazardous conditions as May exist in Violation of the City fire prevention Ordinances. For the purpose of inspection, the Fire Chief and his Representative or either of them are empowered to enter any and all Buildings and Premises at any reasonable hour. 
(Ord. 1001 § 7, 1958)  
2.20.080 - Fire Chief—Rules and regulations maintenance and enforcement. 
The Fire Chief Shall maintain and enforce an up-to-date comprehensive set of rules and regulations governing the discipline, training and operation of the Fire Department. Such rules, regulations and any deletions, changes or additions Shall be effective when Approved by and filed with the City Council. 
(Ord. 1001 § 8, 1958)  
2.20.090 - Apparatus—Alarm System provided. 
The Fire Department Shall be equipped with such apparatus and other fire fighting equipment as May be required to maintain its efficiency. Suitable arrangements and equipment Shall be provided for citizens to turn in an alarm of fire and for notifying all members of the Department so that they May promptly respond. 
(Ord. 1001 § 9, 1958)  
2.20.100 - Fire Chief—Drills—First aid instruction. 
The Fire Chief Shall at least twice each Month provide for suitable drills covering the operation and handling of all equipment essential for efficient Department operation. In addition, he Shall provide at least two times per Month instruction in first aid, water supplies and other related subjects generally considered essential to good firemanship. 
(Ord. 1001 § 10, 1958)  
Chapter 2.24 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
 
2.24.010 - Intention to qualify under State Law. 
The City declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 1079 § 1, 1960)  
2.24.020 - Adherence to State standards. 
Pursuant to Section 13522 of Chapter 1, of the California Penal Code, the City, while receiving aid from the State pursuant to Chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Ord. 1079 § 2, 1960)  
Chapter 2.26 - PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCHERS 
 
2.26.010 - Intention to qualify under State Law. 
The City declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State of California under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1, of Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 0-8-89 § 1, 1989)  
2.26.020 - Adherence to State standards. 
Pursuant to Section 13510(c), Chapter 1, the City will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST). 
(Ord. 0-8-89 § 2, 1989)  
2.26.030 - Confirmation of adherence to State standards. 
Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1, the Commission and its Representatives May make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the Commission to ascertain that the City's public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Ord. 0-8-89 § 3, 1989)  
Chapter 2.28 - EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION 
 
2.28.010 - Purpose. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of Persons and Property within this City in the event of an Emergency; the direction of the Emergency organization; and the coordination of the Emergency functions of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private Persons. 
(Ord. 1384 § 1, 1971)  
2.28.020 - Emergency defined. 
As Used in this chapter, "Emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of Persons and Property within this City caused by such conditions as air Pollution, fire, Flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this City, requiring the combined forces of other political Subdivisions to combat. 
(Ord. 1384 § 2, 1971)  
2.28.030 - Disaster Council—Created—Membership. 
The Colton Disaster Council is created and consists of the Following: 
A.  The Mayor, who Shall be chairman; 
B.  The Director of Emergency Services, who Shall be vice chairman; 
C.  The Assistant Director of Emergency Services; 
D.  Such Chiefs of Emergency Services as are provided for in a current Emergency plan of this City, adopted pursuant to this chapter; 
E.  Such Representatives of civic, Business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official Emergency responsibility, as May be appointed by the Director with the advice and consent of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1384 § 3, 1971)  
2.28.040 - Disaster Council—Powers and duties—Meetings. 
It is the duty of the Colton Disaster Council and it is empowered to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, Emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such Ordinances and Resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council Shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairman. 
(Ord. 1384 § 4, 1971)  
2.28.050 - Emergency Services—Director—Office created. 
There is created the Office of Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager Shall be the Director of Emergency Services. 
(Ord. 1384 § 5(A), 1971)  
2.28.060 - Emergency Services—Assistant Director—Appointment. 
There is created the Office of Assistant Director of Emergency Services, who Shall be appointed by the Director. 
(Ord. 1384 § 5(B), 1971)  
2.28.070 - Emergency Services—Director—Powers and duties. 
A.  The Director is empowered to: 
1.  Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local Emergency" if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a Local Emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council Shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven Days thereafter or the proclamation Shall have no further force or effect; 
2.  Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of Emergency" when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the Emergency; 
3.  Control and direct the effort of the Emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
4.  Direct cooperation between, and coordination of services and staff of the Emergency organization of this City; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that May arise between them; 
5.  Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on Matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein; 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a "Local Emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of Emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war Emergency," the Director is empowered: 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on Matters reasonably related to the protection of life and Property as affected by such Emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations Must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council, 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other Properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and Property and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public Use, 
c.  To require Emergency Services of any City officer or Employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of Emergency" in the County in which this City is located or the existence of a "state of war Emergency" to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such Persons Shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by State Law for registered disaster service workers, 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or Material of any City Department or agency, and 
e.  To execute all of his ordinary power as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by Resolution or Emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement Approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority. 
B.  The Director of Emergency Services Shall Designate the Order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an Emergency. Such Order of succession Shall be Approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. 1384 § 6(A), (B), 1971)  
2.28.080 - Emergency Services—Assistant Director—Powers and duties. 
The Assistant Director Shall, under the supervision of the Director and with the Assistance of Emergency Service Chiefs, develop Emergency plans and manage the Emergency programs of this City; and Shall have such other powers and duties as May be assigned by the Director. 
(Ord. 1384 § 6(C), 1971)  
2.28.090 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and Employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an Emergency, and all groups, organizations, and Persons who May by agreement or operation of Law including Persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.28.070(A)(6)(c) of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and Property in this City during such Emergency, Shall constitute the Emergency organization of the City. 
(Ord. 1384 § 7, 1971)  
2.28.100 - Emergency plan. 
The Colton Disaster Council Shall be responsible for the Development of the Colton Emergency Plan, which plan Shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a Local Emergency, State of Emergency, or State of war Emergency; and Shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the Emergency organization. Such plan Shall take effect upon adoption by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1384 § 8, 1971)  
2.28.110 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with Emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, Shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and Property of the City. 
(Ord. 1384 § 9, 1971)  
2.28.120 - Unlawful Acts—Violation and penalty. 
It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six Months or both, for any Person during an Emergency to: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the Emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any Act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such Act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or Property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the Emergency agency of the State. 
(Ord. 1384 § 10, 1971)  
Chapter 2.30 - APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS OF CITY COMMISSIONS BY COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT 
 
2.30.010 - Purposes and applicability. 
The purposes of this chapter are to establish a fair and equitable method for the appointment of individuals to the various Committees and Commissions within the City and to assure District representation on those Committees and Commissions to the greatest extent possible in accord with the six City Council electoral Districts that have been established by an Ordinance enacted by the people of the City while at the same time assuring that qualified and interested Residents are appointed to serve on such Committees and Commissions. This chapter Shall not apply to any Committee or Commission which is established in accord with applicable Federal or State Law that establishes different requirements as to the number, compositions, or qualifications of the members of Committees or Commissions within the City, nor Shall it apply to the library board of Trustees which are governed by provisions of the California Education Code, Section 18910 et seq., relevant California case Law, and the provisions of Chapter 2.60 of the Colton Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 0-02-95 § 1 1995: Ord. 0-3-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.30.020 - Composition of Commissions and Committees. 
All Commissions and Committees of the City Shall be comprised of seven members appointed on the recommendation of each Councilmember and the Mayor, and ratified by a majority vote of the City Council. 
Notwithstanding the process for appointment of Commissions and Committees contained in this section and the manner of appointment contained in section 2.30.030, the process for appointments to independent citizens oversight committees shall be at the discretion of the City Council or as described in a ballot measure approved by the voters. 
(Ord. 0-16-02 § 1, 2002: Ord. 0-3-93 § 1 (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. O-10-16, §§ 6, 7, 5-17-2016; Ord. No. O-05-17, § 2, 6-6-2017; Ord. No. O-12-17, § 2, 12-5-2017)  
2.30.030 - Manner of appointment. 
It Shall be the responsibility of each member of the City Council to nominate one individual to serve on each of the various City Commissions and Committees within the City subject to ratification by a majority vote of the City Council. In the event that a member of the City Council Shall fail to make any nomination within thirty Days of the date of his or her being sworn into office or within sixty Days of the occurrence of a Vacancy, any other member of the City Council wishing to nominate a Person to that position May do so, subject to ratification by majority vote of the City Council. The City Clerk Shall post and publish a Notice to all interested Persons indicating open or Vacant Commission and Committee positions not earlier than twenty days before or not later than twenty days after the vacancy occurs. Final appointment to a Commission shall not be made for at least ten working days after the posting of the notice in the City Clerk's office. 
Notwithstanding this section, the City Council may, if it finds that an emergency exists, fill an unscheduled vacancy immediately. A person appointed to fill the vacancy shall serve only on an acting basis until the final appointment is made pursuant to this section. No individual Shall serve on more than one Commission or Committee. Although each member of the City Council elected by a District Shall Use his or her best efforts to appoint individuals residing in that District to Commissions and Committees, members of the City Council May appoint individuals not residing in their Districts in their discretion in order to assure that the most interested and qualified individuals serve on the various Committees and Commissions within the City. Individuals nominated by the Mayor to serve on a Commission or Committee Shall represent the City at large on that Commission or Committee, and May reside anywhere in the City. 
(Ord. 0-02-95 § 2 1995: Ord. 0-3-93 § 1 (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. O-03-18, § 2, 2-6-2018)  
2.30.040 - Terms of office for Commissioners and Committee Members. 
All persons appointed to a City Commission or Committee shall serve a term that is concurrent and coterminous with the electoral term of the City Councilmember or Mayor who appoints such individual to the Commission or Committee. 
(Ord. 0-3-93 § 1 (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. O-13-14, § 2, 12-16-2014)  
2.30.050 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-13-14, § 3, adopted December 16, 2014, repealed § 2.30.050, which pertained to terms of office for councilmembers after transition period and derived from Ord. 0-3-93 § 1 (part), 1993.  
2.30.060 - Qualifications and eligibility for appointment to Commission or Committee. 
A.  Except as otherwise specified in this code, any Resident of the City may be appointed to serve on any Commission or Committee, but no individual may serve concurrently on more than one City Commission or Committee. 
B.  No former elected official of the City is eligible for appointment to any Commission or Committee for two years following the expiration of the term of his or her elected office. 
C.  No current employee of the City is eligible for appointment to any Commission or Committee. If a current Commissioner or Committee Member shall become employed with the City during his or her term, the Commissioner or Committee Member shall be deemed to have vacated his or her office. 
D.  No person related to a member of the current City Council is eligible for appointment to any Commission or Committee. If a current Commissioner or Committee Member shall become related to a member of the City Council during his or her term, the Commissioner or Committee Member shall be deemed to have vacated his or her office. The term "related to" includes a spouse, domestic partner, child, sibling, parent, grandparent, grandchild, aunt/uncle, and niece/nephew. The relationship may be by blood, marriage, adoption, cohabitation, or domestic partnership, including in-law, step-, and half-relationships. 
E.  A person who is not a resident of the City shall nevertheless be eligible for appointment to any Commission or Committee if that person owns a business within the City. Such appointments shall be limited to two members per Commission or Committee. The attendance of Commissioners or Committee members appointed in accordance with this section shall count when determining whether or not a quorum exists. 
(Ord. 0-9-93 § 1, 1993: Ord. 0-3-93 § 1 (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. O-13-14, § 1, 12-16-2014; Ord. No. O-01-17, § 2, 3-21-2017)  
2.30.065 - Vacancies. 
Every member of any board, Commission or Committee within the City Shall be expected to regularly attend and participate in meetings of the body to which he or she is appointed and to report to the staff liaison for that body any absence and the reasons for such absence except for special circumstances. In the event that a member Shall be absent from three consecutive regular meetings or is absent from four regular meetings in any twelve-month period; or upon the resignation of a member of a board or Commission or Committee, a Vacancy Shall be deemed to exist. Vacancies Shall be filled in the same manner as that set forth in Section 2.30.030. 
(Ord. 0-02-95 § 3 1995)  
2.30.070 - Service at pleasure of the City Council. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2.30.050, every member of a City Commission or Committee Shall serve in that position strictly at the pleasure of the City Councilmember or Mayor having made said appointment. 
(Ord. 0-3-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.30.075 - Installation of new members Following City Election. 
Following a regular City Council Election, all existing boards, Commissions and Committees, and the officers of those boards, Commissions and Committees, Shall remain in place until new members have been appointed by the City Council. The City Council Shall Act within thirty Days of the date on which new City Council members are sworn into office to appoint new or continuing members of boards, Commissions and Committees. Such newly appointed members Shall take office at the next regular meeting Following their appointment at which time existing members who have been duly replaced Shall step down and new or continuing officers Shall be elected to serve at the pleasure of the board, Commission or Committee. 
(Ord. 0-02-95 § 4 1995)  
Chapter 2.32 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
2.32.010 - Established. 
Pursuant to the provisions of the Government code of the State, Title 7 Planning, the City Council establishes a Planning Commission to be known as the "Planning Commission of the City of Colton." 
(Ord. 1344 § 1, 1969)  
2.32.030 - Authority—Officer appointment—Duties. 
The authority and duties of the Planning Commission are as provided by State Law and as delegated by the City Council. The Planning Commission Shall elect its chairman, whose term Shall be from January 1st, to December 31st, of each Year, or until election of a replacement. The Planning Commission May elect other officers of the Commission as they deem necessary at the same time and for the same term as the chairman. 
The Planning Commission May establish its own rules for the conducting of Public Hearings and for the transaction of other Business, adopt resolutions of policy for implementing the City's Planning Program, approve the form and content of Permit Applications, require information as May be needed to consider Permit Applications, or for recommendations of the Commission. 
(Ord. 1344 § 3, 1969)  
Chapter 2.36 - RECREATION AND PARKS COMMISSION 
 
2.36.010 - Created. 
A recreation and Parks Commission is created in and for the City. 
(Ord. 1104 § 1, 1961)  
2.36.040 - Chairman and officers' appointment—Secretary. 
The members of the Commission Shall organize and choose one of their members as its chairman and elect any other officers that they deem necessary. A secretary and other assistants need not necessarily be members of the Commission. 
(Ord. 1104 § 4, 1961)  
2.36.050 - Director—Appointment—Duties. 
With the recommendation of the Commission, the City Manager Shall appoint a Director of Recreation and Parks, who, subject to administrative determination of policy, Shall plan, formulate, coordinate and direct the program of recreation facilities and activities and Shall direct the Development and maintenance of the Park, Parkway, Street trees and recreation areas and Shall do related work as required. 
(Ord. 1104 § 5, 1961)  
2.36.060 - Powers and duties. 
The Recreation and Parks Commission Shall have the power and duty to: 
A.  Recommend the policies to be adopted and enforced for operation, Use and management of all recreation activities, facilities, Parks, Parkways and Street trees; 
B.  Assist in drafting and submitting to the City Manager an annual budget for recreation, Parks, Parkways, Street trees, Incidental and related purposes, including a long-range Capital Improvement program for recreation and Park services; 
C.  Assist in the planning of recreation and Parks programs for the inhabitants of the City, promote and stimulate public interest therein and to that end solicit to the fullest extent possible the cooperation of School authorities and other public and private agencies interested therein and aid in coordinating the recreation services with other programs of other governmental agencies and voluntary organizations; 
D.  Recommend policies for the acquisition, Development and Improvement of Parks and playgrounds; 
E.  Make appraisals of the effectiveness of the recreation and Parks program; 
F.  Interpret the policies and functions of the recreation Department to the public and interpret the needs of the public to the Council. 
(Ord. 1104 § 6, 1961)  
Chapter 2.44 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
 
2.44.010 - Declaration of need. 
The City Council finds and declares that there is a need for a redevelopment agency in the City pursuant to the provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law, Section 33000 et seq., Health and Safety Code of the State. 
(Ord. 1120 (part), 1962)  
2.44.020 - Blighted areas—Redevelopment—City's policy. 
It is the policy of the City to protect and promote the sound Development and redevelopment of blighted areas within the City and the general welfare of the inhabitants of the community by remedying such injurious conditions through the employment of all means and appropriate for that purpose. Whenever the redevelopment of blighted areas cannot be accomplished by private enterprise alone, without public participation and assistance in the acquisition of land, in planning and in the financing of land assembly, in the work of clearance and in the making of Improvements necessary therefor, it is in the public interest to employ the power of eminent domain to advance or expend public funds for these purposes and to provide a means whereby the blighted areas within the City May be redeveloped or rehabilitated. The redevelopment of such blighted areas and the provision for appropriate continuing land Use and construction policies therein constitute public Uses and purposes for which public money should be advanced or expended and Private Property acquired, and are governmental functions of State and municipal concern in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the people of the State generally and of the people of the City in which such areas exist, in particular. It is in the public interest that work on such Projects be commenced as soon as possible. 
(Ord. 1120 (part), 1962)  
2.44.030 - City Council declared redevelopment agency. 
The City Council is the redevelopment agency for the City with all the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by Law in an agency vested in the City Council. 
(Ord. 1398 § 1, 1971)  
Chapter 2.46 - UTILITIES COMMISSION 
 
2.46.010 - Created. 
A utilities Commission is created in and for the City. 
(Ord. 1524 § 1, 1977)  
2.46.040 - Election of officers. 
The Commission Shall annually elect one of its members as its chairperson and another of its members as a vice-chairperson whose terms Shall be the calendar Year. 
(Ord. 1524 § 4, 1977)  
2.46.050 - Power to adopt rules. 
The Commission May adopt its own rules for transacting Business. 
(Ord. 1524 § 5, 1977)  
2.46.060 - Powers and duties. 
The Utilities Commission may: 
A.  Consider the annual budget for electric, water, sewer, and Refuse collection services during the process of its preparation and make recommendations with respect thereto to the City Council and the City Manager; 
B.  Recommend to the City Council schedules of rates for electric, water, sewer and Refuse services; 
C.  Make reports and recommendations to the City Council regarding electric, water, sewer and Refuse collection services. 
(Ord. 1524 § 6, 1977)  
2.46.070 - Reports and Surveys. 
The Utilities Commission Shall make reports and conduct Surveys as directed by the City Council. 
(Ord. 1524 § 7, 1977)  
Chapter 2.48 - CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM* 
 
2.48.010 - Reason for adopting chapter. 
The City Council expressly finds it to be in the best public interest to amend and revise the civil service system as heretofore adopted by the City Council and to continue the same as amended and revised in this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-03-00 § 1, 2000)  
2.48.020 - Appointment of Human Resource Director. 
A.  The City Manager Shall appoint, upon Approval of the City Council, a Human Resource Director whose duty it Shall be to Act in the capacity of a Secretary and Clerk for the Civil Service System. He or she Shall be the custodian of all personnel records and Shall be the official upon or with whom all Notices, requests for hearings, complaints and other official documents Shall be served or filed. 
B.  The Human Resource Director Shall establish and maintain in card index form a roster of officers and Employees in the competitive service. He or she Shall also prepare a record of the length of service of each officer and Employee in the competitive service, together with a concise statement of all duties being performed by the officer or Employee, the salary being paid, and the hours of work of the Employee. He or she Shall render such additional services in connection with such civil service system as May be requested by the City Council or City Manager. 
C.  The duties of the office of the Human Resource Director May be combined with those of any other office in the event the work involved does not warrant, in the description of the City Council, the creation of a special position. 
(Ord. 0-03-00 § 2, 2000)  
2.48.030 - Duties of the Human Resource Director. 
The Human Resource Director Shall: 
A.  Attend all meetings of the personnel board and serve as its secretary. 
B.  Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the Council or Personnel Board. 
C.  Prepare and recommend to the Council revisions and amendments to the personnel rules. The City Attorney Shall approve the legality of such revisions and amendments prior to their submission to the Council. 
D.  Prepare a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan. The plan, and any revisions thereof, Shall become effective upon Approval by the Council. 
E.  Prepare a plan of compensation, and revisions thereof, covering all classifications in the City except elective positions. The plan, and any revisions thereof, Shall become effective upon Approval by the Council. 
F.  Publish or post Notices of examinations for positions in the competitive service; to receive Applications therefor; to certify to the Human Resource Director a list of all Persons eligible for appointment in the appropriate class in the competitive service. 
(Ord. 0-03-00 § 3, 2000)  
2.48.040 - Civil Service Board. 
There is created a Civil Service Board, to consist of seven members appointed by the Council representing each District of the City. (See § 2.02.020 of the Colton Municipal Code). 
(Ord. 0-03-00 § 4, 2000)  
2.48.050 - Meetings. 
The Civil Service Board Shall hold meetings at such time and place within the City as Shall be Designated by the chairman of the board. Any regular meeting May be adjourned to a time certain and to a place Designated by the chairman. In addition, the board May hold special meetings upon the call of the chairman or any four members of the board. Four members of the board Shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of Business. 
(Ord. 0-03-00 § 5, 2000)  
2.48.060 - Public Hearings. 
Hearings conducted by the Civil Service Board Shall be public, unless the board Shall determine that a private hearing is necessary to secure all the facts in the case. Whenever such a finding is made, the board May limit attendance at the hearing to the members of the board, officers from whose action the Appeal was taken, and such witnesses and other Persons as the board May require to be present. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. 
(Ord. 0-03-00 § 6, 2000)  
2.48.070 - Duties of the Civil Service Board. 
A.  The Civil Service Board Shall determine the Order of Business for the conduct of its meetings, and Shall meet on call of the chairman or four members of the board. Four members of the board Shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of Business. 
B.  The function of the board Shall be: 
1.  As provided by this chapter and by the rules, to hear Appeals submitted by any Person in the competitive service relative to any disciplinary action, dismissal, demotion, or alleged Violation of this chapter or the personnel rules and to certify its findings and recommendations as provided in this chapter. 
2.  In any investigation or hearing conducted by the board, it Shall have the power to examine witnesses under Oath and compel their attendance or production of evidence by subpoenas issued in the name of the City and attested by the City Clerk. It Shall be the duty of the Police Chief to cause all such subpoenas to be served and refusal of a Person to attend or to testify in answer to such a subpoena Shall subject the Person to prosecution in the same manner set forth by Law for failure to appear before the Council in response to a subpoena issued by the Council. Each member of the civil service board Shall have the power to administer Oaths to witnesses. 
3.  When requested by the Council or the City Manager, the Civil Service Board Shall hold hearings and make recommendations on any Matter of personnel administration, within the limits of a request of the City Council or the City Manager. 
(Ord. 0-03-00 § 7, 2000)  
2.48.080 - Request for hearing. 
A.  Any permanent, full-time Employee in the competitive service who has had any disciplinary action, dismissal or reduction in pay Shall be entitled to request a Written statement of the reasons for such action. Such a request Must be made within three Working Days Following the action, and he Shall have three additional Days within which to answer the charges in writing. In the event the Employee requests the statement and prepares his Written answer, copies of both Shall be filed with the City Manager, who Shall transmit them to the Civil Service Board. Within ten Days from the date of filing his answer to the Written charges, or in the event such Written charges have not been made available to him within the time prescribed, then within ten Days after the action taken to demote, dismiss, or reduce the pay of the Employee, he May file a Written demand with the City Manager requesting a hearing before the Civil Service Board. The civil service board Shall then investigate the case (by means of reports/testimony/merits of the case) and conduct a hearing as provided in this chapter and by the rules. 
B.  The provisions of this section Shall not apply to reductions in pay which are a Part of a General Plan to reduce salaries and wages. 
(Ord. 0-03-00 § 8, 2000)  
2.48.090 - Right of Appeal. 
A.  Any permanent, full-time Employee in the competitive service Shall have the right to Appeal to the civil service board relative to any disciplinary action, dismissal, demotion or alleged Violation of this chapter or the personnel rules; except in instances where the right of Appeal is prohibited by this chapter. Thereupon, the board Shall make such investigation as it May deem necessary and within twenty Days after the request for hearing was filed; the board Shall hold a hearing. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. 
B.  Within twenty Days after concluding the hearing, the civil service board Shall certify its findings and recommendations to the Council, City Manager and to any other official from whose action the Appeal was taken, and to the Employee affected. The Council, City Manager or other official from whose action the Appeal was taken Shall review the findings and recommendations of the civil service board and May then revoke, affirm or modify the action taken, as in its judgment seems warranted and the action taken Shall be final. 
(Ord. 0-03-00 §9, 2000)  
2.48.100 - Campaign participation Permitted. 
Officers and Employees in the civil service or merit system of the City May take an active Part in any campaign for or against a candidate for or in any elective office or for or against any ballot measure or proposition. 
(Ord. 0-03-00 §10, 2000)  
2.48.110 - Discrimination. 
No Person in the competitive service, or seeking admission thereto, Shall be employed, promoted, demoted, or Discharged, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of race, religious creed, color, national origin, ancestry, physical handicap, age, sex, or political opinions or affiliations. 
(Ord. 0-03-00 §11, 2000)  
2.48.120 - Solicitation of contributions. 
A.  No officer, agent, clerk, or Employee, under the government of the City, and no candidate for any City office, Shall directly or indirectly, solicit or receive, or be in any manner concerned in soliciting or receiving, any assessment, subscription, contribution, or political service, whether voluntary or involuntary, for any political purpose whatsoever, from anyone on the employment lists or holding any position under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  No officer or Employee in the competitive service Shall, directly or indirectly, solicit or receive, or be in any manner concerned in soliciting or receiving, any assessment, subscription or contribution, whether voluntary or involuntary, for any purpose affecting his working conditions, from any Person other than an officer or Employee in the competitive service. 
(Ord. 0-03-00 §12, 2000)  
2.48.130 - Appropriation of funds. 
The Council Shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-03-00 § 13, 2000)  
2.48.140 - Penalty for Violation. 
Any Person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter (as determined by the City Council), Shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon a conviction thereof Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six Months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 0-03-00 § 14, 2000)  
2.48.150 - Exceptions from civil service provisions Designated. 
The provisions of Sections 2.48.010 through 2.48.140 Shall apply to all official positions and employments in the service of the City except all Department Heads hired after June 5, 2001. 
(Ord. 0-07-01 § 1, 2001)  
Chapter 2.52 - HOLIDAYS 
 
2.52.010 - Designated—Exceptions. 
Every Saturday of each week Shall be considered as a public Holiday for all lawful purposes, provided however, this Shall not apply to essential public services such as police or fire protection or other public Matters not lawfully Permitted to close on such Days. 
(Ord. 727 § 1, 1947)  
Chapter 2.56 - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
 
2.56.010 - Findings. 
The City Council finds and declares that there exists in the City a need to assist Industry in the financing of capital outlays required to acquire, construct or rehabilitate facilities in order to increase employment opportunities and to contribute to economic Development in the City. 
(Ord. 1658 § 1, 1983)  
2.56.020 - Declaration of need. 
The City Council further finds and declares that there is a need for an Industrial Development Authority of the City in order to assist in providing Industry in the City with an alternative method of financing in acquiring, constructing or rehabilitating facilities in accordance with provisions of the Act. 
(Ord. 1658 § 2, 1983)  
2.56.030 - Established. 
The Industrial Development Authority of the City established by the Act is hereby declared organized under the name of "Industrial Development Authority of the City of Colton" and Shall function under and in accordance with provisions of the Act. 
(Ord. 1658 § 3, 1983)  
Chapter 2.60 - LIBRARY 
 
2.60.010 - Established. 
A public library is established in the City. 
(Ord. 218 § 1, 1906)  
2.60.020 - Board of Trustees—Terms. 
The public library Shall be managed by a Board of Library Trustees consisting of five members appointed by the president of the Board by Trustees by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees and Shall hold office for three Years serving without compensation; provided, however, that the members of the board Shall so classify themselves by Lot that one of their number go out of office at the end of the current fiscal Year; two at the end of one Year thereafter and the other two at the end of two Years thereafter. 
(Ord. 218 § 2, 1906)  
2.60.030 - Meetings. 
The Board of Library Trustees Shall meet at least once a Month at such time and places as the said Board of Library Trustees May fix by Resolution. A special meeting May be called at any time by three Trustees by Written Notices served upon each member at least three hours before the time specified for the proposed meeting; a majority of the board Shall constitute a quorum for the transacting of Business. The Board of Library Trustees Shall appoint one of their number president, who Shall serve for one Year and until his successor is appointed, and in his presence Shall select a president pro tem. 
(Ord. 218 § 3, 1906)  
2.60.040 - Library fund. 
All gifts to the City for library purposes of any kind Shall be put into a fund known as the library fund and said fund Shall always be controlled and expended by the Board of Library Trustees for the benefit and Use of said library. 
(Ord. 218 § 4, 1906)  
Chapter 2.64 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR 
 
2.64.010 - Authorized to enforce Titles 15, 16 and 18. 
The Director of the Community Development Department of the City ("the Director") is authorized to enforce Colton Municipal Code Titles 15, 16 and 18 as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-19-87 (part), 1987)  
2.64.020 - In event of Violation of Titles 15, 16 and 18—Investigation and Notice duties. 
In the event that it comes to the attention of the Director that there is a Violation of any of said Titles 15, 16 or 18, the Director Shall investigate the Violation. If such investigation affirms that there appears to be a Violation, the Director Shall cause Notice to be sent to the responsible Party. Said Notice Shall describe the Violation and request voluntary action to correct it or otherwise comply with City Regulations. 
(Ord. 0-19-87 (part), 1987)  
2.64.030 - Authorized to issue citation—Designation of substitute. 
The Director is authorized to issue a citation for an infraction as to such Violation after such Notice if there is neither correction nor compliance. In the absence of the Director, the City Employee assigned by the City Manager to Act on behalf of the Director is deemed "the Director of the Community Development Department" as that term is Used in this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-19-87 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 2.66 - RESERVE POLICE OFFICER CORPS 
 
2.66.010 - Establishment of reserve Police Officer corps. 
A reserve Police Officer corps (the "reserve corps") is hereby established to perform such duties as are described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-05-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.66.020 - Appointment of members. 
The Chief of Police Shall appoint the members of the reserve corps, who are hereinafter called "reserve Police Officer," subject to Approval by the City Manager as authorized by the City Council. Applications for appointment to the position of reserve Police Officer Shall be made in writing on one or more forms provided by the City of Colton. 
(Ord. 0-05-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.66.030 - Requirements for appointment. 
Applicants for the position of reserve Police Officer Shall be required to meet the minimum standards for appointment as determined by the City of Colton, human resources Department (the "Department") and the State of California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST), and Section 832.6(a)(1) of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. 0-05-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.66.040 - Oath of office. 
No Person Shall become a reserve Police Officer until he or she has taken an Oath to observe and obey the Constitution of the United States and of the State of California, and the Laws of this Nation, State, and Local jurisdictions, and faithfully perform the duties required of a reserve Police Officer. 
(Ord. 0-05-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.66.050 - Powers and duties. 
A.  The powers and duties of a reserve Police Officer are subject at all tames to the direction, supervision, and control of the Chief of Police or his or her Designee for the purpose of assisting the Department. 
B.  In accordance with the provisions of Section 830.6(a)(2) of the California Penal Code each reserve Police Officer Shall have the powers and duties of a peace officer as provided by Section 830.1 of the Penal Code. 
C.  Every reserve officer Shall become familiar with and be governed by all rules and regulations as established by the Chief of Police or his or her Designee. These May include but are not limited to, training standards, minimum duty requirements, and monthly meeting attendance. 
(Ord. 0-05-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.66.060 - Identification and Uniform 
All equipment and identification issued by the Police Department remains the Property of the Department and Shall be surrendered upon request by any duly authorized agent of the Department. A reserve Police Officer Shall not wear or possess any Department-issued equipment, and Shall not identify himself or herself as a member of the Colton Police Department, unless the identification is made as Part of or in connection with the reserve Police Officer's performance of official duties for the Department. 
(Ord. 0-05-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.66.070 - Volunteer status. 
Reserve Police Officers serve as volunteers for the Department and Shall receive no compensation or benefits. They Shall not be subject to, nor Shall they acquire, the status or rights of Employees of the Department, except as otherwise required by Law. Reserve Police Officers Shall not be entitled to the rights and privileges provided to regular salaried officers by Section 3300 of the Government Code, also known as the "Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights Act." 
(Ord. 0-05-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.66.080 - Disability payments and death benefits. 
Notwithstanding Section 2.66.070 of this chapter, the City Council acknowledges the applicability to reserve Police Officers of Section 3362.5 of the Labor Code, which presently provides that reserve Police Officers are Employees for purposes of workers' compensation while on duty, and Section 4458.2 of the Labor Code, which governs the calculation of disability payments for injured reserve Police Officers. 
(Ord. 0-05-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.66.090 - Removal from assignment—Resignation. 
A.  All reserve Police Officers serve at the pleasure of the Chief of Police, who Shall have the authority to summarily dismiss any reserve Police Officer at any time regardless of cause or reason. 
B.  Without limiting the authority of the Chief of Police to summarily dismiss any reserve Police Officer at any time without cause, any reserve Police Officer who (i) fails to adhere to the rules and regulations as established by the Chief of Police or his or her Designee; or (ii) attempts to Use his or her identification or association with the reserve corps to evade arrest or receipt of a citation, to evade compliance with any valid Law or regulation, or for the purpose of seeking private gain of any sort, Shall be summarily dismissed by the Chief of Police. 
C.  Any reserve Police Officer May resign from the reserve corps at any time upon giving a Written or verbal resignation to the Chief of Police or his or her Designee. 
(Ord. 0-05-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
For those Business License provisions enacted for revenue-raising for municipal purposes, see Chapter 5.02 of this Code. 
 
Chapter 3.04 - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY 
 
3.04.010 - State provisions and applicability of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter recognize that the general claim procedures applicable to the City and all Local public agencies are governed by the provisions of the California Government Code, Chapters 1 and 2 of Division 3.6, commencing with Section 900 and Following. The provisions of this chapter are enacted pursuant to Government Code Section 935 and Shall apply to all claims against the City for money or damages, including all claims which are excepted by Government Code Section 905, provided that such claims are not governed by any other statutes or regulations. 
(Ord. 0-03-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.04.020 - Presentation of claims—Prerequisite for bringing suit. 
No suit subject to this chapter May be brought against the City until a claim has been presented to and acted upon by the City, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 945.4. Any action brought against the City on a claim after it has been presented to and acted upon by the City Shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. 
(Ord. 0-03-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.04.030 - Authority of City Manager. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 935.4, the City Council delegates authority to the City Manager and his or her Designee to review all claims for sufficiency and to reject any and all claims. The City Council delegates to the City Manager authority to allow, compromise, or settle claims for an amount up to twenty-five thousand dollars. The City Council Shall have sole authority to allow, compromise, or settle claims for an amount in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 0-03-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.04.040 - Contents of claim—Review for sufficiency. 
A claim Shall be presented to the City Clerk by the claimant or by a Person acting on the claimant's behalf and Shall show all information as required by Government Code Section 910. The City Manager, or his or her Designee, Shall review all claims for sufficiency of information. The City Manager, or his or her Designee, may, within twenty Days of receipt of a claim, either personally deliver or mail to claimant a Notice stating deficiencies in the claim presented. If such Notice is delivered or sent to claimant, the City Shall not act upon the claim until at least fifteen Days after such Notice is sent. 
(Ord. 0-03-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.04.050 - Time limitation for presentation of claims. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 911.2, any claim specified in Section 3.04.010 of this chapter Shall be presented within the Following time limitations: 
A.  Claims relating to a cause of action for death, injury to Person or to Personal Property, or growing crops Shall be presented within six Months after the accrual of the cause of action. 
B.  Claims relating to any other cause of action Shall be presented within one Year after the accrual of the cause of action. 
(Ord. 0-03-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.04.060 - Time for action by City. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 912.4, the City Council or City Manager or his or her Designee Shall act on a claim within forty-five Days after the claim has been presented. By mutual agreement of the claimant and the City Council or City Manager or his or her Designee, such forty-five-Day period May be extended by Written agreement. If the claim is not acted on within forty-five Days, it Shall be deemed to have been rejected on the forty-fifth Day unless such time period has been extended, in which case it Shall be denied on the last Day of the period specified in the extension agreement. 
(Ord. 0-03-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.04.070 - Application to file a late claim. 
Any Applicant who fails to file a claim within the time period required by Section 3.04.050 of this chapter May submit a Written Application to the City for leave to present a late claim, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 911.4. The City Manager, or his or her Designee, Shall grant or deny the Application to present a late claim within forty-five Days after it is presented to the City, in accordance with the provisions of the Government Code Sections 911.6 through 912.2, inclusive. 
(Ord. 0-03-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.04.080 - Time barred claim. 
Nothing in this chapter revives or reinstates any cause of action that, on the effective date of this chapter, is barred by failure to comply with any previously applicable statute, Ordinance, or regulation requiring the presentation of a claim prior to a suit subject to this chapter, or by failure to commence any action thereon within the period prescribed by an applicable statute of limitations. 
(Ord. 0-03-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.04.090 - Effective date of chapter. 
Subject to Section 3.04.080, the provisions of this chapter Shall apply retroactively to any causes of action occurring prior to the effective date of this chapter; provided, however, that a claimant who has a cause of action occurring more than ten Months before the effective date of this chapter Shall file a claim within sixty Days after this chapter's effective date in accordance with its provisions or such claim Shall be barred. 
(Ord. 0-03-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 3.08 - BIDDING, CONTRACTING AND PURCHASES OF SUPPLIES, SERVICES AND EQUIPMENT 
 
3.08.010 - Adoption of purchasing system. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases. Therefore, a centralized purchasing system is hereby adopted and vested with the authority for the purchase of all City supplies, services and equipment. In addition, this chapter and the purchasing system it establishes is designed to provide appropriate procedures to implement the City's participation in the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act pursuant to California Public Contract Code, Section 22000 et seq. 
(Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
3.08.020 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise indicated, the Following definitions Shall apply to all provisions of this chapter: 
"Act" means the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act found at California Public Contract Code, Section 22000 et seq. 
"Alternative Procedure" means purchasing supplies, services or equipment by negotiated contract, purchase order or any other procedure outlined in the City's purchasing and bidding policies and procedures manual Approved by the City Manager and consistent with this chapter. A type of Alternative Procedure May include, but is not limited to, what will be referred to as a "simplified pricing procedure" wherein the Authorized Contracting Party, or his or her Designee, obtains oral price quotes from one or more potential contractors or suppliers, and accepts the quote which is determined to be in the best interests of the City. 
"Authorized Contracting Party" means the City official or body provided with authority under this chapter to approve a contract or to make a purchase. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager or Person Designated by the City Manager to perform all or some of the duties prescribed in this chapter. 
"Commission" means the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission created by Division 2, Part 3, Chapter 2, Article 2 of the California Public Contracts Code (commencing at Section 22010). 
"Emergency" for purposes of Public Projects Shall have that meaning provided in California Public Contract Code Sections 22035 and 22050. Emergency for all other purchasing or contracting purposes means a situation which makes competitive bidding, either formal or informal, impractical or not in the best interests of the City. 
"Facility" means any plant, Building, Structure, ground Facility, Utility system (subject to the limitation found in California Public Contract Code Section 22002, Subdivision (c)(3)), Real Property, Streets and Highways, or other public work Improvement. 
"General Services" means all services performed by Persons not in a professional occupation, including, but not limited to, contract services for Park, electrical and computer repair, Building, Facility and Vehicle maintenance, recreation programs and other similar services which are not typical of Professional Services. 
"Maintenance Work" Shall have that meaning provided in Section 22002(d) of the Act, as that section May be amended from time to time. In addition and to the extent not inconsistent with Section 22002(d), Maintenance Work Shall include, but Shall not be limited to, the Following: 
1.  Routine, recurring and usual work for the preservation or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated Facility for its intended purposes; 
2.  Minor repainting; 
3.  Street and Highway maintenance, including Utility patching, skin patching, crack filling, filling of pot holes, slurry sealing, edge grading, Street striping, resurfacing of Streets and Highways at less than one-inch, Sign replacement, Sidewalk repair and replacement, Curb and gutter repair and replacement, and Street and traffic light repair and replacement. Maintenance Work Shall not include striping of a new Street or Highway; 
4.  Sewer maintenance, including foaming, video taping, cleaning and manhole restoration; 
5.  Traffic signal maintenance. Maintenance Work Shall not include installation of new traffic signals; 
6.  Storm drain related maintenance; 
7.  Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, tree and plant replacement, irrigation and sprinkler system servicing, retrofit and repair and landscape rehabilitation; 
8.  Maintenance of facilities, including roof repairs or replacements, heating and air conditioning repairs and electric repairs; 
9.  Vehicle and equipment maintenance and repairs; 
10.  Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water, power, or waste disposal systems, including, but not limited to, dams, reservoirs, powerplants and electrical transmission lines of two hundred thirty thousand volts and higher. 
"Professional Services" means all services performed by persons in a professional occupation, including, but not limited to, consulting and performance services for accounting, auditing, computer hardware and software support, engineering, architectural, planning, environmental, redevelopment, financial, economic, personnel, social services, animal control, management, solid waste, cable television, communication and other similar professional functions which may be necessary for the operation of the City. 
"Public Project" Shall have that meaning provided in Section 22002(c) of the Act, as that section May be amended from time to time. A Public Project Shall not include Maintenance Work. In addition and to the extent not inconsistent with Section 22002(c), Public Project Shall include, but Shall not be limited to, the Following: 
1.  Construction, reconstruction, erection, Alteration, renovation, Improvement, Demolition and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased or operated Facility; 
2.  Painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased or operated Facility; and 
3.  In the case of a publicly owned Utility system, Public Project Shall include only the construction, erection, Improvement, or repair of dams, reservoirs, powerplants and electrical transmission lines of two hundred thirty thousand volts and higher. 
"Public Project Formal Bidding Procedure" means a procedure which meets the requirements of State and Local Law, including Section 22037 of the Act, this chapter and any policies and procedures Approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter. 
"Public Project Informal Bidding Procedure" means a procedure which meets the requirements of State and Local Law, including Section 22034 of the Act, this chapter and any policies and procedures Approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter. 
"Purchasing Officer" means the City Manager or his or her Designee(s) as provided in Section 3.08.020. Initially, the City Manager Designates the Finance Director to act as the Purchasing Officer. Pursuant to Section 3.08.020, the City Manager May change his or her Designation at any time. 
"Colton Formal Bidding Procedure" means a procedure which meets the requirements of State and Local Law, including the Act, this chapter and any policies and procedures Approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. O-06-15, § 1, 4-21-2015; Ord. No. O-10-15, § 1, 10-20-2015)  
3.08.030 - Purchasing Officer. 
There is created the position of Purchasing Officer, who Shall be appointed by City Manager. The Purchasing Officer Shall be the City Manager or his or her Designee(s). The Purchasing Officer Shall be the head, and have the general supervision of all purchasing functions of the City. The duties of the Purchasing Officer May be combined with those of any other office or position. Subject to the supervision of the City Manager, the Purchasing Officer Shall have the authority to: 
A.  Purchase or contract for supplies, services and equipment required by the City; 
B.  Negotiate and recommend to the City Council execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment; 
C.  Prepare and implement policies and procedures governing the bidding, contracting, purchasing, storing, distribution and disposal of supplies, services and equipment for the City; 
D.  Prescribe and maintain such forms as May be reasonably necessary to the implementation of this chapter and any other policies and procedures Approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter; 
E.  Review the working details, drawings, plans and specifications for any Projects or purchases requiring such review in this chapter; 
F.  Inspect or supervise the inspection of purchased supplies, services and equipment to ensure conformity with any specifications established or required by the City; 
G.  Transfer among Departments any supplies, services and equipment not needed by one such Department, but which are necessary for the operation of one or more other Departments; 
H.  Sell any supplies and equipment not needed for public Use or that May become unsuitable for their intended Use; 
I.  Develop and maintain any bidder's list, contractor's list or vendor's catalog file necessary to the operation of this chapter and any other policies and procedures Approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
3.08.040 - General purchasing policies and procedures. 
A.  The City Shall secure supplies, services and equipment at the lowest total cost commensurate with the quality and scope needed, and subject to any limitations imposed by State Law. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Shall secure Professional Services based upon demonstrated competence, professional qualifications and suitability for the Project in general. The City May consider cost of Professional Services if the Authorized Contracting Party determines it to be a relevant factor under the circumstances. 
B.  The Purchasing Officer Shall develop, for Approval by the City Manager, such policies and procedures as are necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. The policies and procedures Shall be Written and implemented in such a way to encourage open and competitive bidding, where appropriate, provide equal opportunity based on merit, make each selection process free of invidious discrimination, provide for efficient and timely acquisition of needed supplies, services and equipment, and provide effective fiscal controls. 
C.  In purchasing, supplies, services and equipment, the City Shall make Use of competitive bidding, both formal and informal, whenever required by Law, this chapter or any policies and procedures Approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter. 
D.  Formal and informal competitive bidding is not required, for instance, when an Emergency is declared pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  Except in cases of Emergency or unless specifically authorized by Resolution or minute order of the City Council, the Purchasing Officer Shall not issue a purchase order for supplies, services or equipment involving any Project or purchase unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which such purchase is to be charged. 
F.  The City Shall comply with all Federal and State bidder's security and bonding requirements and all prevailing wage Laws applicable to each contract or purchase. 
G.  The Purchasing Officer, with Approval of the City Manager, May provide Written authorization to any Department Director to conduct a bidding process outside of the centralized purchasing system; provided, however, that such bidding process and the resulting contract or purchase Shall otherwise comply with the requirements of this chapter. The Purchasing Officer, with Approval of the City Manager, May rescind such authorization in writing at any time and for any or no reason. 
(Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
3.08.050 - Bidding requirements—Public Projects. 
A.  Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars or Less. Public Projects of twenty-five thousand dollars or less May be awarded by the City Manager, upon recommendation of the Director of the Department responsible for the Project, by any Alternative Procedure. 
B.  Twenty-Five Thousand One Dollars to One Hundred Thousand Dollars. Public Projects of more than twenty-five thousand dollars, but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars Shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or the Act, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the Public Project inFormal Bidding Procedure. If all bids received are over one hundred thousand dollars, the City Council may, with the Approval of a four-fifths vote of those members present, award the contract in an amount not exceeding one hundred ten thousand dollars to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, so long as the City Council also determines that the City's cost estimate for the Project was reasonable. 
C.  More than One Hundred Thousand Dollars. Public Projects of more than one hundred thousand dollars Shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or the Act, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the Public Project Formal Bidding Procedure. 
D.  City Engineer Review. The City Engineer or his Designee Shall review the working details, drawings, plans and specifications prepared for every maintenance Project and other General Services Project which May affect the Design or operation of public Improvements and which May bring into question the City's liability for dangerous condition of Public Property. 
E.  City Council Approval. The City Council Shall review and approve the working details, drawings, plans and specifications prepared for every Public Project of more than twenty-five thousand dollars. 
F.  Award. Contracts for Public Projects of twenty-five thousand dollars or less, if awarded, May be awarded in the best interests of the City. Contracts for Public Projects of more than twenty-five thousand dollars, if awarded, Shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the Authorized Contracting Party May accept the one it chooses. 
G.  Dollar Limits and Change Orders or Amendments. The dollar limits indicated herein Shall apply to the original contract and to any amendments or change orders. To this end, therefore, unless an exception provided in Section 3.08.130 applies, any contract amendment or change order which would increase the contract amount above any threshold stated herein Shall comply with the requirements applicable to the increased contract amount. 
H.  No Bid Splitting. The City Shall not split a Project, work, service or purchase into smaller Projects, works, services or purchases for the purpose of avoiding any bidding or contracting requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-16-05 § 1, 2005; Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
3.08.060 - Bidding requirements—Maintenance and General Services. 
A.  Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars or Less. Maintenance Work and other General Services Projects of twenty-five thousand dollars or less May be awarded by the City Manager, upon recommendation of the Director of the Department responsible for the Project, by any Alternative Procedure. 
B.  Twenty-Five Thousand One Dollars to One Hundred Thousand Dollars. Maintenance Work and other General Services Projects of more than twenty-five thousand dollars, but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars Shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the Non-Public Project inFormal Bidding Procedure. 
C.  More than One Hundred Thousand Dollars. Maintenance Work and other General Services Projects of more than one hundred thousand dollars Shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the Non-Public Project Formal Bidding Procedure. 
D.  City Engineer Review. The City Engineer or his Designee Shall review the working details, drawings, plans and specifications prepared for every maintenance Project and other General Services Project which May affect the Design or operation of public Improvements and which May bring into question the City's liability for dangerous condition of Public Property. 
E.  Purchasing Officer Approval. The Purchasing Officer, or his or her Designee, Shall review and approve the working details, drawings, plans and specifications prepared for every Maintenance Work and other General Services Project. 
F.  City Council Approval. The City Council Shall review and approve the working details, drawings, plans and specifications prepared for every Maintenance Work and other General Services Project of more than twenty-five thousand dollars. 
G.  Award. Contracts for Maintenance Work and other General Services Projects of twenty-five thousand dollars or less, if awarded, May be awarded in the best interests of the City. Contracts for Maintenance Work and other General Services Projects of more than twenty-five thousand dollars, if awarded, Shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the Authorized Contracting Party May accept the one it chooses. 
H.  Subsequent Contract Awards, Amendments, Extensions or Renewals. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the City Manager Shall not award a subsequent contract to the same individual or entity for the same or similar services on the same Project, or amend, extend or renew such a contract, without City Council Approval, when the award, amendment, extension or renewal will result in the City paying an aggregate amount of more than twenty-five thousand dollars to the individual or entity in any given fiscal Year. For purposes of this section, the phrase "same Project" Shall include an on-call or as-needed contract. 
I.  Five Year Term Limitation. No Maintenance Work or other General Services contract Shall extend for a period of more than five Years, including any authorized extensions. 
J.  No Bid Splitting. The City Shall not split a Project, work, service or purchase into smaller Projects, works, services or purchases for the purpose of avoiding any bidding or contracting requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-16-05 § 2, 2005; Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
3.08.070 - Bidding requirements—Professional Services. 
A.  Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars or Less. Professional Services contracts of twenty-five thousand dollars or less May be awarded by the City Manager, upon recommendation of the Director of the Department responsible for the Project, by any Alternative Procedure. 
B.  Twenty-Five Thousand One Dollars to One Hundred Thousand Dollars. Professional Services contracts of more than twenty-five thousand dollars, but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars Shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the Non-Public Project inFormal Bidding Procedure. 
C.  More than One Hundred Thousand Dollars. Professional Services contracts of more than one hundred thousand dollars Shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the Non-Public Project Formal Bidding Procedure. 
D.  Purchasing Officer Approval. The Purchasing Officer, or his or her Designee, Shall review and approve the scope of services prepared for every Professional Services contract. 
E.  City Council Approval. The City Council Shall review and approve the scope of services prepared for every Professional Services contract of more than twenty-five thousand dollars. 
F.  Award. Contracts for Professional Services Shall be awarded to the contractor who will best serve the interests of the City, taking into account the demonstrated competence, professional qualifications and suitability for the Project in general. The City May consider cost of Professional Services if the Authorized Contracting Party determines it to be a relevant factor under the circumstances. 
G.  Subsequent Contract Awards, Amendments, Extensions or Renewals. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the City Manager Shall not award a subsequent contract to the same individual or entity for the same or similar services, or amend, extend or renew such a contract, without City Council Approval, when the award, amendment, extension or renewal will result in the City paying an aggregate amount of more than twenty-five thousand dollars to the individual or entity in any given fiscal Year. 
H.  No Bid Splitting. The City Shall not split a Project, work, service or purchase into smaller Projects, works, services or purchases for the purpose of avoiding any bidding or contracting requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
3.08.080 - Bidding requirements—Materials, supplies and equipment. 
A.  Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars or Less. Purchases of Materials, supplies and equipment of twenty-five thousand dollars or less May be awarded by the City Manager, upon recommendation of the Director of the Department responsible for the purchase, by any Alternative Procedure. 
B.  Twenty-Five Thousand One Dollars to One Hundred Thousand Dollars. Purchases of Materials, supplies and equipment of more than twenty-five thousand dollars, but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars Shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the Non-Public Project inFormal Bidding Procedure. 
C.  More than One Hundred Thousand Dollars. Purchases of Materials, supplies and equipment of more than one hundred thousand dollars Shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the Non-Public Project Formal Bidding Procedure. 
D.  Department Director Approval. The Director of the Using Department Shall review and approve the specifications prepared for every purchase of Materials, supplies and equipment. 
E.  Purchasing Officer Approval. The Purchasing Officer, or his or her Designee, Shall review and approve all contracts for the purchase of Materials, supplies and equipment. 
F.  City Council Approval. The City Council Shall review and approve the specifications prepared for every purchase of Materials, supplies and equipment of more than twenty-five thousand dollars. 
G.  Award. Contracts for the purchase of Materials, supplies and equipment of twenty-five thousand dollars or less, if awarded, May be awarded in the best interests of the City. Contracts for the purchase of Materials, supplies and equipment of more than twenty-five thousand dollars, if awarded, Shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the Authorized Contracting Party May accept the one it chooses. 
H.  Local Bidder Preference. In order to promote the economic health of the City and to encourage Local participation in the procurement of Materials, supplies and equipment, the City May take into consideration the Sales tax to be returned to the City as a result of an award in determining the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. This section Shall not be effective unless and until the Purchasing Officer adopts a Written policy to implement its provisions. 
I.  No Bid Splitting. The City Shall not split a Project, work, service or purchase into smaller Projects, works, services or purchases for the purpose of avoiding any bidding or contracting requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
3.08.090 - Public Projects—Formal Bidding Procedure. 
A.  Uses of Formal Bidding Procedure. This Formal Bidding Procedure Shall be Used whenever formal bidding is required for a Public Project. 
B.  Required Process. The formal competitive bidding procedure Shall comply with all aspects of State and Local Law governing formal competitive bidding, including, but not limited to, the California Public Contract Code, California Government Code, California Labor Code, Resolutions of the City Council as May be adopted from time to time, and policies and procedures as the City Manager May approve from time to time. 
C.  Notice Inviting Formal Bids. Notice inviting formal bids Shall be provided. The Notice inviting formal bids Shall comply with Section 22037 of the Act, as such section May be amended from time to time. Notices Shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the Project. At a minimum, the Notice inviting formal bids Shall: 
1.  Describe the Project; 
2.  State how to obtain more detailed information about the Project; 
3.  State the date, time and place for the submission of sealed bids; and 
4.  Include any other information required by State or Local Law, as determined by the City Attorney. 
D.  Published Notice. The Notice Shall be published at least fourteen calendar Days before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the City, or, if there is no such newspaper, in a newspaper of general circulation which is circulated in the City. 
E.  Distribution of Notice Inviting Formal Bids. The Notice inviting formal bids Shall also be sent to those construction trade journals specified in Section 22036 of the Act at least thirty calendar Days before the date of bid opening. 
F.  Additional Notice. The City Shall also provide any additional Notice as it deems proper. 
G.  Contents of Remaining Bid and Contract Documents. The contents and form of the remaining bid and contract documents Shall be Approved by the Director of the Using Department, as well as the City Attorney. 
H.  City's Authority. The City May reject any or all bids received, and May waive any Minor irregularities in each bid received. 
I.  No Bids Received. If no bids are received, the Authorized Contracting Party May award the contract by any Alternative Procedure. 
J.  Award of Contract. The contract Shall be awarded in accordance with Section 3.08.050(f). If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the City May accept the one it chooses. 
K.  Rejection of Bids. The City may, in its sole and absolute discretion, reject any bids presented. If after the first invitation of bids all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates for the Project, the City Shall have the option of any of the Following: 
1.  Abandon the Project; or 
2.  Readvertise for bids in the manner described in this chapter; or 
3.  By passage of a Resolution by a four-fifths vote of the City Council, declare that the Project can be performed more economically by the Employees of the City and have the Project done by force account. 
(Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
3.08.100 - Public Projects—Informal Bidding Procedure. 
A.  Uses of Public Project Informal Bidding Procedure. This inFormal Bidding Procedure Shall be Used when a Public Project is involved and informal bidding is Permitted by this chapter. 
B.  Contractor List. The Purchasing Officer Shall maintain a list of qualified contractors, identified according to categories of work, as described in Section 22034(a) of the Act. The list Shall be developed and maintained in accordance with criteria established by the Commission. In developing the list, the Purchasing Officer Shall obtain from the Contractor's State License Board and from the contractor's trade associations in the County, the names and addresses of qualified contractors located in the County. 
C.  Distribution of Notice Inviting Informal Bids. The Purchasing Officer Shall provide a Notice inviting informal bids. The Notice inviting informal bids Shall be mailed to either or both of the Following: 
1.  All contractors on the qualified contractors list maintained pursuant to subsection (b) of this section; and/or 
2.  All construction trade journals specified in Section 22036 of the Act. The Notice inviting informal bids Must be mailed not less than ten calendar Days before the bids are due. 
D.  Contents of Notice Inviting Informal Bids. At a minimum, the Notice inviting informal bids Shall: 
1.  Describe the Project in general terms; 
2.  State how to obtain more detailed information about the Project; 
3.  State the date, time and place for the submission of sealed bids; and 
4.  Include any other information required by State or Local Law, as determined by the City Attorney. 
E.  Proprietary Projects or Products. If the Director of the Using Department certifies that, to the best of his or her knowledge, the product or service is proprietary in nature and can be obtained only from a limited number of contractors, and that no equivalent products or services are available, the Notice inviting informal bids May be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. 
F.  Contents of Remaining Bid and Contract Documents. The contents and form of the remaining bid and contract documents Shall be Approved by the Director of the Using Department, as well as the City Attorney. 
G.  City's Authority. The City May reject any or all bids received, and May waive any Minor irregularities in each bid received. 
H.  No Bids Received. If no bids are received, the Authorized Contracting Party May award the contract by any Alternative Procedure. 
J.  Award of Contract. The contract Shall be awarded in accordance with Section 3.08.050(f). If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the City May accept the one it chooses. 
(Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
3.08.110 - Non-Public Projects—Formal Bidding Procedure. 
A.  Uses of the Non-Public Project Formal Bidding Procedure. A Formal Bidding Procedure Shall be Used whenever formal bidding is required by this chapter and the Project does not involve a Public Project. 
B.  Distribution of Notice Inviting Formal Bids or Request for Proposals. A Notice inviting formal bids or a request for proposals, as appropriate, Shall be published at least fourteen calendar Days before the date of opening the bids or proposals in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the City, or, if there is no such newspaper, in a newspaper of general circulation which is circulated in the City. The Notice inviting formal bids or request for proposals May also be provided directly to vendors or contractors. The City Shall endeavor to receive formal bids or proposals from at least three vendors or contractors. A Notice inviting bids Shall be Used whenever the Project or purchase Must be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. A request for proposals May be Used whenever the Project or purchase is not required to be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. If the Purchasing Officer and the Director of the Using Department certify that, to the best of their knowledge, there is no Local source or Local provider available for the Project, the Notice inviting bids or the request for proposals, as appropriate, May be distributed to a list of qualified vendors maintained by the Purchasing Officer and/or published in a trade journal appropriate to the Project, in lieu of publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 
C.  Contents of Notice Inviting Formal Bids or Request for Proposals. At a minimum, the Notice inviting formal bids or request for proposals Shall: 
1.  Describe the Project or purchase in general terms; 
2.  State how to obtain more detailed information about the Project or purchase; 
3.  State the date, time and place for the submission of bids or proposals; and 
4.  Include any other information required by State or Local Law, as determined by the City Attorney. Bids for purchases of more than twenty-five thousand dollars Shall be sealed bids. 
D.  Proprietary Projects or Sole Source Products. If the Director of the Using Department certifies that, to the best of his or her knowledge, the product or service is proprietary in nature and can be obtained only from a limited number of vendors or contractors, and that no equivalent products or services are available, the Notice inviting formal bids or request for proposals May be sent exclusively to such vendor(s) or contractor(s). 
E.  Contents of Remaining Bid and Contract Documents. The contents and form of the remaining bid and contract documents Shall be Approved by the Director of the Using Department, as well as the City Attorney. 
F.  City's Authority. The City May reject any or all bids or proposals received, and May waive any Minor irregularities in each bid or proposal received. 
G.  No Bids Received. If no bids are received, the Authorized Contracting Party May award the contract by any Alternative Procedure. 
(Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
3.08.120 - Non-Public Projects—Informal Bidding Procedure. 
A.  Uses of Non-Public Project Informal Bidding Procedure. This inFormal Bidding Procedure Shall be Used whenever informal bidding is allowed for a purchase which does not involve a Public Project. 
B.  Distribution of Notice Inviting Informal Bids or Request for Proposals. A Notice inviting informal bids or request for proposals, as appropriate, Shall be provided. The Notice inviting informal bids or requests for proposals Shall be provided to at least three vendors or contractors, and the City Shall endeavor to receive informal bids or proposals from at least three vendors or contractors. A Notice inviting bids Shall be Used whenever the Project or purchase Must be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. A request for proposals May be Used whenever the Project or purchase is not required to be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. 
C.  Contents of Notice Inviting Informal Bids or Request for Proposals. At a minimum, the Notice inviting informal bids or request for proposals Shall: 
1.  Describe the Project or purchase in general terms; 
2.  State how to obtain more detailed information about the Project or purchase; 
3.  State the date, time and place for the submission of bids or proposals; and 
4.  Include any other information required by State or Local Law, as determined by the City Attorney. Bids for purchases of more than twenty-five thousand dollars Shall be sealed bids. 
D.  Proprietary Projects or Products. If the Director of the Using Department certifies that, to the best of his or her knowledge, the product or service is proprietary in nature and can be obtained only from a limited number of vendors or contractors, and that no equivalent products or services are available, the Notice inviting informal bids or request for proposals May be sent exclusively to such vendor(s) or contractor(s). 
E.  Contents of Remaining Bid and Contract Documents. The contents and form of the remaining bid and contract documents Shall be Approved by the Director of the Using Department, as well as the City Attorney. 
F.  City's Authority. The City May reject any or all bids or proposals received, and May waive any Minor irregularities in each bid or proposal received. 
G.  No Bids or Proposals Received. If no bids or proposals are received, the Authorized Contracting Party May award the contract by any alternative purchasing procedure. 
(Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
3.08.130 - Exceptions to competitive bidding—Public Projects. 
In addition to the situations described Section 3.08.050, competitive bidding, either formal or informal, is not required for Public Projects in the situations provided for in this section. Under such conditions, any Alternative Procedure May be Used. 
A.  Emergencies. In situations determined by the City Manager to constitute an Emergency for a Public Project pursuant to Section 22035 of the Act and Public Contract Code Section 22050. The City Council hereby delegates to the City Manager the power to declare a public Emergency and take any directly related and immediate action required by the Emergency, up to a total of one hundred thousand dollars, pursuant to Section 22035 of the Act and California Public Contract Code Section 22050. Emergency expenditures of more than one hundred thousand dollars Shall first be Approved by the City Council. Work Shall be performed without the benefit of competitive bidding, either formal or informal, only so long as necessary under those sections. 
For Projects of more than twenty-five thousand dollars, a report on the Emergency and work performed Shall be provided at the next regular meeting of the City Council, and then at every meeting thereafter required by Section 22050. At such meetings, the City Council Shall determine, by a four-fifths vote, that there is a need to continue the action without the benefit of informal or formal competitive bidding in accordance with Section 22035 of the Act and California Public Contract Code Section 22050. The City Council Shall terminate the Emergency action at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant, so that the remainder of the Emergency action May be completed pursuant to a Formal Bidding Procedure. 
For Projects of twenty-five thousand dollars or less, the City Manager Shall determine, on his or her own as the action continues, whether there is a need to continue the action without the benefit of Public Project informal competitive bidding. The City Manager Shall terminate the Emergency action at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant, so that the remainder of the Emergency action May be completed pursuant to an inFormal Bidding Procedure. 
B.  No Competitive Market. When the City Council determines, in accordance with applicable Law, that a competitive market does not exist and that no competitive advantage will be gained by the public bidding process. 
C.  No Bids Received. When no bids are received pursuant to either the Public Project inFormal Bidding Procedure or the Public Project Formal Bidding Procedure. 
D.  Otherwise Authorized. When otherwise authorized by this chapter or applicable Law. 
(Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
3.08.140 - Exceptions to competitive bidding—Non-Public Projects. 
In addition to the situations described in sections 3.08.060 through 3.08.080, competitive bidding, either formal or informal, is not required for Non-Public Projects in the situations provided for in this section. Under such conditions, any alternative procedure, including no bidding, may be used with the City Manager's approval. 
A.  Emergencies. In situations determined by the Authorized Contracting Party to constitute an Emergency, as defined in section 3.08.020. 
B.  No Competitive Market. When the City Council determines, in accordance with applicable law, that a competitive market does not exist and that no competitive advantage will be gained by the public bidding process. 
C.  Competitive Bidding Already Completed. When the Authorized Contracting Party determines that a competitive bid procedure has been conducted by another public agency (e.g. through CMAS or GSA) and the price to the City is equal to or better than the price to that public agency. 
D.  State Purchase. When the purchase is made on behalf of the City by the State Department of General Services. 
E.  Purpose of Bidding is Otherwise Accomplished. When the City Manager determines that it is in the best interest of the City and its administrative operations to dispense with public bidding for Non-Public Projects under this chapter. Prior City Council concurrence with the City Manager's determination shall be required for Non-Public Project purchases over one hundred thousand dollars. 
F.  No Bids Received. When no bids are received Non-Public Project formal or informal bidding procedures. 
G.  Electric Utility. Purchases authorized by Section 2.18.010 of this Code. 
H.  Expenses. The reimbursement or payment of travel expenses and other employee expenses. 
I.  Insurance. The payment of any insurance premiums or claims, including employee medical payments. 
J.  Real Property. The purchase or lease of real property with City Council approval. 
K.  Banking. Banking services. 
L.  Otherwise Authorized. When otherwise authorized by this chapter or applicable law. 
(Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. O-06-15, § 2, 4-21-2015; Ord. No. O-10-15, § 2, 10-20-2015)  
3.08.150 - Surplus supplies and equipment. 
All using Departments Shall submit to the Purchasing Officer, at such times and in such form as he/she Shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies, Materials and equipment which are no longer Used or which have become obsolete or worn out. 
A.  The Purchasing Officer Shall have authority to sell as surplus all supplies, Materials and equipment which cannot be Used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for City Use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies, Materials and equipment. The Sale of surplus supplies and equipment Shall be made pursuant to rules prescribed by the City Manager, and only after authorization from the City Council as to any items of an estimated value of ten thousand dollars or more. 
B.  Surplus supplies and equipment May be sold to the public if so prescribed by the City Manager and/or the City Council. City officials and Employees, and their immediate families, however, Shall not be eligible to purchase such surplus items. 
(Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
3.08.160 - City Manager authorization to execute contracts. 
Pursuant to the California Government Code, the Mayor Must execute all contracts on behalf of the City, unless another City Officer or Employee is authorized to do so. The City Manager and his or her Designees, as explicitly set forth in this chapter and the administrative policies implementing this chapter, are hereby authorized to execute contracts on behalf of the City. 
(Ord. 0-12-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 3.12 - FUNDS 
 
3.12.010 - Capital Improvement Fund created—Moneys expenditure. 
There is created a special fund to be known as the "Capital Improvement Fund." All revenue received by this fund will be in compliance with the instructions and/or Approval of the City Council for purposes of Capital Improvements so stated by the City Council at the time of such instructions and/or Approval of the City Council. All moneys expended from this fund Shall be in compliance with budgeted appropriations Approved by the City Council prior to the date of such expenditure. 
(Ord. 1202 § 4, 1964)  
3.12.020 - General Fund maintenance—Reserves Designated. 
A.  There is and Shall also be maintained a fund known as the "General Fund," which Shall be Used for the receipt of and expenditure of all moneys of the City Treasury not specifically Designated to the other funds contained in this chapter, or other Ordinances or Resolutions to which reference is made in this chapter. The Use of this fund Shall also comply with the provisions of the Government Code specifically applying to this fund. 
B.  There Shall be maintained in the General Fund certain reserve accounts for the purposes stated herein: 
1.  Reserve for sewer plant equipment replacement; 
2.  Reserve for general City equipment replacement; 
3.  Reserve for Refuse collection equipment. 
These reserves Shall be maintained to accrue such annual sums of moneys as determined at the time of the adoption of the annual budget by the City Council. Expenditure and/or transfers from such accrued reserves Shall be in accordance with budget appropriation and/or transfers to other funds Approved by the City Council; 
4.  Reserve for cash basis. 
This reserve Shall be established in the General Fund to provide for the necessary safe cash margin between revenues and expenditures of the various funds during the so-called "dry period" between July 1st and December 31st of each fiscal Year. The amounts of moneys retained in this reserve Shall be determined by the City Council at the time of adoption of the annual budget, and the Finance Director is instructed to make such necessary fund transfers as are needed to comply with the Council's action. 
(Ord. 1202 § 5, 1964)  
3.12.025 - Liability risk retention fund. 
A.  Created—Purpose. A liability risk retention fund is created to establish and hold cash reserves for the purpose of satisfying judgment of claims as determined by the self-insured administrator. 
B.  Review and Adjustment. Cash reserves Shall frequently and periodically be reviewed and adjusted, and the City Shall cause to be kept and maintained in said fund adequate reserves on all open cases and as determined by the self-insured administrator. 
C.  Expenditure. All moneys in said fund Shall be expended or liquidated in accordance with reserves established under the exclusive direction of the City's self-insured administrator. 
(Ord. 1498 §§ 1—3, 1976)  
3.12.030 - Other fund reserves—Approval. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter Shall be construed to prohibit the maintenance of reserves in any fund that are necessary to comply with the accepted budgetary and fund accounting principles in reference to reserves for depreciation of physical assets, stores and inventories, accounts receivables and bonded debt. 
B.  All reserves established under the provisions of subsection A of this section Shall be Approved by the City Council or the auditing firm employed by the City Council to conduct an annual audit of the financial transactions of the City. 
(Ord. 1202 § 6, 1964)  
Chapter 3.16 - TRANSFER OF TAX ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION FUNCTIONS TO COUNTY 
 
3.16.010 - Designation. 
All assessments hereafter made in the City for taxes for municipal purposes Shall be made by the County Assessor of the County of San Bernardino, and such taxes or assessments so made Shall be collected by the tax Collector of the County of San Bernardino. 
(Ord. 992 § 1, 1958)  
Chapter 3.20 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
 
3.20.010 - Title—Adoption authority. 
The Ordinance codified in this chapter is known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Colton." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State. 
(Ord. 1310 § 1, 1967)  
3.20.020 - Imposition—Rate. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the City Shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other Person or Persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or Property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of Sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional Part thereof. 
(Ord. 1310 § 2, 1967)  
3.20.030 - Payment. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.20.020 Shall be paid by any Person who makes, Signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose Use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Ord. 1310 § 3, 1967)  
3.20.040 - Instruments to secure debts exempt. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter Shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Ord. 1310 § 4, 1967)  
3.20.050 - Public agencies exempt. 
The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any State or territory, or political Subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia Shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a Party, but the tax May be collected by assessment from any other Party liable therefor. 
(Ord. 1310 § 5, 1967)  
3.20.060 - Plans of reorganization and adjustment exempt. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter Shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
A.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
B.  Approved in any equity receivership proceeding in a Court involving a Railroad corporation, as defined in Subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
C.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a Court involving a corporation, as defined in Subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
D.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
Subsections A. to D., inclusive, of this section Shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five Years from the date of such confirmation, Approval or change. 
(Ord. 1310 § 6, 1967)  
3.20.070 - Orders of Securities and Exchange Commission exempt. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter Shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in Subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the Property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Ord. 1310 § 7, 1967)  
3.20.080 - Partnerships exempt. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy Shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership Shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for Fair Market Value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax Shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B., and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Ord. 1310 § 8, 1967)  
3.20.090 - Administration. 
The County Recorder Shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any County Ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 1310 § 9, 1967)  
3.20.100 - Refunds. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter Shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State. 
(Ord. 1310 § 10, 1967)  
Chapter 3.24 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
3.24.010 - Title. 
This chapter Shall be known as the "Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance of the City of Colton." 
(Ord. 1304 § 1, 1967)  
3.24.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter. 
"Hotel" means any Structure or any portion of any Structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for Occupancy by Transients for Dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any Hotel, inn, tourist home or house, Motel, studio Hotel, bachelor Hotel, lodging house, rooming house, Apartment house, dormitory, public or Private Club, Mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar Structure or portion thereof. 
"Occupancy" means the Use or possession, or the right to Use, or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any Hotel for Dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
"Operator" means the Person who is proprietor of the Hotel, whether in the capacity of Owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgage in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the Operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an Employee, the managing agent Shall also be deemed an Operator for the purposes of this chapter and Shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent Shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, Business trust, receiver, Trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the Occupancy of space in a Hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, Goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipt, cash, credits and Property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
"Tax Administrator" means City Manager or such other City Employee/official, as Shall be Designated by the City Council. 
"Transient" means any Person who exercises Occupancy or is entitled to occupy by reason of concession, Permit, right of Access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar Days or less, counting portions of calendar Days as full Days. Any such Person so occupying space in a Hotel Shall be deemed to be a Transient until the period of thirty Days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the Operator and the Occupant providing for a longer period of Occupancy. Any individual who exercises or is entitled to Occupancy for a period of thirty Days or less Shall be deemed to be a Transient, regardless of whether the reservation and payment or payment for Occupancy is made directly by the individual exercising Occupancy or another individual or entity. The intent is to tax the individual occupying the Hotel room. 
For purposes of this definition, the exercise of or entitlement to Occupancy Shall be evidenced by any of the Following: 
1.  An individual's signature on a Hotel registration card or form, a Hotel invoice or receipt or any other document associated with an individual's Occupancy in a Hotel; and/or 
2.  An individual's providing identification to Hotel staff as proof of employment, membership or affiliation with a Person as defined in subsection D. of this section as a condition of or in connection with exercising Occupancy in a Hotel. 
In determining whether a Person is a Transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the provisions of this chapter May be considered. 
(Ord. 0-17-03 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1304 § 2, 1967)  
3.24.030 - Imposition—Rate. 
For the privilege of Occupancy in any Hotel, each Transient is subject to and Shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the Rent charged by the Operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the Transient to the City which is extinguished only by payment to the Operator of the Hotel at the same time the Rent is paid. If the Rent is paid in installments, proportionate share of the tax Shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax Shall be due when the Transient ceases to occupy space in the Hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the Operator of the Hotel, the Tax Administrator May require that such tax Shall be paid directly to the Tax Administrator. 
(Ord. 1639, 1983: Ord. 1472 § 1, 1975: Ord. 1312 § 1, 1967: Ord. 1304 § 3, 1967)  
3.24.040 - Exemptions. 
No tax Shall be imposed upon: 
A.  Any Person as to whom, or any Occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided; 
B.  Any Federal or State Officer or Employee when on official Business; 
C.  Any officer or Employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of Federal Law or international treaty. 
No exemption Shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time the Rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. 
(Ord. 1304 § 4, 1967)  
3.24.050 - Operator's duties. 
Each Operator Shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the Rent is collected from every Transient. The amount of tax Shall be separately stated from the amount of the Rent charged, and each Transient Shall receive a receipt for payment from the Operator. No Operator of a Hotel Shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any Part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the Operator, or that it will not be added to the Rent, or that, if added, any Part will be refunded except in the manner provided in Section 3.24.160. 
(Ord. 1304 § 5, 1967)  
3.24.060 - Registration—Certificate. 
Within thirty Days after July 20, 1967, or within thirty Days after commencing Business, whichever is later, each Operator of any Hotel Renting Occupancy to Transients Shall register the Hotel with the Tax Administrator and obtain from him a "Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the Premises. The certificate Shall, among other things, state the Following: 
A.  The name of the Operator; 
B.  The address of the Hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the Person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from Transient the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any Person to conduct any unlawful Business or to conduct any lawful Business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a Hotel without strictly complying with all Local applicable Laws, including but not limited to those requiring a Permit from any board, Commission, Department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a Permit." 
(Ord. 1304 § 6, 1967)  
3.24.070 - Reporting and remitting. 
Each Operator Shall, on or before the last Day of the Month Following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which May be established by the Tax Administrator, make a return to the Tax Administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total Rents charged or chargeable as provided in Section 3.24.030, whether or not received, including any Rentals charged for occupancies exempt under the provisions of Section 3.24.020(D) and Section 3.24.040 and the amount of tax collected for Transient occupancies. Amounts claimed on the return as exempt from the tax under Section 3.24.020(D) and Section 3.24.040 Shall be fully itemized and explained on the return or supporting schedule. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected Shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator May establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he May require further information in the return. All taxes collected by Operators pursuant to this chapter Shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the Tax Administrator. 
Each Operator Shall notify the Tax Administrator ten Days prior to the Sale or cessation of Business for any reason, and returns and payments are due and payable to the Tax Administrator immediately upon the Sale or cessation of Business. 
(Ord. 1304 § 7, 1967)  
3.24.080 - Delinquency—Original—Penalty. 
Any Operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required in Section 3.24.070, Shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
(Ord. 1304 § 8(a), 1967)  
3.24.090 - Delinquency—Continued—Penalty. 
Any Operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty calendar Days Following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent Shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
(Ord. 1304 § 8(b), 1967)  
3.24.100 - Delinquency—Fraud—Penalty. 
If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax Shall be added thereto, in addition to the penalties stated in Sections 3.24.080 and 3.24.090. 
(Ord. 1304 § 8(c), 1967)  
3.24.110 - Delinquency—Interest. 
In addition to the penalties imposed, any Operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter Shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per Month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
(Ord. 1304 § 8(d), 1967)  
3.24.120 - Penalties Part of tax. 
Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of Sections 3.24.080 through 3.24.110 Shall become a Part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. 1304 § 8(e), 1967)  
3.24.130 - Failure to collect tax—Determination of tax—Hearing. 
If any Operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report or remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the Tax Administrator Shall proceed in such manner as he May deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Tax Administrator Shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any Operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he Shall proceed to determine and assess against such Operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the Tax Administrator Shall give a Notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the Operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such Operator may, within ten Days after the serving or mailing of such Notice, make Application in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If Application by the Operator for a hearing is not made within the prescribed time, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the Tax Administrator Shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such Application is made, the Tax Administrator Shall give not less than five Days' Written Notice in the manner prescribed herein to the Operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the Notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the Operator May appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the Tax Administrator Shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and Shall thereafter give Written Notice to the Operator in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due Shall be paid within fifteen Days unless an Appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.24.140. 
(Ord. 1304 § 9, 1967)  
3.24.140 - Appeal. 
Any Operator aggrieved by any Decision of the Tax Administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, May Appeal to the City Council by filing a Notice of Appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen Days of the serving or determination of tax due, as provided in Section 13.24.130. The City Council Shall fix a time and place for hearing such Appeal, and the City Shall give Notice in writing to such Operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the City Council Shall be final and conclusive and Shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of Notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due Shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of Notice. 
(Ord. 1304 § 10, 1967)  
3.24.150 - Records maintenance and inspection. 
It Shall be the duty of every Operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three Years, all records as May be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he May have been liable for the collection of any payment to the City, which records the Tax Administrator Shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 1304 § 11, 1967)  
3.24.160 - Refund procedures. 
Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this chapter, it May be refunded as provided in subsections A. and B. of this section, provided that a claim in writing therefor stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded is filed with the Tax Administrator within three Years of the date of the payment. The claim Shall be on forms furnished by the Tax Administrator. 
A.  An Operator May claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City when it is established in a manner prescribed by the Tax Administrator that the Person from whom the tax has been collected was not a Transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit Shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected and remitted by the Operator has either been refunded to the Transient or credited to Rent subsequently payable by the Transient, such refund or credit made by the Operator. 
B.  A Transient May obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in this section, but only when the tax was paid by the Transient directly to the Tax Administrator, or when the Transient, having paid the tax to the Operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the Tax Administrator that the Transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the Operator who collected the tax. 
C.  No refund Shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by Written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 1304 § 12, 1967)  
3.24.170 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any Transient under the provisions of this chapter Shall be deemed a debt owed by the Transient to this City. Any such tax collected by an Operator which has not been paid to the City Shall be deemed a debt owed by the Operator to the City. Any Person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter Shall be liable to an action in the name of the City for the recovery of such an amount. 
(Ord. 1304 § 13, 1967)  
3.24.180 - Violation and penalty. 
Any Person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and Shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six Months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Any Operator or other Person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or fails to furnish any return required to be made, or fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Tax Administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any Person required to make, render, Sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. 
(Ord. 1304 § 14, 1967)  
Chapter 3.26 - CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX 
 
3.26.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
A.  "Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" also means the term as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018 and is not limited to medical cannabis. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this chapter, "Cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
B.  "Cannabis business" means any business, organization or facility, regardless of form, whether operating for profit or not for profit, that cultivates, processes, stores, tests, packages, labels, distributes, transports, and/or sells, dispenses or delivers cannabis, cannabis products and/or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products. "Cannabis business" does not include personal medical or adult use cannabis cultivation authorized by State law and this Code. A cannabis business shall not be considered to be a religious, social or charitable organization exempt from the payment of business taxes under this chapter. 
C.  "Cannabis cultivation" means the seeding, planting, watering, warming, cooling, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading or trimming of cannabis. 
D.  "Cannabis distribution" or "Cannabis transport" means any activity involving the commercial procurement, sale, transfer and/or transport of cannabis and cannabis products from one cannabis business to another cannabis business for purposes authorized pursuant to state law. 
E.  "Cannabis nursery" means a cannabis business that produces only clones, immature plants, seeds and other agricultural products used specifically for cannabis cultivation. 
F.  "Cannabis processing" shall mean any activity involving the holding, storing, sorting, preparation, labeling and packaging of raw cannabis for retail sale; or involving the production, preparation, propagation, labeling, packaging or compounding of cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis. 
G.  "Cannabis product" means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, an edible product, or a topical product. "Cannabis product" also means cannabis products as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 11018.1 and is not limited to medical cannabis products. 
H.  "Cannabis testing" means any activity involving the testing of cannabis or cannabis products by a facility that is both of the following: 
1.  Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in the cannabis industry in the state; and 
2.  Registered with the California State Department of Public Health. 
I.  "Engaged in a cannabis business" means the commencing, conducting, operating, managing or carrying on of a cannabis business and the exercise of corporate, franchise or other business powers, whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee, or other representative, within the City, whether operating from a fixed location within the City or coming into the City from an outside location to engage in cannabis business activities. By way of example, a person shall be deemed "engaged in cannabis business" within the City if such person or the person's officer, agent, manager, employee, or other representative acting on behalf of such person: 
1.  Maintains a fixed place of cannabis business within the City; 
2.  Owns, leases or otherwise has the legal right to occupy real property within the City for cannabis business purposes; 
3.  Regularly maintains a stock of tangible personal property within the City in the ordinary course of cannabis business; 
4.  Performs work or renders cannabis business services to other cannabis businesses or to retail cannabis customers located within the City. 
J.  "Gross receipts" means, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the total amount of monetary consideration actually received or receivable by a cannabis business for performance of any act or service in providing, at wholesale or retail, cannabis and/or cannabis products, for which a charge is made or credit allowed including, but not limited to: membership dues, the value of monetary and in-kind contributions, payments, reimbursement of fees for cultivation, processing, distribution, delivery, retail, storing, exchanging, processing, delivering, making available, or transmitting of cannabis or cannabis products, any payments made, and anything else of value obtained by a cannabis business. Included in "gross receipts" shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind without deduction of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
1.  Cash discounts where allowed and taken on sales; 
2.  Sales or other applicable state or local tax required by law to be added to the purchase price of cannabis or cannabis products and collected from the purchaser; 
3.  Such part of the sales price of any property returned by purchasers to the seller as refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances or return of refundable deposits previously included in gross receipts; or 
4.  Whenever there are included within gross receipts amounts which reflect sales for which credit is extended and such amount proved uncollectable in a subsequent year, those amounts may be excluded from gross receipts in the year they prove to be uncollectable, provided, however, if all or any portion of such amounts excluded as uncollectible are subsequently collected they shall be included in gross receipt for the period when they are recovered. 
K.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, which is conducting itself as a cannabis business. 
L.  "Space utilized in connection with cannabis cultivation/processing" means any space or ground, floor or other surface area (whether horizontal or vertical) which is used for either or both of the following: 
1.  Cannabis nursery and/or cultivation, of any combination of those activities, as well as storing any products, supplies or equipment related to any such activities, no matter where such storage may take place or such storage space may be located. 
2.  Cannabis processing, testing, distribution or transport, or any combination of those activities, as well as storing any products, supplies or equipment related to any such activities, no matter where such storage may take place or such storage space may be located. 
M.  "State" means the State of California. 
N.  "Tax Administrator" is the City's Director of Finance, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.020 - Purpose of tax. 
This tax is a general tax, the revenues from which may be used for general City services. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.030 - Imposition of tax. 
A.  Every person engaged in a cannabis business within the City of Colton, and regardless of whether such business has a permit to operate pursuant to the Colton Municipal Code, shall pay a cannabis business tax at the following rates: 
1.  Up to a maximum of ten percent of gross receipts or fractional part thereof, generated by a cannabis business at wholesale or retail, subject to adjustment by the City Council pursuant to Section 3.26.050; and 
2.  Up to a maximum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per square foot of space utilized in connection with cannabis cultivation/processing, subject to adjustment by the City Council pursuant to Section 3.26.050. 
B.  No cannabis business shall be deemed to be exempt from the payment of the taxes identified above by any other provision of this Code, unless expressly exempted under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.040 - Payment obligation. 
All taxpayers subject to this chapter must pay the full tax imposed by this chapter regardless of any rebate, exemption, incentive, or other reduction set forth elsewhere in this Code, except as required by California or Federal law. Failure to pay the tax shall be subject to penalties, interest charges, and assessments as the City Council may establish and the City may use any or all other code enforcement remedies provided in this Code. No provision in this Code can lower the tax rate set forth in this chapter or otherwise reduce the amount of taxes paid hereunder unless the provision specifically states that the reduction applies. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.050 - City council authorization to adjust tax rate and/or methodology. 
This chapter authorizes the maximum business tax rate as identified in Section 3.26.030 above. The City Council may, by ordinance, upwardly or downwardly adjust the rate of the tax imposed by this chapter and may otherwise repeal or amend this chapter without a vote of the People. However, as required by California Constitution Article XIIIC (Proposition 218), voter approval is required for any amendment that would increase the maximum rate or methodology of any tax levied pursuant to this Chapter. The People of the City of Colton affirm that the following actions shall not constitute an increase of the maximum rate or methodology of the tax requiring subsequent voter approval: 
A.  The upward adjustment of the tax rate applicable to any or all classes of cannabis business, provided the rate does not exceed the maximum set forth by this voter-approved chapter; 
B.  The restoration of the tax to a rate that is no higher than the maximum set by this voter-approved chapter, if the City Council has previously acted to reduce the rate of the tax; 
C.  An action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax, or any definition applicable to the tax, so long as interpretation or clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification) is not inconsistent with the language of this chapter; 
D.  The establishment of a class of person or service that is exempt or excepted from the tax or the discontinuation of any such exemption or exception; and 
E.  Resuming collection of the tax imposed by this chapter, even if the City had, for some period of time, either suspended collection of the tax or otherwise failed to collect the tax, in whole or in part. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.060 - Payment of tax does not authorize illegal activity. 
The payment of the tax required pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal business in an illegal manner. Nothing in this chapter implies or authorizes that any activity connected with the distribution or possession of cannabis is legal unless otherwise authorized and allowed in strict and full conformance to the provisions of State law and this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.070 - Cannabis business tax is not a sales tax. 
The tax provided for under the provisions of this chapter is not a sales, transactions or use tax and shall not be calculated or assessed as such. The tax established under this chapter shall not be separately identified or otherwise specifically assessed or charged to any customer or client of a cannabis business. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.080 - Amendments and administration. 
A.  This chapter was submitted to the voters for approval. Any amendment to this chapter to increase the tax above the maximum rate expressly provided in Section 3.26.030 shall not become effective until such amendment is approved by the voters. The voters expressly authorize the City Council to amend, modify, change, or revise any other provision of this chapter as the City Council deems in the best interest of the City, as set forth in Section 3.26.050. 
B.  The Tax Administrator shall promulgate rules, regulations and procedures to implement and administer this chapter to ensure the efficient and timely collection of the tax imposed by this chapter, including without limitation, formulation and implementation of penalties and interest to be assessed for failure to pay the tax as provided. 
C.  The Tax Administrator shall annually audit the taxes imposed by this chapter to verify that tax revenues have been properly expended in accordance with the law. 
D.  Pursuant to California Constitution Article XIIIB, the appropriation limit for the City is increased to the maximum extent over the maximum period of time allowed under law consistent with the revenues generated by the tax established by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.090 - Returns and remittances. 
The Tax shall be due and payable as follows: 
A.  The tax established by this chapter shall be collected quarterly. Each person owing tax shall prepare and file a tax return to the Tax Administrator setting out the total amount of tax owed for the preceding calendar quarter during which the tax was in effect. The return shall be filed not later than thirty calendar days following the last day of the preceding each calendar quarter. At the time the tax return is filed, the full amount of the tax owed for the preceding calendar quarter shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator. 
B.  All tax returns shall be completed on forms provided by the Tax Administrator. 
C.  Tax returns and payments for all outstanding taxes owed the City are immediately due to the Tax Administrator upon cessation of business for any reason. 
D.  Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication received by the Tax Administrator is received after the time prescribed by this Section for the receipt thereof, but is in an envelope bearing a postmark showing that it was mailed on or prior to the date prescribed in this section for the receipt thereof, or whenever the Tax Administrator is furnished substantial proof that the payment, statement, report, request, or other communication was in fact deposited in the United States mail on or prior to the date prescribed for receipt thereof, the Tax Administrator may regard such payment, statement, report, request, or other communication as having been timely received. If the due date falls on Friday, Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday, the due date shall be the next regular business day on which the City Hall is open to the public. 
E.  Unless otherwise specifically provided under other provisions of this chapter, the taxes required to be paid pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed delinquent if not paid on or before the due date specified in Subsection (A) of this section. 
F.  The Tax Administrator is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill to any person subject to the provisions of this chapter and failure to send such notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.100 - Failure to pay tax. 
A.  Any person who fails or refuses to pay any tax required to be paid pursuant to this chapter on or before the due date shall pay penalties and interest as follows: 
1.  A penalty equal to twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax calculated from the due date of the tax at a rate established by resolution of the City Council; and 
2.  An additional penalty equal to twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax if the tax remains unpaid for a period exceeding one calendar month beyond the due date, plus interest on the unpaid tax and interest on the unpaid penalties calculated at the rate established by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  Whenever a check is submitted in payment of a tax and the check is subsequently returned unpaid by the bank upon which the check is drawn, and the check is not redeemed prior to the due date, the taxpayer will be liable for the tax amount due plus penalties and interest as provided for in this section plus any amount allowed under State law. 
C.  The tax due shall be that amount due and payable from January 1, 2019 or the first date on which the cannabis business first engaged in business in the City, whichever date occurred last, together with applicable penalties and interest calculated in accordance with Subsection (A) of this section. 
D.  The Tax Administrator may waive the first and second penalties of twenty-five percent each imposed upon any person if: 
1.  The person provides evidence satisfactory to the Tax Administrator that failure to pay timely was due to circumstances beyond the control of the person and occurred notwithstanding the exercise of ordinary care and the absence of willful neglect, and the person paid the delinquent tax and accrued interest owed the City prior to applying to the Tax Administrator for a waiver. 
2.  The waiver provisions specified in this subsection shall not apply to interest accrued on the delinquent tax and a waiver shall be granted only once during any twenty-four-month period. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.110 - Refunds. 
A.  No refund shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter, except as provided in this section. 
B.  No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter shall be made because of the discontinuation, dissolution, or other termination of a cannabis business. 
C.  Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this chapter, such amount may be refunded to the person who paid the tax provided that a written claim for refund is timely filed with the City, pursuant to this Code. The period for filing a claim for refund shall be one year from the time the tax was paid or erroneously or illegally collected; provided however, that in no event shall the period to file such claim expire prior to the shortest period allowable for filing a tax refund claim under Government Code Section 911.2. Such claim must clearly establish claimant's right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto, and must clearly set forth the facts and legal theories under which the claimant believes he or she has right to a refund. Where the amount of any individual refund claim is in excess of the amount set by ordinance or resolution of the City Council relating to the settlement of general liability claims against the City by the City Manager, City Council approval shall be required. 
D.  The filing of a written claim pursuant to Government Code Section 935 is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. 
E.  The Tax Administrator shall have the right to examine and audit all the books and business records of the claimant in order to determine the eligibility of the claimant to the claimed refund. No claim for refund shall be allowed if the claimant refuses to allow such examination of claimant's books and business records after request by the Tax Administrator to do so. 
F.  Any person entitled to a refund of taxes paid pursuant to this chapter may elect in writing to have such refund applied as a credit against a cannabis business's taxes for the next calendar quarter. 
G.  In the event that the tax was erroneously paid and the error is attributable to the City, the amount of the tax erroneously paid shall be refunded to the claimant. If the error is attributable to the claimant, the City shall retain the amount set forth in this chapter from the amount to be refunded to cover expenses. 
H.  The Tax Administrator shall initiate a refund of any tax which has been overpaid or erroneously collected whenever the overpayment or erroneous collection is uncovered by a City audit of tax revenues. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.120 - Enforcement. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the Tax Administrator to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  For purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter generally, the Tax Administrator, with the concurrence of the City Attorney, may from time to time promulgate administrative rules and regulations. 
C.  The Tax Administrator shall have the power to audit and examine all books and records of cannabis businesses as well as persons engaged in the operation of cannabis businesses, including both state and federal income tax returns, California sales tax returns, or other evidence documenting the gross receipts of or the transaction prices charged by a cannabis business or persons engaged in the operation of a cannabis business, for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax, if any, required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter, and for the purpose of verifying any statements or any item thereof when filed by any person pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. If such cannabis business or person, after written demand by the Tax Administrator, refuses to make available for audit, examination or verification such books, records, or equipment as the Tax Administrator requests, the Tax Administrator may, after full consideration of all information within the Tax Administrator's knowledge concerning the cannabis business and its business and activities of the person so refusing, make an assessment in the manner provided in Section 3.26.130. 
D.  The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax debt unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil action shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any State law requiring the payment of all taxes. 
E.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any regulation or rule passed in accordance herewith, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the City any material fact in procuring the a cannabis business certificate or permit from the City shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.130 - Debts, deficiencies and assessments. 
A.  The amount of any tax, penalties, and interest imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City and any person operating a cannabis business without having paid any applicable tax, penalties, and interest shall be liable in an action in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the tax, and penalties and interest imposed on such cannabis business. 
B.  If the Tax Administrator is not satisfied that any statement filed as required under the provisions of this chapter is correct, or that the amount of tax is correctly computed, the Tax Administrator may compute and determine the amount to be paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained in the statement or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession. One or more deficiency determinations of the amount of tax due for a period or periods may be made. When a person discontinues engaging in a cannabis business, a deficiency determination may be made at any time within three (3) years thereafter as to any liability arising from engaging in such business whether or not a deficiency determination is issued prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due. Whenever a deficiency determination is made, notice shall be given to the person concerned in the same manner as notices of assessment are given under Subsections (C), (D), and (E) of this section. 
C.  Under any of the following circumstances, the Tax Administrator may make and give notice of an assessment of the amount of tax owed by a person under this chapter: 
1.  If the person has not filed any statement or return required under the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  If the person has not paid any tax due under the provisions of this chapter; 
3.  If the person has not, after demand by the Tax Administrator, filed a corrected statement or return, or furnished to the Tax Administrator adequate substantiation of the information contained in a statement or return already filed, or paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter; 
4.  If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any tax due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to penalties and interest otherwise stated in this chapter. 
5.  The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any tax known by the Tax Administrator to be due or estimated by the Tax Administrator, after consideration of all information within the Tax Administrator's knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person assessed, to be due under each applicable section of this chapter, and shall include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the date of the notice of assessment. 
D.  The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by handing it to him or her personally, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the cannabis business appearing on the face of the business license issued under this Code, or to such other address as he or she shall register with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this Chapter; or, should the person have no business license issued and should the person have no address registered with the Tax Administrator for such purpose, then to such person's last known address. For the purposes of this section, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail. 
E.  Within ten calendar days after the date of service the person may apply in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the assessment. If application for a hearing before the City is not made within the time herein prescribed, the tax assessed by the Tax Administrator shall become final and conclusive. 
F.  If the person requests a hearing, the Tax Administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which shall be held within thirty calendar days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the Tax Administrator to such person at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the Tax Administrator desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced. 
G.  At the time fixed for the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the Tax Administrator, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall issue a final assessment (or non-assessment), by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to the person owing the tax. The decision of the Tax Administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.26.140 of this chapter. 
H.  Unless appealed, payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the thirtieth calendar day following the date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency shall be at the rates set forth herein, along with interest at the rate as set forth by resolution of the City Council, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the City seeking payment of a tax assessed under this Section shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this subsection. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.140 - Appeals. 
A.  The provisions of this section apply to any deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. [See Government Code Section 935(b).] 
B.  If any person is aggrieved by any deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator; he or she may appeal to the City Manager by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten calendar days of the date of the deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator which aggrieved the person. 
C.  If the person requests an appeal, the City Clerk shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which shall be held within thirty calendar days after receipt of the written request for appeal. Notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing shall be mailed by the City Clerk to such person at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the City Manager desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced. For the purposes of this section, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail. 
D.  At the time fixed for the hearing, the City Manager shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, de novo, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the City Manager, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager shall issue a final decision confirming, modifying or rejecting the Tax Administrator's deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final decision to the person owing the tax. The City Manager's decision shall be final and subject only to judicial review shall be pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the thirtieth calendar day following the date of receipt of the City Manager's decision. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.150 - No injunction/writ of mandate. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this City or against any officer of the City to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.26.160 - Future amendment to cited statute. 
Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time; provided, that such reference to a statute herein shall not include any subsequent amendment thereto, or to any subsequent change of interpretation thereto by a state or federal agency or court of law, to the extent that such amendment or change of interpretation would require voter approval under California law, or to the extent that such change would result in a tax decrease. Only to the extent voter approval would otherwise be required or a tax decrease would result, the prior version of the statute (or interpretation) shall remain applicable. For any application or situation that would not require voter approval or would not result in a decrease of a tax, provisions of the amended statute (or new interpretation) shall be applicable to the maximum possible extent. To the extent that the City's authorization to collect or impose any tax imposed under this chapter is expanded or limited as a result of changes in state or federal law, no amendment or modification of this chapter shall be required to conform the tax to those changes, and the tax shall be imposed and collected to the full extent of the authorization up to the full amount of the tax imposed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Chapter 3.28 - SALES AND USE TAX 
 
3.28.010 - Short title. 
This chapter Shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. 1484 § 1, 1975)  
3.28.020 - Purpose. 
The City Council declares that the Ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the Following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a Sales and Use tax Ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a Sales and Use tax Ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a Sales and Use tax Ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.  To adopt a Sales and Use tax Ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City Sales and Use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon Persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1484 § 4, 1975)  
3.28.030 - Rate. 
The rate of Sales tax and Use tax imposed by this chapter Shall be one percent. 
(Ord. 1484 § 2, 1975)  
3.28.040 - Operative date. 
This chapter Shall be operative on January 1, 1976. 
(Ord. 1484 § 3, 1975)  
3.28.050 - Contract with State. 
Prior to the operative date the City Shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter; provided, that if the City has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it Shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date Shall be the first Day of the first calendar quarter Following the execution of such a contract rather than the first Day of the first calendar quarter Following October 7, 1975. 
(Ord. 1484 § 5, 1975)  
3.28.060 - Sales tax imposed—Rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible Personal Property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate stated in Section 3.28.030 of the Gross Receipts of the retailer from the Sale of all tangible Personal Property sold at retail in the City on and after the operative date. 
(Ord. 1484 § 6, 1975)  
3.28.070 - Place of Sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail Sales are consummated at the place of Business of the retailer unless the tangible Personal Property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common Carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The Gross Receipts from such Sales Shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State Sales and Use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of Business in the State or has more than one place of Business, the place or places at which the retail Sales are consummated Shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 1484 § 7, 1975)  
3.28.080 - Use tax imposed—Rate. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, Use or other consumption in this City of tangible Personal Property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, Use or other consumption in this City at the rate stated in Section 3.28.030 of the Sales price of the Property. The Sales price Shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State Sales or Use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 1484 § 8, 1975)  
3.28.090 - State Law—Adoption. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a Part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 1484 § 9, 1975)  
3.28.100 - State Law—Limitations on adoption. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City Shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, Shall not be made when the word "State" is Used as Part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution Shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this Ordinance; the substitution Shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain Sales, storage, Use or other consumption of tangible Personal Property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such Sales, storage, Use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain Sales, storage, Use or other consumption of tangible Personal Property which would not be subject to tax by the State under said provisions of that code; the substitution Shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution Shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in Business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 1484 § 10, 1975)  
3.28.110 - State Law—Amendments adopted. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the Sales and Use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code Shall automatically become a Part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1484 § 13, 1975)  
3.28.120 - Seller's Permit not required when. 
If a seller's Permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's Permit Shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1484 § 11, 1975)  
3.28.130 - Exclusions and exemptions.* 
A.  The amount subject to tax Shall not include any Sales or Use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, Use, or other consumption of tangible Personal Property, the Gross Receipts from the Sale of which have been subject to tax under a Sales and Use tax Ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any City and County, County, or City, in this State Shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the Sales tax the Gross Receipts from the Sale of tangible Personal Property to Operators of aircraft to be Used or consumed principally outside the City in which the Sale is made and directly and exclusively in the Use of such aircraft as common Carriers of Persons or Property under the authority of the Laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, Use, or other consumption of tangible Personal Property purchased by Operators of aircraft and Used or consumed by such Operators directly and exclusively in the Use of such aircraft as common Carriers of Persons or Property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the Laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the Use tax. 
(Ord. 1657 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1484 § 12, 1975) 
* This section Shall be operative January 1, 1984.  
3.28.130 - Exclusions and exemptions.* 
A.  The amount subject to tax Shall not include any Sales or Use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, Use, or other consumption of tangible Personal Property, the Gross Receipts from the Sale of which have been subject to tax under a Sales and Use tax Ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any City and County, County, or City in this State Shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the Sales tax the Gross Receipts from the Sale of tangible Personal Property to Operators of waterborne vessels to be Used or consumed principally outside the City in which the Sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of Persons or Property in such vessels for Commercial Purposes. 
D.  The storage, Use, or other consumption of tangible Personal Property purchased by Operators of waterborne vessels and Used or consumed by such Operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of Persons or Property of such vessels for Commercial Purposes is exempted from the Use tax. 
E.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the Sales tax the Gross Receipts from the Sale of tangible Personal Property to Operators of aircraft to be Used or consumed principally outside the City in which the Sale is made and directly and exclusively in the Use of such aircraft as common Carriers of Persons or Property under the authority of the Laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. 
F.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, Use, or other consumption of tangible Personal Property purchased by Operators of aircraft and Used or consumed by such Operators directly and exclusively in the Use of such aircraft as common Carriers of Persons or Property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the Laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the Use tax. 
(Ord. 1657 § 2, 1983: Ord. 1484 § 12, 1975) 
* This section Shall be operative on the operative date of any Act of the Legislature of the State of California which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from City Sales and Use taxes for Operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in Subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as those Subdivisions read on October 1, 1983.  
3.28.132 - Credit against taxes due and payable to redevelopment agency. 
In the event that the redevelopment agency of the City adopts an Ordinance pursuant to the provisions of Section 7202.6 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of California which provides for the levying of a Sales and Use tax within a Project area of the redevelopment agency of the City, any retailer or other Person required to pay a Sales or Use tax pursuant to the provisions of this chapter Shall be given a credit against amounts payable under this chapter in the amount of Sales and/or Use taxes payable to the redevelopment agency of the City under such Ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions of said Section 7202.6. In the event the redevelopment agency of the City issues obligations Secured in whole or in Part by taxes levied pursuant to the provisions of Section 7202.6 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of California, the City Shall not revoke this credit in whole or in Part nor Shall it reduce its Sales and Use tax rate. 
(Ord. 0-26-93 § 2, 1993: Ord. 0-23-93 § 2, 1993)  
3.28.135 - Credit against payment of taxes. 
Any retailer or consumer subject to a Sales or Use tax under this chapter Shall be granted a credit against the payment of tax owed under this chapter in the amount of Sales or Use tax paid, if any, to the redevelopment agency for the City pursuant to the "Colton Redevelopment Agency Sales and Use Tax Ordinance," as enacted by redevelopment agency for the City. 
(Ord. 0-15-86 § 1, 1986)  
3.28.136 - Credit against payment of taxes. 
Any retailer or consumer subject to a Sales and Use tax under this chapter Shall be granted a credit against the payment of tax owed under this chapter in the amount of Sales or Use tax paid, if any, to the redevelopment agency for the City pursuant to the "American R.V. Expo of Colton Redevelopment Project Sales and Use Tax Ordinance," as enacted by the redevelopment agency for the City, Ordinance No. 0-1-88. 
(Ord. 0-29-88 § 1, 1988)  
3.28.138 - Credit against payment of taxes. 
Any retailer or consumer subject to a Sales or Use tax under this chapter Shall be granted a credit against the payment of tax owed under this chapter in the amount of Sales or Use tax paid, if any, to the redevelopment agency for the City pursuant to the "Colton Redevelopment Agency Sales and Use Tax Ordinance—Portion of Cooley Ranch, Project Number 4," as enacted by redevelopment agency for the City Ordinance No. RDA-2-90. 
(Ord. 0-15-90 § 1, 1990)  
3.28.140 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process Shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any Court against the State or this City, or against any Officer of the State or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 1484 § 14, 1975)  
3.28.150 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six Months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 1484 § 15, 1975)  
Chapter 3.29 - COST OF LIVING ADJUSTMENT 
 
3.29.010 - Authority of City Manager. 
The City Manager Shall adjust all existing taxes, Fees, and charges provided for in the Colton Municipal Code and by Resolution of the City Council annually in accordance with the increase or decrease in the cost of living. All adjustments Shall be based on the Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers. The CPI on January 1, 1978, equals one hundred. No adjustment Shall take effect until a report thereof by the City Manager is presented to the City Council and by Council order, filed with the City Clerk. The Council May reject but May not modify any or more of the adjustments in any report before ordering the report filed. 
The foregoing does not relate to any taxes on Real Property including but not limited to ad valorem taxes thereon. 
(Ord. 1542, 1978)  
Chapter 3.36 - HOME FINANCING PROGRAM 
 
3.36.010 - Adopted. 
The City adopts the home financing program pursuant to Part 5 of Division 31 of the Health and Safety Code of the State and determines to issue its mortgage revenue bonds pursuant to the Act in order to provide funds for the program. 
(Ord. 1663 § 1, 1984)  
3.36.020 - Findings. 
The City finds and declares that the program will serve the public purposes of providing financing for decent, safe and sanitary housing which is affordable to many Persons, particularly those in the lower end of the purchasing spectrum, and of increasing the housing supply in the City. 
(Ord. 1663 § 2, 1984)  
3.36.030 - Compliance with General Plan. 
The City finds and declares that the program complies with the land Use element and the housing element of the General Plan of the City. 
(Ord. 1663 § 3, 1984)  
3.36.040 - Geographical boundaries. 
The City Shall operate the program within the geographical boundaries of the City. 
(Ord. 1663 § 4, 1984)  
Chapter 3.38 - LATE CHARGES/REDUCTION INCENTIVE 
 
3.38.010 - Fees, billings, charges, and taxes made a civil debt. 
The amount of any Fee, billing for damage to City Property, service charge, Utility charge, license, Permit, or tax of any nature whatsoever imposed by any provision of this Code Shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the City. An action May be commenced in the name of the City in any Court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any delinquent or unpaid Fee, billing for damage to City Property, service charge, Utility charge, license, Permit, or tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this Code. The remedy prescribed by this section Shall be accumulative, and the Use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action Shall not bar the Use of any other remedy provided by this Code or by Law for the purposes of enforcing the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. 0-7-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
3.38.020 - Late charges on delinquent accounts receivable. 
A.  Any Fee, billing for damage to City Property, service charge, Utility charge, license, Permit, or tax of any nature whatsoever imposed by the City that is not paid within thirty Days after the same becomes due and payable to the City Shall be deemed a delinquent account receivable. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection C. of this section any delinquent account receivable Shall be subject to a late charge in the amount of ten percent of the delinquent amount, which Shall be collected in the manner provided in Section 3.38.010 of this chapter. The late charge imposed pursuant to this subsection will continue to be charged every thirty Days on delinquent amounts that remain unpaid. 
C.  Any delinquent account receivable arising from an unpaid Utility charge Shall be subject to a late charge in the amount of five percent of the delinquent amount currently due and payable to the City, which Shall be collected in the manner provided in Section 3.38.010 of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, accounts for Utility charges with a balance of twenty dollars or less Shall not be subject to the late charge imposed by this subsection. 
D.  Nothing contained herein Shall limit, restrict or otherwise affect the imposition of greater late charges, interest, penalties or other charges for late payments as provided for by other sections of this Code, or by the Laws of the State of California. 
(Ord. 0-03-06 § 1, 2006: Ord. 0-7-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
Chapter 3.40 - UTILITY USER TAX 
 
3.40.010 - Definitions. 
The Following words and phrases whenever Used in this chapter Shall be construed as defined in this section. 
"City" means the City of Colton. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, "charges" Shall include the value of any other services, credits, Property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the Service User in exchange for the services being provided. If a nontaxable service and a taxable service are billed together under a single charge, the entire charge Shall be deemed taxable unless the Service Supplier can reasonably identify charges not subject to the Utility User tax based upon its books and records that are kept in the regular course of Business, which Shall be consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. 
"Co-Generator" means any Person employing co-generation technology (as defined in Section 218.5 of the California Public Utilities Code) for producing power from other than a conventional power source for the generation of electricity for self-use or Sale to others. 
"Gas" means natural or manufactured Gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel which May be substituted therefor. 
"Month" means a calendar Month. 
"Nonutility Supplier" means: (a) an electricity supplier, other than an electrical corporation Franchised to serve the City, which generates electrical energy in capacities of at least fifty kilowatts for its own Use or for Sales to others, including those using co-generation or fuel cell technologies; or (b) a Gas supplier, other than a Gas corporation Franchised to serve the City, that sells or supplies Gas to other Uses within the City. 
"Person" means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, Massachusetts Business or common Law trust, society or individuals. 
"Service Supplier" means any entity required to collect or self-impose and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter. 
"Service User" means a Person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter. 
"Tax Administrator" means the Finance Director of the City of Colton. 
"Telephone Communication Services" means "communications services" as defined in Sections 4251 and 4252 of the Internal Revenue Code, and the regulations thereunder, and Shall include any telephonic quality communication that is interconnected to the public switched network, and Shall include, without limitation, for the purpose of transmitting messages or information (including, but not limited to voice, telegraph, teletypewriter, data, facsimile, video, or test) by electronic, radio or similar means through "interconnected service" with the "public switched network" [as these terms are commonly Used in the Federal Communications Act and the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission—see 47 U.S.C.A. Section 332(d)], whether such transmission occurs by wire, cable, cable modem or digital Subscriber line (DSL), fiber-optic, light wave, laser, microwave, radio wave [including, but not limited to, cellular service, personal communications service (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), and other types of personal wireless service—see 47 U.S.C.A. Section 332(c)(7)(C)(1)—regardless of radio spectrum Used], switching facilities, satellite or any other similar facilities. 
"Telephone Corporation," "electrical corporation," "Gas corporation" and "water corporation" Shall have the same meanings as defined in Sections 234, 218, 222, and 241, respectively, of the California Public Utilities Code except, "electrical corporation," "Gas corporation" and "water corporation" Shall also be construed to include any municipality or public agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power, Gas or water to a Service User. 
"Video Programming" means multichannel Video Programming or communications; open video systems (OVS); cable television, including digital cable television and all other forms of digital services; master Antenna television; satellite master Antenna television; multichannel multipoint distribution; direct broadcast satellite (to the extent allowed by Federal Law); and other forms of Video Programming or communications (including two-way communications), whatever their technology. 
"Video Service Supplier" means any Person, company, or service which provides one or more channels of Video Programming, including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the Use and enjoyment of the Video Programming, to or from an address in the City, including to or from a Business, home, Condominium, or Apartment, where some Fee is paid, whether directly or included in dues or Rental charges for that services, whether or not public rights-of-way are utilized in the delivery of the Video Programming or communications. A "Video Service Supplier" includes, but is not limited to, multichannel Video Programming distributors [as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 522(13)], open video systems (OVS) suppliers, suppliers of cable television, master Antenna television, satellite master Antenna television, multichannel multipoint distribution services, direct broadcast satellite (to the extent allowed by Federal Law), and other suppliers of Video Programming or communications (including two-way communications), whatever their technology. 
"Video Services" means any and all services related to the providing of Video Programming (including origination programming), including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the Use and enjoyment of the Video Programming, regardless of the content of such Video Programming or communications. "Video Services" Shall not include services for which a tax is paid under Section 7.70.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.020 - Statutory, constitutional and City exemptions. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter Shall be construed as imposing a tax upon: (1) any Person or service when imposition of such tax upon that Person or service would be a Violation of a Federal or California statute, the Constitution of the United States or that of the State of California; (2) the City; (3) any governmental entity, including but not limited to the County of San Bernardino and the Colton Unified School District; or (4) religious or Nonprofit Organizations which are exempt from taxation pursuant to State or Federal Law, and which have applied for and received tax-exempt status from either the State of California or the Federal government. 
B.  Any Service User that is exempt from the taxes imposed by this chapter pursuant to subsection A. of this section, Shall file an Application with the Tax Administrator for an exemption; provided, however, that this requirement Shall not apply to a Service User that is a State or Federal agency or Subdivision with a commonly recognized name, or is a Service User of telephone communications services that has received a Federal excise tax exemption certificate for such service. The Application Shall be made upon a form Approved by the Tax Administrator and Shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the Applicant for an exemption, and Shall include the names of all Utility Service Suppliers serving that Service User. If deemed exempt by the Tax Administrator, such Service User Shall give the Tax Administrator timely Written Notice of any change in Utility Service Suppliers so that the Tax Administrator can properly notify the new Utility Service Supplier of the Service User's tax exempt status. A Service User that fails to comply with this section Shall not be entitled to a refund of Utility User taxes collected and remitted to the Tax Administrator from such Service User as a result of such noncompliance. 
C.  Upon request of the Tax Administrator, a Service Supplier or nonutility Service Supplier, or its billing agent, Shall provide a list of the names and addresses of those customers which, according to its billing records, are deemed exempt from the Utility User tax. With respect to a Service User of Telephone Communication Services, a Service Supplier of such Telephone Communication Services doing Business in the City Shall, upon request of the Tax Administrator, provide a Copy of the Federal exemption certificate for each exempt customer within the City that is served by such Service Supplier. 
D.  At the request of a Service Supplier, the Tax Administrator Shall prepare a list of the Persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a Copy thereof to the Service Supplier. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.030 - Telephone User tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every Person who Uses any international, interstate and/or intrastate Telephone Communication Services in the City, other than a Telephone Corporation. For industrial, commercial or any Use other than service to the Person's principal place of residence, the tax imposed by this section Shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such Telephone Communication Services. For Persons using telephone service for their principal place of residence, the tax imposed by this section Shall be at the rate of four percent of the charges made for such Telephone Communication Services. The tax Shall be collected from the Service User by the Telephone Communication Services supplier or its billing agent. To the extent allowed by Law, the tax on Telephone Communication Services Shall apply to a Service User if the billing or service address of the Service User is within the City's boundaries, irrespective of whether a particular Telephone Communication Service originates and/or terminates within the City. If the billing address of the Service User is different from the service address, the service address of the Service User Shall be Used. 
B.  The tax imposed under subsection A. of this section, Shall not be imposed upon any Person for using Telephone Communication Services to the extent that, pursuant to Sections 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code, the amounts paid for such Communication Services are exempt from or are not subject to the tax imposed under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code. In the event that the Federal excise tax on "Communication Services" as provided in Sections 4251, 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code is subsequently repealed, any reference in this section to such Law, including any related Federal regulations, private letter rulings, case Law, and other opinions interpreting these sections, Shall refer to that body of Law that existed immediately prior to the date of repeal, as well as to any judicial or administrative Decision interpreting such Federal excise tax Law, which is published or rendered after the date of repeal. 
C.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, as Used in this section, the term "charges" Shall not include: 
1.  Charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge Shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due. 
2.  Charges for any type of service or equipment furnished by a Service Supplier subject to public Utility regulation during any period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available for Sale or lease from Persons other than a Service Supplier subject to public Utility regulation. 
D.  To prevent actual multijurisdictional taxation of Telephone Communication Services subject to tax under this section, any Service User, upon proof to the Tax Administrator that the Service User has previously paid the same tax in another State or City on such Telephone Communication Services, Shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other State or City; provided, however, the amount of credit Shall not exceed the tax owed to the City under this section. For purposes of establishing sufficient legal nexus for the imposition and collection of Utility User tax on charges for Telephone Communication Services pursuant to this chapter, "minimum contacts" Shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition and collection of the Utility User tax to the fullest extent Permitted by California and Federal Law, and as it May change from time to time. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.040 - Video Service User tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every Person using Video Services in the City from a Video Service Supplier. For industrial, commercial or any Use other than service to the Person's principal place of residence, the tax imposed by this section Shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such Video Services. For Persons using Video Service for their principal place of residence, the tax imposed by this section Shall be at the rate of four percent of the charges made for such Video Services. The tax Shall be collected from the Service User by the Video Service Supplier or its billing agent. 
B.  The Tax Administrator, from time to time, May Survey the Video Service Suppliers in the City to identify the various Components of Video Service that are being offered to customers within the City, and the charges therefor. The Tax Administrator may, thereafter, issue and disseminate to such Video Service Suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those Components that are: (i) necessary or common to the receipt, Use and enjoyment of Video Service; or, (ii) which currently are, are historically have been, included in a bundled rate for Video Service by a Local distribution company. Charges for such Components Shall be subject to the tax of subsection A. of this section. 
C.  As Used in this section, the term "charges" Shall include the value of any other services, credits, Property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the Service User in exchange for the Video Services. If a nontaxable service and a taxable service are billed together under a single charge, the entire charge Shall be deemed taxable unless the Service Supplier can reasonably identify charges not subject to the Utility User tax based upon its books and records that are kept in the regular course of Business, which Shall be consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. 
D.  The tax imposed in this section Shall be collected from the Service User by the Video Service Supplier, its billing agent, or a reseller of such services. In the case of Video Service, the Service User Shall be deemed to be the purchaser of the bulk Video Service (e.g. an Apartment Owner), unless such service is resold to individual Users, in which case the Service User Shall be the ultimate purchaser of the Video Service. The amount collected in one Month Shall be remitted to, and received by, the Tax Administrator on or before the last Day of the Following Month. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.050 - Electricity User tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every Person using electricity in the City, and for any supplemental services or other associated activities directly related to and/or necessary for the provision of electricity to the Service User, which are provided by a Service Supplier or nonutility Service Supplier to a Service User. For industrial, commercial or any Use other than service to the Person's principal place of residence, the tax imposed by this section Shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such electricity by an electrical corporation Franchised to serve the City and Shall be paid by the Person using the energy. For Persons using electricity for their principal place of residence, the tax imposed by this section Shall be at the rate of four percent of the charges made for such electricity by an electrical corporation Franchised to serve the City and Shall be paid by the Person using the energy. The applicable tax for electricity provided by a Nonutility Supplier Shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the Service User would have incurred, if the energy Used had been provided by the electrical corporation Franchised by the City. Rate schedules for this purpose Shall be available from the City. Nonutility Suppliers Shall install and maintain an appropriate Utility-type metering system which will enable compliance with this section, or May arrange another methodology for applying the tax acceptable to the Tax Administrator. "Charges," as Used in this section, Shall include charges made for: (1) metered energy and (2) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges and all other annual and monthly charges, fuel or other cost adjustments. The tax Shall be collected from the Service User by the Service Supplier or nonutility Service Supplier, or its billing agent. 
B.  The tax imposed in this section Shall be collected from the Service User by any energy Service Supplier or Nonutility Supplier. An energy supplier providing wheeling services for delivery of electricity through its distribution system Shall collect the tax from the Service User based upon the cost of wheeling the electricity. The tax on energy provided by self-production or by a Nonutility Supplier Shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.40.110. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.060 - Tax on co-generated electricity. 
A.  The tax imposed on every Person using co-generated electrical energy in the City Shall be at the rate specified in Section 3.40.050. The tax applicable to co-generated electrical energy Used on site Shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the Co-Generator would have incurred if the energy Used had been provided by the electrical corporation Franchised by the City. 
B.  The Co-Generator Shall install and maintain an appropriate metering system which will enable compliance with this section. 
C.  The tax Shall be collected and paid by the Co-Generator under Section 3.40.110 if the Co-Generator consumes the energy. If the Co-Generator sells the energy for consumption in the City, the tax will be imposed by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges for such service, the Service User would have incurred if the energy Used had been provided by the electrical corporation Franchised by the City, and Shall be collected from the Service User by the energy supplier. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.070 - Gas User tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every Person using Gas in the City, Gas which is transported through a pipeline distribution system or by mobile transport. For industrial, commercial or any Use other than service to the Person's principal place of residence, the tax imposed by this section Shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such Gas and Shall be paid by the Person using the Gas. For Persons using Gas for their principal place of residence, the tax imposed by this section Shall be at the rate of four percent of the charges made for such Gas and Shall be paid by the Person using the Gas. The tax applicable to Gas provided by Nonutility Suppliers Shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the Service User would have incurred, if the Gas or Gas transportation had been provided by the Gas corporation Franchised by the City. "Charges" as Used in this section Shall include: (1) the charge for Gas which is delivered through a Gas pipeline distribution system or by mobile transport; (2) Gas transportation charges; and (3) demand charges, service charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges and any other charges authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
B.  There Shall be excluded from the tax imposed in this section: (1) charges made for Gas which is to be resold and delivered through a Gas pipeline distribution system or mobile transport; (2) charges made for Gas Used by a Co-Generator or as the primary fuel in a fuel cell to generate electricity; and (3) charges made for natural Gas Used in the propulsion of a motor Vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, utilizing natural Gas. 
C.  Tax imposed in this section Shall be collected from the Service User by the Gas Service Supplier. A Gas supplier providing transportation services for delivery of Gas through a pipeline distribution system Shall collect the tax from the Service User based upon the cost of transporting the Gas. The tax on Gas provided by self-production or by a Nonutility Supplier Shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.40.110. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.080 - Water User tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every Person in the City using water which is delivered through mains or pipes. For industrial, commercial or any Use other than service to the Person's principal place of residence, the tax imposed by this section Shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such water at one location and Shall be paid by the Person paying for such water. For Persons using water for their principal place of residence, the tax imposed by this section Shall be at the rate of four percent of the charges made for such water at one location and Shall be paid by the Person paying for such water. 
B.  There Shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed, charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered through mains or pipes. 
C.  The tax imposed in this section Shall be collected from the Service User by the Person supplying the water. 
D.  The phrase "one location" as Used in subsection A of this section Shall mean one or more contiguous sites for which the Service User receives one or more Utility billings. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.090 - Sewer User tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every Person in the City using sewer services provided by the City. For industrial, commercial or any Use other than service to the Person's principal place of residence, the tax imposed by this section Shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such sewer services at one location and Shall be paid by the Person paying for such sewer services. For Persons using sewer service for their principal place of residence, the tax imposed by this section Shall be at the rate of four percent of the charges made for such sewer services at one location and Shall be paid by the Person paying for such sewer services. 
B.  The tax imposed in this section Shall be collected from the Service User by the City. 
C.  The phrase "one location" as Used in subsection A. of this section Shall mean one or more contiguous sites for which the Service User receives one or more Utility billings. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.100 - Refuse hauling User tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every Person in the City receiving Refuse hauling services from the City or any Refuse hauler Franchised by the City. For industrial, commercial or any Use other than service to the Person's principal place of residence, the tax imposed by this section Shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such service and Shall be paid by the Person paying for such Refuse hauling service. For Persons using Refuse hauling services for their principal place of residence, the tax imposed by this section Shall be at the rate of four percent of the charges made for such service and Shall be paid by the Person paying for such Refuse hauling service. 
B.  The tax imposed in this section Shall be collected from the Service User by the Person furnishing the Refuse hauling service. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.110 - Collection of tax from Service Users receiving direct purchase of Utility services. 
A.  Any Service User subject to the tax imposed by Section 3.40.050, 3.40.060, or 3.40.070 of this chapter, who produces electricity or Gas for self-use or who receives electricity or Gas directly from a Nonutility Supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter or otherwise not having the full tax due on the Use of Gas or electricity in the City directly billed and collected by the Service Supplier, Shall report that fact to the Tax Administrator and remit the tax due directly to the City within thirty Days of such Use. 
B.  The Tax Administrator May require the Service User to identify its Nonutility Supplier and provide, subject to audit, filed tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of electricity or Gas Used and the price thereof. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.120 - Maximum tax payable. 
The Following maximum amount Shall be payable under the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  The combined total maximum of electricity, co generated electricity, Gas, telephone communications services, water, and Video Services User taxes paid by any single Service User for one location under this chapter Shall not exceed the sum of twenty thousand dollars during any twelve-month period between April 1 and March 31. 
B.  A Service User May deposit the maximum tax specified in subsection A of this section with the Tax Administrator during the Month of April each Year as payment in advance of taxes due under this chapter for the twelve-month period commencing the first Day of that Month and ending on March 31 thereafter. Any Service User making a deposit of maximum tax Shall not thereafter be billed for any tax under this chapter for that twelve-month period. The Tax Administrator Shall notify each Service Supplier when to cease and when to resume billing the tax to such Service Users. 
C.  The penalty assessment provided in Section 3.40.130 of this chapter Shall not be counted in computing the maximum tax as provided in subsection A. of this section. 
D.  Any Service User paying more than a maximum tax provided for in subsection A. of this section during any twelve-month period commencing April 1 and ending March 31, May claim a refund or credit for such overpayment from the Tax Administrator. 
E.  The term "one location" as Used in subsection A. of this section Shall mean one or more contiguous sites from which the Service User receives one or more Utility billings. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.130 - Delinquent taxes. 
A.  Taxes collected from a Service User, or owed by a Service User pursuant to Section 3.40.110 in this chapter, which are not remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal Holiday, the return May be postmarked on the first regular Working Day Following a Saturday/Sunday, or legal Holiday. 
B.  If the Person required to collect and/or remit the Utility User tax fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more services or charges on the customer's billing) or fails to remit the tax collected, the Tax Administrator Shall Attach a penalty for such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of ten percent of the total tax that is delinquent or deficient in the remittance. 
C.  Any Person who fails to remit any delinquent remittance within a period of thirty Days Following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent Shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
D.  The Tax Administrator Shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon Persons required to collect and/or remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of fifteen percent of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the Tax Administrator. 
E.  In addition to any other penalties imposed by this chapter, any Person required to collect and/or remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter who fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more services or charges on the customer's billing) or fails to remit the tax collected, Shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per Month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid. 
F.  Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this section Shall become a Part of the tax required to be remitted. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.140 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by a Service User under the provisions of this chapter Shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the Person required to collect and remit. Any Person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter Shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.150 - Duty to collect—Procedures. 
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter Shall be performed as follows: 
A.  The tax imposed by this chapter Shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the Service Supplier. Where the amount paid by a Service User to a Service Supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a Service User Shall be applied to the Utility charge first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance Shall be applied to taxes due. In those cases where a Service User has notified the Service Supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on such charges Section 3.40.130 will apply. 
B.  The duty to collect tax from a Service User Shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the Service User where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a Person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect Shall arise separately for each billing. 
C.  The taxes imposed by this chapter Shall be collected from Service Users by Service Suppliers. The amount of tax collected in one Month Shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last Day of the Following Month; and Must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the last Day of the Following Month. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.160 - Additional power and duties of Tax Administrator. 
A.  The Tax Administrator Shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The Tax Administrator Shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes imposed in this chapter. A Copy of such rules and regulations Shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's Office. 
C.  The Tax Administrator May make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this chapter so that collection of any tax imposed in this chapter May be made in conformance with the billing procedures of a particular Service Supplier so long as such agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A Copy of each such agreement Shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's Office. 
D.  The Tax Administrator Shall determine the eligibility of any Person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by this chapter or a right to refund of a portion of the tax imposed by this chapter as May be determined by Resolution of the City Council establishing either an exemption or refund policy. In the event that an exemption policy is established by Resolution of the City Council, the Tax Administrator Shall provide the Service Supplier with the name of any Person whom the Tax Administrator determined is exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with the address to which service is supplied to any such exempt Person. If an exemption policy is Approved by Resolution of the City Council, the Tax Administrator Shall also notify the Service Supplier of termination of any Person's right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt Person. 
E.  The Tax Administrator Shall provide Written Notice to all Service Suppliers of any change in the City's boundaries at least ninety Days prior to any annexation or other change in the City's boundaries. The Notice Shall set forth the revised boundaries by Street and address along with a Copy of the final annexation order from Local Agency Formation Commission. 
F.  The Tax Administrator may, from time to time, Survey the various Service Suppliers to identify residential and commercial/industrial customers in the City, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by State or Federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such services. The Tax Administrator may, thereafter, issue and disseminate to such Service Suppliers administrative rulings identifying those Components and items which are: (1) necessary for the various unbundled billing Components of retail service that are common to the receipt, Use and enjoyment of a given service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for service by a Local distribution company or other Service Supplier to a class of retail customers. Unbundled charges for such Components and items Shall be subject to the taxes established by this chapter. Such administrative rulings Shall be consistent with legal nexus requirements and any State or Federal excise tax rules, regulations, and Laws pertaining to the services in question, and Shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology, or increase an existing tax. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.170 - Assessment—Administrative remedy. 
A.  The Tax Administrator May make an assessment for taxes not remitted by a Person required to remit. 
B.  Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a Service User has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the Service User from the amounts remitted to a Person required to collect the tax, or that a Service User has refused to pay the amount of tax, the Tax Administrator May relieve such Person of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named Service Users for specified billing periods. 
C.  The Service Supplier Shall provide the City with amounts refused and/or unpaid with the names and addresses of the Service Users neglecting to pay the tax imposed under provisions of this chapter. Whenever the Service User has failed to pay the amount of tax for a period of two or more billing periods, the Service Supplier Shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. 
D.  The Tax Administrator Shall notify the Service User that the Tax Administrator has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the States periods and demand payment of such taxes. The Notice Shall be served on the Service User by personal delivery or by deposit of the Notice in the United States Mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the Service User at the address to which billing was made by the Person required to collect the tax; or, should the Service User have changed addresses, to the last known address. If a Service User fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator within fifteen Days from the date of the service of the Notice, which Shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in Person, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the Notice Shall be imposed, but not less than five dollars. The penalty Shall become Part of the tax required in this chapter to be paid. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.180 - Records. 
A.  It Shall be the duty of every Person required to collect and remit to the City any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three Years, all records as May be necessary to determine liability for the remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator Shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
B.  A Person providing transportation services of natural Gas to a User for delivery through a Gas pipeline distribution system Shall make available to the Tax Administrator records of the names and addresses of Service Users for whom only transportation services are provided by such Persons. All information provided to the Tax Administrator pursuant to this section Shall be Used solely for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.190 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this chapter, it May be refunded by the Tax Administrator. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, a Service Supplier May claim a refund; or take as credit against taxes remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the Service User from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided however, that neither a refund nor a credit Shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax erroneously or illegally collected has either been refunded to the Service User or credited to charges subsequently payable by the Service User to the Person required to collect and remit. A Service Supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due from a Service User, May refund such amount to the Service User and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than three Years from the date of overpayment. 
C.  No refund Shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes the right thereto by Written records showing entitlement thereto. 
D.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a Service Supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a Court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to Service Users of charges for past Utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the amount of such refunded charges Shall also be refunded to Service Users, and the Service Supplier Shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. In the event this chapter is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the City. 
E.  A Service Supplier May refund the taxes collected to the Service User in accordance with this section or by the Service Supplier's customary practice. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.200 - Exemptions—Low-income Persons, senior citizens. 
A.  The tax imposed by this chapter Shall not apply to utilities supplied to the separately metered or billed residence of a Service User if: (1) the Service User is at least sixty-five Years of age or older; or (2) the combined Gross Income of all members of the Service User's residence is less than the amount established for San Bernardino County by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for low income or very low-income families for the applicable household size; and (3) such conditions are demonstrated to the Tax Administrator's satisfaction. 
B.  The income exemption limit provided in this chapter Shall be revised annually by the Tax Administrator to conform to the most current low-income and very low-income limits for San Bernardino County for applicable household sizes, as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) with regard to the public housing and Section 8 program. 
C.  The exemption granted by this section Shall not eliminate the duty of the Service Supplier, Nonutility Supplier, or Person to collect and remit Utility User taxes for exempt Persons, or the duty of exempt Persons to pay such taxes, unless an exemption is applied for and granted in accordance with Section 3.40.210. 
D.  The tax imposed by this chapter Shall not apply to charges related to late payments, returned checks and collection charges. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.210 - Applications for exemption. 
A.  Any Service User meeting the exemption qualifications of Section 3.40.200 May file an Application with the Tax Administrator for an exemption. Such Application Shall be made on forms supplied by the Tax Administrator and Shall recite under Oath facts which qualify the Applicant for an exemption. 
B.  The Tax Administrator Shall review all such Applications, certify qualified Applicants as exempt, and notify all affected Service Suppliers when an exemption is Approved, stating the name of the Applicant, the address to which exempt service is being supplied, the account number, if any, and such other information as May be necessary for the Service Supplier to remove the exempt Service User from its tax billing procedure. The Service Supplier Shall remove the exempt Service User from its tax billing procedure no later than sixty Days after receipt of such Notice from the Tax Administrator. 
C.  Approved exemptions under this section Shall not apply retroactively. 
D.  Except as provided hereinafter, exemptions Shall be renewed by the Tax Administrator as long as the facts supporting the Application for exemption continue. An exemption granted Shall automatically terminate with any change in the residence of the Person exempted, but such Person May apply for a new exemption with each change of residence. 
E.  Any Person exempt from the tax Shall notify the Tax Administrator within ten Days of any change in fact or circumstance which might cause the Person to become ineligible for exemption. 
F.  Any Person knowingly receiving the benefits of this exemption when the basis for such exemption does not exist or ceases to exist, Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
G.  Any Service Supplier who determines that a new or nonexempt Service User is receiving exempt service through a meter or connection previously Used by an exempt Service User Shall immediately notify the Tax Administrator of such fact. The Tax Administrator Shall ascertain whether or not the provisions of this article have been complied with and, where appropriate, order the Service Supplier to commence collecting the tax from the nonexempt Service User. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.220 - Use of tax revenues. 
The tax revenues collected under this chapter Shall be Used for the purpose of defraying the costs of City services by supplementing the City's General Fund and May be Used for any purpose for which General Fund monies May be Used. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.230 - Effective date and termination date. 
This chapter Shall become effective April 6, 2004. The tax imposed under this chapter Shall apply to charges appearing on bills rendered on or after April 6, 2004, or as soon thereafter as the respective utilities are physically and mechanically able to reflect such charges on customer billings (within sixty Days but not more than ninety Days after the effective date), through June 30, 2011. The tax imposed under this chapter Shall be reviewed annually by the City Council. The City Council May determine, in its discretion, to direct the collection of an amount less than the maximum amount imposed by this chapter for a period of time or from time to time. Such reduced collection, for whatever period of time, Shall not reduce or waive the City Council's right to direct the collection of the maximum amount imposed by this chapter at any time. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.240 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any Person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, which upon conviction thereof is punishable in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
3.40.250 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, Subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or any Part thereof is for any reason held to unconstitutional, such Decision Shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter or any Part thereof. The voters of the City of Colton hereby declare that they would have passed each section, subsection, Subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsection, Subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 0-01-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 3.44 - ELECTRIC SYSTEM REVENUE FUND[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-09-02, §§ 1—3, adopted July 2, 2002, amend Ch. 3.44, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 3.44 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
 
3.44.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the terms that are initially capitalized and not otherwise defined herein shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in the 2002 Installment Purchase Agreement, the Indenture of Trust relating to the 2002 Bonds (the "2002 Indenture"), between the Authority and the Trustee named therein, or as otherwise provided herein. Such capitalized terms and the meanings ascribed thereto shall survive the termination, cancellation or expiration of the 2002 Installment Purchase Agreement, the 2002 Indenture or any other applicable agreement. 
(Ord. No. O-09-02, § 1, 7-2-2002)  
3.44.020 - Fund and accounts. 
(a)  The following fund and accounts are hereby created or continued, as applicable, each of which is to be held by the Treasurer separate and apart from all other funds and accounts held by the Treasurer: 
Electric System Revenue Fund and the following accounts therein: 
(i)  Electric System Revenue Account (the "Revenue Account"); 
(ii)  Electric System Maintenance and Operation Account (the "M&O Account"); 
(iii)  Electric System Qualified Obligations Account (the "Qualified Obligations Account"); 
(iv)  Electric System Surplus Revenue Account (the "Surplus Revenue Account") and the Subordinate Qualified Obligations Sub-account (the "Subordinate Qualified Obligations Sub-account") therein; and 
(v)  Operating Reserve Account. 
(b)  The Treasurer shall maintain the Electric System Revenue Fund and the accounts therein so long as any of the Qualified Obligations or Subordinate Qualified Obligations remain Outstanding. 
(Ord. No. O-09-02, § 2, 7-2-2002)  
3.44.030 - Flow of gross revenues. 
The Treasurer shall deposit the Gross Revenues of the Electric System as received in the Revenue Account into a bank account separate and apart from other accounts of the City. On or before the 20th day of each calendar month, the Treasurer shall withdraw the entire amount on deposit in the Revenue Account and shall allocate and deposit such amount in the indicated priority to the following accounts, sub-account and fund: 
(i)  First, there shall be transferred to the M&O Accounts an amount sufficient for the payment of Maintenance and Operation Expenses for the following month; 
(ii)  Second, there shall be transferred to the Qualified Obligations Account the amount of Qualified Obligation Service necessary to be deposited (assuming equal monthly deposits) such that all Qualified Obligations may be made as scheduled (to the extent not already transferred to such Account in such month or not otherwise on deposit in such Account) or, if less, the entire amount of Gross Revenues then available for transfer, to such Account; and 
(iii)  Third, all moneys remaining in the Revenue Account after the above transfers have been made shall be transferred to the Surplus Revenue Account. Moneys in the Surplus Revenue Account at any time shall be used in the following order of priority: 
(a)  For the payment of all Additional Installment Payments (as defined in the 1997 Installment Sale Agreement) that have accrued or been incurred or that are then due and payable. 
(b)  For transfer to the Operating Reserve Account an amount equal to one year's Maximum Annual Qualified Obligation Service, payable as follows: over a period not to exceed twelve months, and in each such month not less than one-twelfth of one year's Maximum Annual Qualified Obligation Service, until such Account contains an amount equal to one year of Maximum Annual Qualified Obligation Service; provided, however, that if any amount is withdrawn from this Account for this purpose, it shall be replenished with all available funds in the Surplus Revenue Account after transfers have been made pursuant to clause (a) of this paragraph (iii); 
(c)  For the payment of all additional installment payments, additional purchase payments or similar payments that have accrued or have been incurred or that are then due and payable with respect to any Qualified Obligations issued or incurred to prepay 1997 Installment Payments; 
(d)  For transfer to the Subordinate Qualified Obligations Sub-account within the Surplus Revenue Account the amount of Subordinate Qualified Obligation Service necessary to be deposited (assuming equal monthly deposits) such that all Subordinate Qualified Obligations may be made as scheduled (to the extent not already transferred to such Sub-account in such month or not otherwise on deposit in such Sub-account) of if less, the entire amount of moneys in the Surplus Revenue Account after transfers have been made pursuant to clauses (a), (b) and (c) of this paragraph (iii); 
(e)  For the payment of all Additional Purchase Payments that have accrued or have been incurred or that are then due and payable; 
(f)  For the payment of all debt service or similar payments that have accrued or have been incurred or that are then due and payable on any bond, note, warrant, evidence of indebtedness, contract, instrument or other agreement which is payable from Gross Revenues of the Electric System on a basis that is subordinate and junior to the payment of the Subordinate Qualified Obligations; 
(g)  For the payment of all additional installment payments, additional purchase payments and other similar payments that have accrued or have been incurred or that are then due and payable with respect to any such bond, note, warrant, evidence of indebtedness, contract, instrument or other agreement referred to in clause (f) of this paragraph (iii); 
(h)  For transfer to any fund or account under any trust agreement, indenture of trust or similar agreement relating to the Qualified Obligations, the 2002 Bonds, any other Subordinate Qualified Obligations or any obligation referred to in clause (f) of this paragraph (iii) to the extent of the deficiency in any such fund or account; 
(i)  For transfer to the City's general fund, on a monthly basis, in an amount set by the City Council, but not greater than the following: One-twelfth of twenty percent of the Electric System's Gross Revenues of the preceding Fiscal Year (less (x) the costs and expenses relating to sales of electricity for resale during such Fiscal Year, (y) contributions in aid of construction during such Fiscal Year and (z) the public benefit charge collected pursuant to Assembly Bill 1890) or all available moneys in the Surplus Revenue Account if less than such amount; 
(j)  For transfer to the City's general fund (which additional transfers shall be considered to be a loan, subject to such terms and conditions of repayment as the City Council may establish); provided, however, that before such additional transfer may be made (i) no deficiency shall exist with respect to the amounts required to be on deposit in the Surplus Revenue Account as provided in clauses (a) through (h) of this paragraph (iii) and (ii) the Net Revenues of the Electric System, as shown on the books of the City for each of the last two completed Fiscal Years (as shown by an audit certificate or opinion of an independent certified public accountant or firm of certified public accountants employed by the City), shall have amounted to at least 1.25 times the sum of (i) the Maximum Annual Qualified Obligation Service on all Qualified Obligations to be outstanding immediately subsequent to such additional transfer and (ii) the Maximum Annual Subordinate Qualified Obligation Service on all Subordinate Qualified Obligations to be outstanding immediately subsequent to such additional transfer; provided, however, that for the purpose of applying the restriction in this clause (j), the following may be added to Net Revenues; an allowance for earnings arising from any increase in charges made for service from the Electric System which has become effective prior to said additional transfer but which, during all or any part of said last two completed Fiscal Years, was not in effect, in an amount equal to ninety-five percent of the amount by which the Net Revenues would have been increased if such increase in charges had been in effect during the whole of said last two completed Fiscal Years, as shown by the audit certificate or opinion of an independent certified public accountant or firm of certified public accountants employed by the City; and 
(k)  For any lawful purpose of the Electric System (excluding any further loans to the City). 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, moneys remaining on deposit in the Surplus Revenue Account at any time shall be transferred as needed to the Qualified Obligations Account in the amount necessary (or all moneys in the Surplus Revenue Account if less than the amount necessary) to make up any deficiency in the Qualified Obligations Account. 
(Ord. No. O-09-02, § 3, 7-2-2002; Ord. No. O-08-12, § 1, 7-17-2012; Ord. No. O-04-16, § 1, 6-7-2016; Ord. No. O-10-18, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
3.44.040 - Electric utility service rate freeze, exception. 
A.  For a period of five years from the effective date of this Section, the City Council may not set electric utility service rates for City of Colton customers in an amount that exceeds those rates set by City of Colton Resolution No. R-39-13 (adopted June 18, 2013) (the "Rate Freeze"). 
B.  The City Council may increase electric utility service rates beyond the maximum amount set forth in subsection A. only by resolution, duly adopted by a unanimous vote of all members of the City Council, and making written findings that there exists an emergency to the City's Electric System that requires such an increase in rates. 
C.  Upon the fifth (5th) anniversary of the effective date of this Section, the Rate Freeze shall have no further force or effect and the City Council may set increased electric utility service rates as otherwise permitted by law. However, it may not "back-bill" or apply rates retroactively to the Rate Freeze period. 
D.  As a voter-approved ordinance, pursuant to Elections Code Section 9217, this Section 3.44.040 shall apply notwithstanding any ordinance, resolution or other action of the City to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. O-04-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
Chapter 3.46 - WEST VALLEY HABITAT CONSERVATION PLAN MITIGATION FEE PROGRAM 
 
3.46.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize and implement a local Mitigation Fee program for the area encompassed by the boundaries of the Hub City Centre Specific Plan to implement the West Valley Habitat Conservation Plan (WVHCP). The Mitigation Fees authorized by this chapter will assist in the acquisition and improvement of land to implement the requirements of the WVHCP, protect sensitive habitat, area, protect covered species that benefit from the lands located within the boundaries of the specific plan and encourage development on authorized parcels. Such activities benefit the public health, safety and welfare of all residents of Colton by providing a streamlined regulatory process that allows development to proceed, increase economic development opportunities, provide permanent open space and protect sensitive land and species. 
(Ord. No. O-07-15, § 2, 6-2-2015)  
3.46.020 - Short Title. 
The program authorized by this chapter Shall be known as the "West Valley Habitat Conservation Plan Mitigation Fee Program." 
(Ord. No. O-07-15, § 2, 6-2-2015)  
3.46.030 - Administrative responsibility. 
The Development Services Director of the City of Colton Shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter. Detailed administrative procedures concerning the implementation of this chapter May be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. O-07-15, § 2, 6-2-2015)  
3.46.040 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms Shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Certificate of Occupancy" means a Certificate of Occupancy issued by the City in accordance with all applicable ordinances, regulations, and rules of the City and State law. 
B.  "City" means the City of Colton, California. 
C.  "City Council" means the City Council of the City of Colton, California. 
D.  "Conservation Commission" means the governing body established pursuant to the WVHCP that is delegated the authority to oversee and implement the provisions of the WVHCP. 
E.  "Conservation" means all the actions necessary for the permanent protection of species natural communities and habitat land as required by the WVHCP including land acquisition, land management, biological monitoring, law enforcement and administration. 
F.  "Conservation Areas" has the same meaning and intent as such term is defined and utilized in the WVHCP. 
G.  "Credit" means a Credit allowed pursuant to Section [3.46.090] this chapter, which May be applied against the Mitigation Fee paid. 
H.  "Fee" means the Local Development Mitigation Fee adopted pursuant to the Mitigation Fee Act, Government. Code, Section 66000 et seq. 
I.  "Final Inspection" means a Final Inspection of a project as defined by the building codes of the City. 
J.  "Gross Acreage" means the total property area as shown on a land division map of record, or described through a recorded legal description of the property. This area Shall be bounded by road right-of-way and/or legal, surveyed property lines. 
K.  "Local Development Mitigation Fee," "Mitigation Fee" or "Fee" means the development impact fee imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
L.  "West Valley Habitat Conservation Plan" or "WVHCP" means the West Valley Habitat Conservation Plan, adopted by the City Council on February 3, 2015. 
M.  "Project Area" means the area, measured in acres, from the adjacent road right-of-way line to the limits of project improvements. Project Area includes all project improvements and areas that are disturbed as a result of the project improvements on an owner's Gross Acreage, including all areas depicted on the forms required to be submitted to the City pursuant to this chapter and/or other applicable development ordinance or regulation of the City. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Project Area is the area upon which the project will be assessed the Mitigation Fee authorized by this chapter. 
N.  "Residential Unit" means a building or portion thereof used by one family and containing but one kitchen, which unit is designed or occupied for residential purposes, including single-family dwelling, multiple-family dwellings, and mobile homes on permanent foundations, but not including hotels and motels. 
O.  "Revenue" or "Revenues" means any funds received by the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of acquiring and preserving habitat land and open space areas within the City and the region which are known to support threatened, endangered or key sensitive populations as described in the West Valley Habitat Conservation Plan. 
(Ord. No. O-07-15, § 2, 6-2-2015)  
3.46.050 - Mitigation Fee Policies. 
To assist in providing Revenue to acquire and conserve lands necessary to implement the WVHCP, a Mitigation Fee Shall be paid for each acre of residential, commercial or office development or portion thereof to be constructed upon within the boundaries of the Hub City Centre Specific Plan boundaries, and that is identified as "developable." 
The Mitigation Fees Shall be established by separate resolution of the City Council and May be amended from time to time in accordance with the adoption procedures established by State law. The amount of the Mitigation Fee for a residential, commercial or office development project required to be paid Shall be based on the acreage to be disturbed by development (i.e., grading and/or construction) and Shall be calculated on the basis of the Project Area, in accordance with the following: 
A.  The Project Area Shall be determined by City staff based on the subdivision map, plot plan, and other information submitted to or required by the City. 
B.  An applicant May elect, at his or her own expense, to have a Project Area dimensioned, calculated, and certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The engineer or land surveyor Shall prepare a wet-stamped letter of certification of the Project Area dimensions and a plot plan exhibit thereto that clearly delineates the Project Area. Upon receipt of the letter of certification and plot plan exhibit, the City Shall review the submitted documents. If the Project Area dimensions, the letter of certificate and the plot plan are acceptable to the City, the City Shall calculate the Mitigation Fee required to be paid based on the certified Project Area. If the Project Area dimensions, the letter of certification, or the plot plan are not acceptable to the City, the applicant Shall perform such actions as directed by the City in order to resolve any deficiencies perceived by the City. 
C.  Where construction or other improvements on Project Area are prohibited due to legal restrictions on the Project Area, such as Federal Emergency Management Agency designated floodways or areas legally required to remain in their Natural State, that portion of the Project Area so restricted Shall be excluded for the purpose of calculating the Mitigation Fee. 
(Ord. No. O-07-15, § 2, 6-2-2015)  
3.46.060 - Imposition of Mitigation Fee. 
Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary in the City's municipal code or a non-codified ordinance, no permit Shall be issued a permit for any residential or commercial/office project within the boundaries of the Hub City Centre Specific Plan, except upon the condition that the Mitigation Fee applicable to such project has been paid in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-07-15, § 2, 6-2-2015)  
3.46.070 - Payment of Mitigation Fee. 
A.  The Mitigation Fee Shall be paid in full at the time of the issuance of a grading permit for the project, or other permit which allows for ground/soils disturbance, whichever occurs first. 
B.  In no event Shall a Final Inspection be made or a Certificate of Occupancy be issued prior to full payment of the fee. 
C.  The fee Shall be assessed one time per lot or parcel, except in cases of phased construction. In such cases, each grading permit Shall require the payment of Mitigation Fees. No refunds Shall be provided for changes in land use to a lower fee category. It Shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide documentation of any previously paid fee. 
D.  The Mitigation Fee required to be paid under this chapter Shall be the fee in effect at the time of payment. 
E.  There Shall be no deferment of the fee beyond final inspection or issuance of certificate(s) of occupancy. 
F.  Notwithstanding anything in the City's municipal code, or any other written documentation to the contrary, the Mitigation Fee Shall be paid whether or not the project is subject to conditions of approval by the City imposing the requirement to pay the fee. 
G.  If all or part of the project is sold prior to payment of the Local Development Mitigation Fee, the project Shall continue to be subject to the requirement to pay the fee as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. O-07-15, § 2, 6-2-2015)  
3.46.080 - Collection, Accounting and Disbursement of Mitigation Fees. 
The Mitigation Fees collected pursuant to this chapter Shall be placed in a separate fund, each of which May be further segregated by specific projects. The fund, and interest earned thereon, Shall be expended solely for the acquisition of the habitat land identified in the WVHCP, reimbursement for the acquisition of those lands, or for transmittal to the designated management entity, Riverside Land Conservancy (RLC), to fund restoration and long-term stewardship costs identified in the WVHCP, Conservation Easements and Memorandum of Understanding with RLC. 
(Ord. No. O-07-15, § 2, 6-2-2015)  
3.46.090 - Mitigation Fee Credit. 
A.  The owner of a parcel of property otherwise required to pay a Fee pursuant to this chapter May receive a Credit for the corresponding Mitigation Fee when that owner donates land identified as suitable for habitat, as identified in the WVHCP. The Mitigation Fee Credit Shall offset, on a proportionate basis without interest, the corresponding Mitigation Fee to be paid pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  The amount of the Mitigation Fee credit Shall equal the City's most recent estimated cost of acquisition. 
C.  To the extent that an owner is granted a Mitigation Fee credit, such owner Shall not be entitled to a future reimbursement for such land donation except as provided in this chapter. 
D.  A development fee credit is an obligation of the City that runs with the land and inures to the benefit of each successor in interest of the original landowner until full credit has been received. 
(Ord. No. O-07-15, § 2, 6-2-2015)  
3.46.100 - Reimbursement. 
A.  The owner of a parcel of property otherwise required to pay a mitigation pursuant to this chapter will be entitled to enter into a reimbursement agreement to reimburse from subsequently collected Mitigation Fees the direct and verifiable costs of land donations in excess of that required by their project where all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
1.  The owner has donated land that is identified as suitable for habitat land in the WVHCP. 
2.  The land, or portion thereof, has been dedicated to the public. 
3.  Use of the land, or portion thereof, is in compliance with all applicable laws and adopted plans. 
B.  The City Shall not reimburse the owner for costs related to financing any land donation. 
C.  An owner Shall only be entitled to reimbursement to the extent that any land donation benefits property not within the owner's project. Thus, an owner May receive a Mitigation Fee credit as provided in this chapter for property that serves the owner's project and reimbursement for the additional land donation that benefits subsequently developed property. 
D.  In no event Shall an owner receive a Mitigation Fee credit and/or reimbursement in excess of the City's most recent estimated cost of acquiring the land. 
E.  Any reimbursement agreement entered into under this section Shall require the City, for a period of up to fifteen years, to reimburse the owner from the proceeds of the Mitigation Fees collected from new projects that directly benefit from the land donated that is the subject of the reimbursement agreement. The terms of the reimbursement Shall be set forth in the reimbursement agreement. 
(Ord. No. O-07-15, § 2, 6-2-2015)  
3.46.110 - Deferrals, Waivers and Reductions. 
The City Council is empowered to grant deferral, waiver or reduction of any fee imposed by this chapter upon request. Such deferral, waiver or reduction May only be granted if, in the opinion of the City Council, properly supported by specific findings and evidence, that deferral, waiver or reduction would allow a fairer financing arrangement to be imposed, or where waiver or reduction is required because imposition of such Mitigation Fees in full would cause inequities because prior mitigation lands have been donated. Findings must be based on written and other evidence submitted by the property owner substantiating the owner's contention that the fee should be deferred, waived or reduced. 
Findings must include facts supporting deferral, waiver or reduction including, without limitation, findings that in the case of deferral (1) other properties to be benefitted by any fee will not be burdened by the review and delay in fee imposition, and (2) alternative financing methods involving more than one owner have been proposed for review and will be approved prior to the payment of the fees in question, and (3) delay will result in a more fair funding arrangement; and, in the case of waiver or reduction the owner will receive insufficient or no benefit from the fee imposed and would therefore be required, if the fee were imposed in full, to pay more than their fair share for the benefit received. 
(Ord. No. O-07-15, § 2, 6-2-2015)  
3.46.120 - Exemptions. 
The following types of construction Shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Existing improvements that are converted from an existing permitted use to a different permitted use, provided that no additional area of the property is disturbed as a result of such conversion. 
B.  Projects for which the City is restrained by law from collecting the fee due to a development agreement or vested tentative map entered into with or issued by the City prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
C.  Projects are exempt from paying the Mitigation Fee provided they meet the legal requirements for vesting based upon lawfully issued permits and continuous construction. 
(Ord. No. O-07-15, § 2, 6-2-2015)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS  
Chapter 5.02 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND TAXES GENERALLY*  
I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
5.02.010 - Purpose. 
The provisions of this chapter are enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and are not intended for regulation. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1, § 1, 1975)  
5.02.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases Used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Business" means and includes professions, trades, occupations, and all and every kind of calling, whether or not carried on for profit. 
B.  "City" means the City of Colton, a municipal corporation of the State, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged, or reincorporated form. 
C.  "Collector" means the Director of Finance, or other City Officer charged by the City Manager with the administration of the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  "Gross Receipts" means and includes the total of amounts actually received or receivable from Sales and the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any Act or service, or whatever nature it May be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such Act or service is done as a Part of, or in connection with the Sale of Materials, Goods, wares, or merchandise. Included in "Gross Receipts" Shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and Property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the Property sold, the cost of Materials Used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from "Gross Receipts" Shall be the Following: 
1.  Cash discounts allowed and taken on Sales; 
2.  Credit allowed Property accepted as Part of the purchase price and which Property May later be sold; 
3.  Any tax required by Law to be included in, or added to, the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
4.  Such Part of the Sale price of Property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of Sale as is refunded, either in cash or by credit; 
5.  Amounts collected for others where the Business is acting as an agent or Trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to the Persons for whom collected provided the agent or Trustee has furnished the Collector with the names and addresses of such other Persons and the amounts paid to them; 
6.  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into the income of the Business Shall not be excluded; 
7.  As to Property management, the Gross Receipts involving four or less residential units and a lessor of only one commercial Rental unit; 
8.  As to a retail Gasoline dealer, a portion of his receipts from the Sale of motor Vehicle fuels equal to the motor Vehicle fuel license taxes imposed by, and previously paid pursuant to, the provisions of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State; 
9.  As to a retail Gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel taxes imposed by the provisions of Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code if paid by the dealer or collected by him from the consumer or purchaser; and 
10.  Uncollectible chargeoffs. 
E.  "Person" means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Businesses, common Law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any Business in the City other than as an Employee. 
F.  "Sale" means and includes the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to Property for a consideration of any Property; and a transaction whereby the possession of Property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price. Such definition Shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a Sale within the contemplation of Law. 
G.  "Sworn Statement" means an affidavit sworn to before a Person authorized to take Oaths, or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 2, 1975).  
5.02.030 - License—Required. 
It is unlawful for any Person to transact and carry on any Business, trade, profession, calling, or occupation in the City without first having procured a license to do so and without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter. The provisions of this section Shall not be construed to require any Person to obtain a license prior to doing Business within the City if such requirement conflicts with applicable Laws of the United States or of the State. Persons not so required to obtain a license prior to doing Business within the City Shall nevertheless be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 3, 1975)  
5.02.035 - License—Requirement for contractors or Owner-builders. 
Prior to, and as a condition of, receiving final Approval of a Business Occupancy Permit or Building Permit final inspection, it Shall be the duty of the general contractor or Owner-builder to fill out and return the form to be provided by the Community Development Department listing the names and addresses of all subcontractors or specialty contractors performing work or services related to the general contractor's or Owner-builder's Project. It Shall be the duty of the general contractor or Owner-builder at the time he or she makes any subcontract (Written or oral) for the performance of any work by a subcontractor or specialty contractor, and which is to be performed within the City, to see that such subcontractor or specialty contractor has obtained the required Business License from the City and he or she Shall not Permit any such subcontractor or specialty contractor to perform any of the work contemplated in any such subcontract (Written or oral) unless and until such required Business License has been first obtained. Final Approval of the general contractor's or Owner-builder's Business Occupancy Permit or Building Permit final inspection Shall not be given until all subcontractors or specialty contractors have obtained City Business Licenses. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 1, 2003)  
5.02.040 - License—Application contents. 
Upon making Application for the first license to be issued pursuant to the provisions of Sections 5.02.010 through 5.02.370 or for a newly established Business, the Applicant Shall furnish to the Collector, setting forth the Following information: 
A.  The exact nature or kind of Business for which a license is requested; 
B.  The place where such Business is to be carried on, and if the Business is not to be carried on at any permanent place of Business, the place of residence of the Owner of such Business; 
C.  In the event the Application is made for the issuance of a license to a Person doing Business under a fictitious name, the name and place of residence of the Person owning the Business; 
D.  In the event the Application is made for the issuance of a license to a corporation or a partnership, the names and places of residence of the officers or partners thereof; 
E.  In all cases where the amount of license tax to be paid is measured by Gross Receipts, such information as May be required and as May be necessary to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the Applicant; 
F.  A nonrefundable license Fee as adopted by City Council Resolution is due and payable to the Collector at the time of filing Application for the first license. 
(Ord. 0-3-97 §§ 1, 2, 1997; Ord. 0-5-91 § 1, 1991; Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 4, 1975) 
(Ord. No. O-13-16, § 1, 8-2-2016)  
5.02.050 - License—Issuance—Contents. 
Every Person required by the provisions of Sections 5.02.010 through 5.02.370 to have a license Shall make Application for such license to the Collector, as provided in Sections 5.02.010 through 5.02.370, and upon the payment of the prescribed license tax, the Collector Shall issue to such Person a license which Shall contain the Following information: 
A.  The name of the Person to whom the license is issued; 
B.  The Business Licensed; 
C.  The place where such Business is to be transacted and carried on; 
D.  The date of the expiration of such license; and 
E.  Such other information as May be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 5, 1975)  
5.02.060 - License—Issuance—Estimates of Gross Receipts. 
A.  If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the Applicant is measured by Gross Receipts, he Shall pay a Fee of sixty-five dollars for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such Person Shall, within thirty Days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the Collector with a Sworn Statement, upon a form furnished by the Collector, showing the Gross Receipts during the period of such license, and the license tax for such period Shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided in this chapter for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license taxes for other Businesses, after deducting from the payment the Fee paid at the time such first license was issued. 
B.  The Collector Shall not issue to any such Person another license for the same or any other Business until such Person Shall have furnished to the Collector the Sworn Statement and paid the license tax required by the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 2, 2003)  
5.02.070 - Determination of tax—Appeal and hearing. 
A.  Determination of Tax. If the Collector is not satisfied with the information furnished by the Applicant, the Collector May by other means reasonably determine and fix the amount of license tax. Notice of the Collector's determination Shall be given to the Person being assessed either personally or by mail addressed to Applicant's last known address. 
B.  Right of Appeal. Any Person aggrieved by the Collector's determination or by any other Written Decision of the Collector or his refusal to issue a license, May Appeal the Collector's Decision in writing to the City Manager. 
C.  Time and Manner of Appeal. Appeals Shall be taken by filing a Written Notice of Appeal with the City Manager within twenty Days of the action being Appealed. The Notice Shall specify the name and address of the Person making the Appeal, the action being Appealed, the Representative of the City who performed the action, and the date of the action. 
D.  Hearing of Appeal. 
1.  The City Manager Shall fix a date of hearing of the Appeal not less than fifteen calendar Days nor more than sixty calendar Days after receipt of the Written Notice of Appeal. The City Manager Shall give Notice to the appellant of the date, time and location of the hearing. 
2.  Hearings Shall be conducted informally by the City Manager and the legal rules of evidence need not be followed. At the hearing, the City Manager Shall consider all evidence submitted and Shall make a determination on the issues specified in the Notice of Appeal. Hearings May be continued from time to time by mutual consent of the appellant and the City Manager. Written Notice of the City Manager's determination Shall be mailed to the appellant within ten calendar Days of the close of the hearing. 
3.  At the hearing, the appellant Shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence relevant to the action being Appealed. Failure of the appellant to appear at the hearing, unless the hearing is continued by mutual agreement of all parties, Shall constitute an abandonment of the Appeal. Such abandonment Shall constitute acceptance of the Collector's original determination or Decision. 
E.  Right to City Council Review. The appellant May seek City Council review of the City Manager's determination by filing an Appeal with the City Clerk within twenty calendar Days after the appellant receives a Copy of the Notice of the City Manager's determination. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 3, 2003)  
5.02.080 - License—Branch Establishments. 
A separate license Shall be obtained for each branch Establishment or location of the Business transacted and carried on and for each separate type of Business at the same location, and such license Shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the Business Licensed thereby at the location provided, however, warehouses and distributing plants Used in connection with, and Incidental to, a Business Licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter Shall not be deemed to be separate places of Business or branch Establishment; and provided, further, any Person conducting two or more types of Business at the same location and under the same management, or at different locations, but which Businesses Use a single or integrated set of books and records, may, at his option, pay only one tax calculated on all Gross Receipts of the Businesses under the schedule which applies to the classification of Business of such Person. That classification of Business generating the highest amount of Gross Receipts Shall be Used to determine the classification of the combined Businesses. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 8, 1975)  
5.02.090 - License—Duplicates. 
A duplicate license May be issued by the Collector to replace any license previously issued pursuant to the provisions of Sections 5.02.010 through 5.02.370 and which license has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing a statement of such fact and, at the time of filing such statement, paying to the Collector a duplicate license Fee in the amount of ten dollars. 
(Ord. 0-5-91 § 2, 1991: Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 9, 1975)  
5.02.100 - License—Renewal. 
In all cases the Applicant for the renewal of the license required by the provisions of Sections 5.02.010 through 5.02.370 Shall submit to the Collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the Applicant, a Sworn Statement, upon a form to be provided by the Collector, setting forth such information concerning the Applicant's Business during the Preceding Year as May be required by the Collector to enable him to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by such Applicant. A nonrefundable renewal Fee as adopted by City Council Resolution is due and payable to the Collector at the time of license renewal. 
(Ord. 0-5-91 § 3, 1991; Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 10, 1975) 
(Ord. No. O-13-16, § 1, 8-2-2016)  
5.02.110 - License—Nontransferable—Exceptions. 
No license issued pursuant to the provisions of Sections 5.02.010 through 5.02.370 Shall be transferable; provided, however, when a license is issued authorizing a Person to transact and carry on a Business at a particular place, such licensee may, upon Application therefor and paying a Fee in the amount of five dollars, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such Business under such license at some other location to which the Business is or is to be moved; and provided, further, a transfer, whether by Sale or otherwise, to another Person under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the provisions of this section. For the purposes of this section, stockholders, bondholders, partnerships, or other Persons holding an interest in a corporation or other entity, defined in Section 5.02.020 to be a Person, Shall be regarded as having the rear or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 11, 1975)  
5.02.120 - License—Posting. 
Any licensee transacting and carrying on a Business at a fixed placed of Business in the City Shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the Premises where such Business is conducted. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 12, 1975)  
5.02.130 - Licenses—Carrying. 
Any licensee transacting and carrying on a Business, but not operating at a fixed place of Business in the City, Shall keep the license upon his Person at all times while transacting and carrying on the Business for which such license is issued. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 13, 1975)  
5.02.140 - Measure of tax—Identification—Issuance. 
Whenever the tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is measured by the number of Vehicles, devices, machines, or other pieces of equipment Used, or whenever the license tax is measured by the Gross Receipts from the operation of such items, the Collector Shall issue only one license; provided, however, he May issue for each period for which the license tax has been paid, one identification sticker, tag, plate, or symbol for each item included in the measure of the tax or Used in a Business where the tax is measured by the Gross Receipts from such items. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 14, 1975)  
5.02.150 - Measure of tax—Identification—Affixing. 
Whenever identifying stickers, tags, plates, or symbols have been issued for each Vehicle, device, machine, or other piece of equipment included in the measure of a license tax, the Person to whom such stickers, tags, plates or symbols have been issued Shall keep firmly affixed upon each Vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment the identifying sticker, tag, plat or symbol which has been issued therefor at such locations as are Designated by the Collector. Such device, machine, or piece of equipment kept in Use during the period for which the sticker, tag, plate or symbol is issued. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 15, 1975)  
5.02.160 - Measure of tax—Identification—Failure to affix. 
No Person Shall fail to affix, as required by the provisions of Section 5.02.150, any identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol of the Vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment for which it was issued at the location Designated by the Collector. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 16, 1975)  
5.02.170 - Measure of tax—Identification—Nontransferable. 
No Person Shall give away, sell, or transfer any identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol to another Person or Permit its Use by another Person. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 17, 1975)  
5.02.180 - Statements and Applications—Filing—Time extension. 
In addition to all other powers conferred upon him, the Collector Shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing a required Sworn Statement or Application for a period not exceeding thirty Days and in such case to waive any penalty which would otherwise have accrued; provided, however, ten percent simple interest Shall be added to any tax determined to be payable. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 18, 1975)  
5.02.190 - Statements nonconclusive—Actions to collect not precluded. 
No statement required by the provisions of Sections 5.02.010 through 5.02.370 Shall be conclusive as to the Matters set forth therein, nor Shall the filing of the same preclude the City from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 19, 1975)  
5.02.200 - Statements and records—Inspection and verification. 
The statements required by the provisions of Sections 5.02.010 through 5.02.370 and each of the several items therein contained Shall be subject to inspection and verification by the Collector, his deputies, or authorized Employees of the City who are authorized to examine and inspect such books and records of any licensee or Applicant for a license as May be necessary, in the judgment of such Collector, deputies, or authorized Employees, to verify or ascertain the amount of license tax due; provided, however, such inspection and verification Shall be limited to those books and records necessary to establish Gross Receipts. A certificate executed by a certified public accountant licensed by the State Shall establish a rebuttable presumption that the Gross Receipts of such licensee are as stated in the statements required by the provisions of Sections 5.02.010 through 5.02.370. 
All Persons subject to the provisions of this chapter Shall keep Complete Records of Business transactions, including Sales, receipts, and purchases, and Shall retain all such records for examination by the Collector. Such records Shall be maintained for a period of at least three Years. No Person required to keep records pursuant to the provisions of this section Shall unreasonably refuse to Permit authorized Representatives of the Collector to examine such records at reasonable times and places. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 20, 1975)  
5.02.210 - Information confidential. 
It is unlawful for the Collector or any Person having an administrative duty pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the Business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of the records and equipment of any Person required to obtain a license or pay a license tax, or any other Person visited or examined in the Discharge of an official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or Application, or to Permit any statement or Application, or Copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any Person; provided, however, the provisions of this section Shall not be construed to prevent: 
A.  The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another City official, Employee, or agent for the collection of taxes or for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provision hereof or collecting taxes imposed by the provisions hereof; 
B.  The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, Federal or State Officials, or the tax officials of another City or County or City and County if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or Court of Law upon subpoena; 
C.  The disclosure of information and results of the examination of records of particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, to a Court of Law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any license tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the City; 
D.  The disclosure, after the filing of a Written request to such effect, to the taxpayer himself or to his successors, receivers, Trustees, executors, Administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, or information relating to the items included in the measure of any paid tax or any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, including interest and penalties; provided, however, the City Attorney Shall approve each such disclosure; 
E.  The disclosure of the names and addresses of Persons to whom licenses have been issued and the general type or nature of their Business; 
F.  The disclosure by way of public meeting, or otherwise, of such information as May be necessary to the Council in order to Permit it to be fully advised of the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of license taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him by the City for license taxes, or when acting upon any other Matter; and 
G.  The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or Business done in the City. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 21, 1975)  
5.02.220 - Evidence of doing Business. 
When any Person, by the Use of Signs, circulars, cards, telephone directories, or newspapers, advertises, holds out, or represents that he is in Business in the City, or when any Person holds an active license or Permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he is in Business in the City, and such Person fails to deny by a Sworn Statement given to the Collector that he is not conducting a Business in the City after being requested to do so by the Collector, such facts Shall be considered prima facie evidence that such Person is conducting a Business in the City. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 22, 1975)  
5.02.230 - Taxes—Imposed. 
There are imposed upon the Businesses, trades, professions, callings, and occupations set forth in this chapter, license taxes in the amounts set forth in this chapter. It is unlawful for any Person to transact and carry on any Business, trade, profession, calling, or occupation in the City without paying such taxes or without complying with any and all applicable provisions hereof. Persons not required to obtain a license prior to doing Business within the City, if such requirement conflicts with applicable Laws of the United States or of the State, Shall nevertheless be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 23, 1975)  
5.02.240 - Taxes—Exemptions—Interstate commerce. 
None of the license taxes provided for herein Shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitution of the United States and the State. 
In the event a license tax is believed by a licensee, or Applicant for a license, to place an undue burden upon the interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, he May apply to the Collector for an adjustment of the tax. Such Application May be made before, at, or within six Months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The Applicant Shall, by Sworn Statement and supporting testimony, show his method of Business, the gross volume or estimated gross volume of Business, and such other information as the Collector May deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden or Violation. The Collector Shall then conduct an investigation and, after having first obtained the Written Approval of the City Attorney, Shall fix as the license tax for the Applicant an amount which is reasonable and nondiscriminatory or, if the tax has already been paid, Shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the Collector Shall have the power to base the license tax upon a percentage of Gross Receipts or any other measure which will assure that the license tax assessed Shall be Uniform with that assessed on the Businesses of like nature; provided, however, the amount assessed Shall not exceed the license tax provided herein. Should the Collector determine the Gross Receipts measure of license tax to be the proper basis, he May require the Applicant to submit, either at the time of the termination of the Applicant's Business in the City or at the end of each three Months' period, a Sworn Statement of the Gross Receipts, and the Applicant Shall pay the amount of license tax therefor; provided, however, no additional license tax during any one calendar Year Shall be required after the licensee Shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license tax as provided herein. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 24, 1975)  
5.02.250 - Taxes—Exemptions—Businesses exempt by Federal and State Laws. 
A.  The provisions hereof Shall not be deemed or construed to apply to any Person transacting and carrying on any Business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable Laws of the United States or of the State from the payment of the taxes provided for herein. 
B.  Any Person claiming an exemption pursuant to the provisions of this section Shall file a Sworn Statement with the Collector stating the facts upon which an exemption is claimed. In the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such Person Shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by the provisions hereof. The Collector, upon a proper showing contained in the Sworn Statement, Shall issue a license to such Person claiming such exemption without payment to the City of the license tax required by the provisions hereof. 
C.  The Collector, after giving Notice and a reasonable opportunity for a hearing to a licensee, May revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 25, 1975)  
5.02.280 - Taxes—Exemptions—Public utilities. 
The provisions hereof Shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a tax to carry on any Business, occupation, or activity performed by a public Utility furnishing Gas and/or electric service or cable television, which public Utility pays the City a tax pursuant to a Franchise agreement with the City. If the Legislature of the State should enact legislation to grant general Law cities the power to levy a tax on Utility service consumers, this section May be amended at such time to include provisions for the levying of such tax. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 28, 1975)  
5.02.285 - Taxes—Maximum amount.* 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, no Business Shall be required to pay a license tax in an amount totaling more than six thousand dollars in any one Year, not including any penalties. 
(Ord. 0-10-98 §§ 1, 2, 1998) 
* The cap specified in Section 5.02.285 Shall apply to taxes initially due as of January 1, 1999, based on the calendar Year 1998.  
5.02.290 - Taxes—Dates due and payable. 
A.  Annual. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all annual license taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter for businesses with a City of Colton situs address shall be due and payable in advance on January 1 of each year; provided, however, license taxes for new operations commenced after January 1 may be prorated on a monthly basis, a fraction thereof considered a whole month, for the balance of the license period. All annual license taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter for businesses with a situs address outside of the City of Colton shall be due and payable in advance on July 1 of each year; provided, however, license taxes for new operations commenced after July 1 may be prorated on a monthly basis, a fraction thereof considered a whole month, for the balance of the license period. 
B.  Flat rate. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, license taxes, other than annual taxes, imposed by the provisions hereof shall be due and payable as follows: 
1.  Annual flat rate license taxes for businesses with a City of Colton situs address, on January 1 of each year; 
2.  Annual flat rate license taxes for businesses with a situs address outside of the City of Colton, on July 1 of each year; 
3.  Semiannual flat rate license taxes, on January 1 and July 1 of each year; 
4.  Quarterly flat rate license taxes, on January 1, April 1 and October 1 of each year; 
5.  Daily flat rate license taxes, each day in advance; and 
6.  Other flat rate license taxes, in advance on the first date of business and thereafter on the first day of any applicable period. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 29, 1975) 
(Ord. No. O-01-12, § 1, 2-7-2012)  
5.02.300 - Taxes—Delinquencies—Penalties. 
For failure to pay a license tax when due, the collector shall add a penalty of ten percent of the license tax at eight a.m. on the first day delinquent. License taxes shall be considered delinquent as follows: 
A.  Annual license taxes for businesses with a situs address within the City of Colton shall be delinquent on March 1 of each year. 
B.  Annual license taxes for businesses with a situs address outside the City of Colton shall be delinquent on September 1 of each year. 
C.  Semiannual license taxes shall be delinquent on March 1 and September 1 of each year; 
D.  Quarterly license taxes shall be delinquent on March 1, June 1 and December 1 of each year; 
E.  Daily license taxes shall be delinquent at eight a.m. on the morning after the day for which the tax is due. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 30, 1975) 
(Ord. No. O-01-12, § 2, 2-7-2012)  
5.02.310 - Taxes—Delinquencies—Agreements for installment payments. 
No license or sticker, tag, plate, or symbol Shall be issued, nor Shall one which has been suspended or revoked be reinstated or reissued, to any Person who, at the time of applying therefor, is indebted to the City for any delinquent license taxes unless such Person, with the consent of the Collector, enters into a Written agreement with the City, through the Collector, to pay such delinquent taxes, plus eight percent simple annual interest upon the unpaid balance, in Monthly installments, or more often, extending over a period of not to exceed one Year. 
In any agreement so entered into, such a Person Shall acknowledge the obligation owed to the City and agree that, in the event of failure to make timely payment of any installment, the whole amount unpaid Shall become immediately due and payable and his current license Shall be revocable by the Collector upon thirty Days' Notice. In the event legal action is brought by the City to enforce collection of any amount included in the agreement, the prevailing Party Shall recover from the other Party all costs of suit incurred including reasonable Attorney's Fees. The execution of such an agreement Shall not prevent the prior accrual of penalties on unpaid balances at the rate provided herein; provided, however, no penalties Shall accrue on account of taxes included in the agreement after the execution of the agreement and the payment of the first installment and during such time as such Person Shall not be in breach of agreement. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 31, 1975)  
5.02.320 - Taxes—Overpayment—Refunds. 
No refunds of an overpayment of taxes imposed by the provisions hereof Shall be made in whole or in Part unless a claim for a refund is filed with the Collector within a period of three Years from the last Day of the calendar Month Following the period for which the overpayment was made, and all such claims for a refund Shall be on forms furnished by him and in the manner prescribed by him. Upon the filing of such claim and when he determines that an overpayment has been made, the Collector May refund the amount overpaid. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 32, 1975)  
5.02.330 - Taxes and penalties debt to City—Actions to collect. 
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions hereof Shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action for the amount of any delinquent license tax and penalties May be commenced in the name of the City in any Court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 33, 1975)  
5.02.340 - Tax payment—Effect on other Laws. 
Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any Business pursuant to the provisions hereof Shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such Business required pursuant to any other Law of the City and Shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other Laws. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 34, 1975)  
5.02.350 - Effect of chapter on past actions and unexpired licenses. 
Neither the adoption of this chapter nor the superseding hereby of any portion of any other Law of the City Shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecutions for Violations of the provisions of any other Laws, which Violations were committed prior to January 1, 1975, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such Violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by the provisions of any Law to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining Shall continue in full force and effect. 
When a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any Person by the City and the tax has been paid for the Business for which such license has been issued pursuant to the provisions of any Law enacted prior to January 1, 1975, and the term of such license has not expired, the license tax prescribed for such Business by the provisions hereof Shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of such unexpired license. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 35, 1975)  
5.02.360 - Enforcement. 
A.  Rules and Regulations. The Collector May make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions hereof as May be desirable to aid in the enforcement hereof. 
B.  Duties of Collector and Chief of Police. It Shall be the duty of the Collector, and he is directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions hereof, and the Chief of Police Shall render such assistance in the enforcement thereof as May from time to time be required by the Collector or the Council. 
C.  Examination of Places of Business. The Collector, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him and acting through his deputies or duly authorized assistants, May examine or cause to be examined all places of Business in the City to ascertain whether the provisions hereof have been complied with. 
D.  Right of Entry. The Collector and his Designated Representatives Shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, at any reasonable time, any place of Business required to be licensed by the provisions hereof and demand an exhibition of the license of such Business. Any Person having such license theretofore issued, in his possession or under his control, who wilfully fails to Exhibit the same upon demand is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided for in Section 5.02.370. It Shall be the duty of the Collector and each of his assistants to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all Persons found to be violating any of such provisions. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 36, 1975)  
5.02.370 - Violations deemed misdemeanor. 
Any Person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or Employee of the City any Material fact in procuring the license or Permit provided for herein is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 1 § 37, 1975)  
5.02.375 - Prohibition of Businesses or Uses that violate State or Federal Law. 
No license issued or payment of Business tax under the provisions of this chapter Shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal Business or of a legal Business in an illegal manner. Notwithstanding any provisions in this Code to the contrary, any Business, operation or Use that cannot be conducted or carried out without being in Violation of State or Federal Law Shall be prohibited in all planning areas, Districts, or Zones within the City. 
(Ord. 0-04-08 § 2 (part), 2008)  
II. - TAXES—GROSS RECEIPTS 
 
5.02.380 - Scope. 
Every Person who engages in Business at a fixed place of Business within the City except as shown in Sections 5.02.480 through 5.02.730 Shall pay a license tax based upon Gross Receipts at the rates and in the classifications set forth in Sections 5.02.390 through 5.02.470. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 5, 2003)  
5.02.390 - Classification A—Manufacturing, wholesale, retail. 
A.  Classification A (up to two percent profit before taxes) includes: 
1.  Any Person conducting, managing or carrying on a Business consisting mainly of manufacturing, packing, Warehousing processing, carrying or selling at wholesale any Goods, wares, merchandise or produce; and 
2.  Any Person conducting, managing or carrying on a Business consisting mainly of selling at retail any Goods, wares or merchandise; and 
3.  Any Person engaged in a Business not otherwise specifically described by other provisions of this chapter operating on a net profit before taxes of up to two percent. 
B.  The license taxes for this classification are as follows: 
Annual Gross Receipts 	Annual License Tax 
	
Up to $25,000 	$65.00 
$25,001 to $50,000 	$95.00 plus $.85 per thousand dollars or fraction thereof over $25,000 
$50,001 to $100,000 	$185.00 plus $.60 per thousand dollars or fraction thereof over $50,000 
$100,001 to $1,000,000 	$250.00 plus $.35 per thousand dollars or fraction thereof over $100,000 
$1,000,001 and over 	$600.00 plus $.20 per thousand dollars or fraction thereof over $1,000,000 
 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 6, 2003)  
5.02.400 - Classification B—Service-oriented Businesses. 
A.  Classification B (two and one-hundredth percent to six percent profit before taxes) includes: 
1.  Every Business of providing, transporting, maintaining or performing labor or services for the benefit of another, including performing services in the capacity of an agent/broker; 
2.  Every Business of supplying some general demand for the benefit of another which does not produce a tangible commodity; 
3.  Every Business of transporting, maintaining, storing or repairing tangible commodities whether or not such a Business is conducted from a Premises, Vehicle or mobile location within or outside the City; and 
4.  Any other Business not otherwise specifically described by other provisions of this chapter operating on a net profit before taxes of two and one-hundredth percent to six percent. Service-oriented Businesses do not include Professional Services within the terms of this chapter. 
B.  The license taxes for this classification are as follows: 
Annual Gross Receipts 	Annual License Tax 
	
Up to $25,000 	$65.00 
$25,001 to $50,000 	$105.00 plus $.90 per thousand dollars or fraction thereof over $25,000 
$50,001 to $100,000 	$190.00 plus $.70 per thousand dollars or fraction thereof over $50,000 
$100,001 to $1,000,000 	$275.00 plus $.45 per thousand dollars or fraction thereof over $100,000 
$1,000,001 and over 	$725.00 plus $.30 per thousand dollars or fraction thereof over $1,000,000 
 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 7, 2003)  
5.02.410 - Classification C—Professional, Property management, contractors. 
A.  Classification C (six and one-hundredth percent to ten percent profit before taxes) includes the Following: 
1.  Any Person, group, association, partnership, firm or corporation engaging in or carrying on any profession or vocation requiring satisfactory compliance with Written and/or oral examination standards adopted by a branch of the State or Federal government and/or requiring a period of specialized training such as, but not limited to, physicians, dentists, Attorneys, and accountants; 
2.  Any Person engaging in or carrying on the Business of maintaining and Renting or letting Buildings or Structures to Tenants for residential and nonresidential Property Uses; 
3.  Any Person or company, wherever located, which is licensed as a contractor by the State of California and who undertakes to or offers to or purports to have the capacity to undertake to or submits a bid to, or does himself or herself or by or through others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any Building, Highway, road, Railroad, excavation or other Structure, Project, Development or Improvement, or to do any Part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other Structures or works in connection therewith. The term "contractor" includes general engineering contractor, general Building contractor, subcontractor, specialty contractor and other Building tradesmen. 
B.  The license taxes for this classification are as follows: 
Annual Gross Receipts 	Annual License Tax 
	
Up to $25,000 	$65.00 
$25,001 to $50,000 	$115.00 plus $.95 per thousand dollars or fraction thereof over $25,000 
$50,001 to $100,000 	$195.00 plus $.80 per thousand dollars or fraction thereof over $50,000 
$100,001 to $1,000,000 	$300.00 plus $.55 per thousand dollars or fraction thereof over $100,000 
$1,000,001 and over 	$850.00 plus $.40 per thousand dollars or fraction thereof over $1,000,000 
 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 8, 2003)  
5.02.430 - Exemptions from Gross Receipts. 
A.  A Person who owns, leases, occupies or otherwise maintains within the City a place or Premises upon which or from which he engages in the Business of selling Goods, wares, and merchandise, and whose Gross Receipts from such Sales are attributable to Business activities carried on within the City and activities carried on outside the City, May apportion such Gross Receipts and include in the measure of tax those Gross Receipts directly attributable to activities carried on within the City. 
B.  In making a calculation of Gross Receipts to be reported as the measure of tax, the Person May deduct from one hundred percent of Gross Receipts the percentage of Gross Receipts deemed to be directly attributable to selling activities carried on by such Person outside the City. 
For the purposes of this calculation, the Person May deduct, to the extent appropriate, but in no case in an amount greater than, the Following percentages of those Sales, or particular categories of Sales, on which the corresponding elements of the selling process are performed at a place or location outside the City: 
1.  A Person May deduct one hundred percent of Gross Receipts deemed to be directly attributable to selling activities carried on by such Person outside the City if the Person has in place a similar Business License or Permit in the location outside the City and is accounting for those Gross Receipts at that location. 
2.  A Person May deduct up to twenty percent of Gross Receipts deemed to be attributable to selling activities carried on by such Person outside the City if the Person does not have in place a similar Business License or Permit in that location and is not accounting for those Gross Receipts at that location. 
Any Person who believes that the percentage determined to be allowable as a deduction from Gross Receipts under the foregoing provisions of this ruling is less than the facts justify, May apply to the Collector for a modification of the percentage. Such Application Shall be made in writing to the Collector and Shall be accompanied by a statement of facts supporting the basis for such modification. The Collector Shall make his determination on the basis of evidence presented to him, and such other evidence as he May have, May request from the taxpayer, or May discover from other sources. The Collector Shall increase, reduce, or allow to stand, the percentage originally determined, depending on the facts. 
C.  Should the Collector be of the opinion that the percentage calculated to be allowable as a deduction from Gross Receipts under the foregoing provisions of this ruling is greater than the facts justify in any particular case, he Shall make such investigation as is necessary to ascertain the facts and revise the percentage, if required. 
D.  Any variation from the percentages provided for under this ruling Shall be Approved in writing by the Collector. 
(Ord. 0-8-93 § 3, 1993; Ord. 1471 Art. 2 § 6, 1975)  
5.02.440 - Reclassification—Applications. 
A.  In the event a licensee or an Applicant for a license believes that his individual Business is not assigned to the proper classification pursuant to the provisions of Sections 5.02.380 through 5.02.470 because of circumstances peculiar to such Business, as distinguished from other Businesses of the same kind, he May apply to the Collector for reclassification. Such Application Shall contain such information as the Collector May deem necessary and require in order to determine whether the Applicant's individual Business is properly classified. The Collector Shall then conduct an investigation Following which he Shall assign the Applicant's individual Business to the classification shown to be proper on the basis of such investigation. The proper classification Shall be the classification which, in the opinion of the Collector, most nearly fits the Applicant's individual Business. The reclassification Shall not be retroactive but Shall be at the time of the next regularly ensuing calculation of the Applicant's tax. 
B.  In Sections 5.02.380 through 5.02.470, references are made to certain percentages of profit before taxes. It is the intention of this chapter that every Business specifically named in a classification Shall pay the tax appropriate for such classification. The purpose of referring to profit before taxes is solely to assist the Collector in classifying a Business not precisely named in Sections 5.02.380 through 5.02.470. In determining which classification is appropriate for such an unnamed Business, the Collector Shall refer to Robert Morris Associates annual statement studies or some other acceptable comprehensive study. The purpose of such reference Shall be to determine what the general average net profit before taxes is of Businesses of the type in question. 
C.  It is not the intention of this chapter to tax Businesses based upon the actual net profit of the particular taxpayer involved. The classification of a Business Shall not be varied because a particular taxpayer for a particular period has, in fact, achieved a certain profit. The license tax for a Business is payable as stated herein without regard to whether the Business made a particular profit (or any profit at all) for the Year in question. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 2 § 7, 1975)  
5.02.450 - Reclassification—Notice. 
The Collectors Shall notify the Applicant of the action taken on the Application for reclassification. Such Notice Shall be given by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office in Colton, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the Applicant at his last known address. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 2 § 8, 1975)  
5.02.460 - Reclassification—Hearing—Notices. 
The Applicant for reclassification may, within fifteen Days after the mailing or serving of the Notice of reclassification, make Written request to the Collector for a hearing on the Application for reclassification. If such request is made within the time prescribed, the Collector Shall cause the Matter to be set for hearing before the Council within fifteen Days. The Collector Shall give the Applicant at least ten Days' Notice of the time and place of the hearing in the manner set forth in Section 5.02.450 for serving Notice of the action taken on the Application for reclassification. The Council Shall consider all evidence adduced, and the Council's findings thereon Shall be final. A Written Notice of such findings Shall be served upon the Applicant in the manner set forth in Section 5.02.450 for service of Notice of the action taken on the Application for reclassification. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 2 § 9, 1975)  
5.02.470 - Classification limited. 
No Business Shall be classified more than once in one Year. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 2 § 10, 1975)  
III. - TAXES—FLAT RATE 
 
5.02.480 - Scope. 
Every Person transacting and carrying on the Businesses set forth in Sections 5.02.490 through 5.02.720 Shall pay a license tax set forth in those sections. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 3 § 1, 1975)  
5.02.490 - Amusement ride. 
For the purposes of this section, an "amusement ride" means one or more merry-go-rounds, flying horses, ferris wheels or other similar amusement devices. Wherein amusement rides are held in conjunction with and on Premises owned or leased by commercial houses for Commercial Purposes, the tax Shall be the sum of fifteen dollars per Day per unit not to exceed seven Days. Wherein amusement rides are not conducted as a promotion for a commercial house, the tax Shall be the sum of twenty-five dollars per Day per unit or one hundred dollars per Year per unit. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 10, 2003)  
5.02.500 - Auctioneers. 
For every Person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on or engaged in the Business of selling at auction any Personal Property whatsoever, the tax Shall be five hundred dollars per calendar Year or fraction thereof, payable in advance; provided, however, the provisions of this section Shall not apply to any Person, firm or corporation having an established permanent place of Business for conducting a public auction and who, in addition thereto, provides space for private vendors, in which case the license Shall be based upon the annual Gross Receipts of the public auction plus the Fee of two dollars and fifty cents per Day for each private vendor to whom space is Rented. (Report and payment to be made on a Monthly basis.) The provisions of this section Shall not apply to any Person, firm or corporation having an established and permanent place of Business in the City and paying a license to the City therefor, who May auction any Goods, wares or merchandise for purposes of winding up the affairs of said Business or for the purpose of closing out any special line of Goods, wares or merchandise or other Personal Property that May then be in stock or in their possession at the commencement of the auction at said place of Business or place where said Property is regularly kept without making a regular practice of doing so or without adding to the stock to be auctioned after the commencement of the auction. 
(Ord. 1614 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1586 § 1, 1980: Ord. 1471 Art. 3 § 3, 1975)  
5.02.501 - Flea markets. 
A.  Every Person, firm or corporation conducting, managing, carrying on or engaging in the Business of a flea market Shall pay the annual Gross Receipts tax set out in classification D of Section 5.02.420 plus an added Fee of two dollars and fifty cents per Day for each private vendor to whom space is Rented. (Report and payment to be made on a Monthly basis.) 
B.  "Flea market" as Used in this chapter means any Business wherein space is Rented on a Day by Day basis to various dealers, sellers or vendors for selling, or offering for Sale, Goods, wares, merchandise or things or articles of value and where no admission Fee is charged to enter the area where the merchandise is being offered for Sale. 
(Ord. 1614 § 2, 1982)  
5.02.510 - Bail bondsman. 
For every Person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the Business of bail bondsman, the tax Shall be two hundred fifty dollars per Year. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 11, 2003)  
5.02.520 - Outdoor festivals. 
For the purpose of this section, "outdoor festival" means any music festival, dance festival, "rock" festival or similar musical activity, at which music is provided by paid or amateur Performers or by prerecorded means, which is held at any place other than in a permanent Building or permanent installation which has been constructed for the purpose of conducting such activities or similar activities, and to which members of the public are invited or admitted for a charge or free of cost. 
For every Person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the Business of outdoor festivals, the tax Shall be seven hundred fifty dollars per Year. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 12, 2003)  
5.02.530 - Carnival. 
For the purposes of this section, "carnival" means a group of two or more shows, entertainments, games, devices, mechanical rides, amusements, vaudeville or dramatic or minstrel performance, or games, tricks, devices or wheels, the result of the operation of which is dependent upon chance or skill, and as a result of the operation of which things or Representatives of value are given or paid. The charging of a single admission Fee to a carnival Shall not limit the provisions of this section. Carnivals Shall pay the sum of forty dollars per Day for each separate show, game, amusement, vaudeville or dramatic performance, game of chance or skill. Food and drink stands Shall be charged at twenty-five dollars per Day. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 13, 2003)  
5.02.540 - Circus. 
A.  For the purpose of this section, "circus" means an exhibition or entertainment at which feats of horsemanship, acrobatic feats, and trained or wild animals are exhibited or displayed, to which exhibition or entertainment an admission Fee is charged. 
B.  For any Person conducting, carrying on or managing a circus, or other similar exhibition, the taxes are as follows: 
1.  Where the seating capacity is five thousand or less, the sum of fifty dollars per Day; or 
2.  Where the seating capacity exceeds five thousand but not eight thousand, the sum of seventy-five dollars per Day; or 
3.  Where the seating capacity is eight thousand or more, the sum of one hundred dollars per Day. 
4.  For each circus Parade on the Public Streets, fifty dollars per Day; provided, that the Person conducting the circus has not paid a license for such circus. 
C.  For any Person conducting, carrying on or managing any sideshow, or after show or concert, to a circus, the sum of twenty-five dollars per Day Shall be paid for each show or after show or concert. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 3 § 7, 1975)  
5.02.550 - Contractors. 
Contractors possessing a State contractors' license of any class Shall pay an annual license tax based upon Gross Receipts at the rates and classifications set forth in Sections 5.02.390 through 5.02.470. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 14, 2003)  
5.02.560 - Convalescent Hospitals, rest homes, Hospitals and sanitariums. 
For every Person, firm or corporation conducting managing or carrying on the Business of operating or conducting a convalescent Hospital, rest home, Hospital or sanitarium, the tax Shall be as follows: 
A.  Up to and including twenty beds, one hundred fifty dollars per Year or fraction thereof; or 
B.  In excess of twenty beds, one hundred fifty dollars per Year plus five dollars per each bed above twenty beds per Year or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 15, 2003)  
5.02.570 - Dancing—Public Dance without charge. 
For every Person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on a Public Dance to which the public is admitted without charge, or at which the public is allowed to participate in the dancing without charge, the tax is fifty dollars per quarter. This license Fee is in addition to any other Business License or other license paid by said Person, firm or corporation to the City. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 16, 2003)  
5.02.580 - Dancing—Public Dance for profit. 
For every Person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on a Public Dance for profit to which the public Must pay an admission charge, or at which the public is allowed to participate in the dancing for a specified price, the tax is fifty dollars per dance or one hundred dollars per Month in advance. This license Fee is in addition to any other Business License or other license paid by said Person, firm or corporation to the City. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 17, 2003)  
5.02.590 - Delivery service. 
Every Person, firm or corporation making deliveries of merchandise to Business Establishments in the City and not having a fixed place of Business in the City Shall pay a Business License of seventy-five dollars per quarter. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 18, 2003)  
5.02.600 - Directory compiling and publishing. 
For every Person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the Business of compiling and publishing City, Business or classified directories and publishing not to exceed five thousand of such directories per Year, the tax is one hundred fifty dollars per Year. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 19, 2003)  
5.02.610 - Dog kennels. 
A.  Every Person, firm or corporation engaged in the Business of operating a Commercial Kennel as defined in subsection B. of this section Shall obtain a license from the License Department of the City and Shall pay an annual Fee as follows: 
1.  For a kennel having the Following number of dogs, the Fee Designated: 
	5 to 10 dogs 	$ 50.00 
	11 to 20 dogs 	$ 75.00 
	21 to 30 dogs 	$ 100.00 
 
2.  The Fee Shall be further increased ten dollars for each increment of ten or fractional Part of ten dogs over thirty dogs. 
B.  A "Commercial Kennel" means a place where five or more dogs are kept for the purpose of boarding, breeding, training or marketing. 
C.  All dogs owned by a Commercial Kennel Shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter upon attaining the age of six Months. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 20, 2003)  
5.02.620 - Handbill distributors. 
Every Person not having a fixed place of Business within the City and conducting the Business of advertising by the distribution of handbills, circulars, or other Written or printed advertising Materials Shall pay an annual license tax in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 21, 2003)  
5.02.630 - Night watch service. 
For every Person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the Business of Night watch service or engaged in the Business or occupation of private policeman or managing or carrying on a detective agency, the tax is seventy-five dollars per quarter. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 22, 2003)  
5.02.640 - Real estate agent. 
For every Person, firm or corporation engaged in the selling of real estate and not having a fixed place of Business in the City, an annual license tax of two hundred dollars Shall be paid. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 23, 2003)  
5.02.650 - Refuse collection systems. 
A.  Every Person, firm or corporation operating a Refuse collection system Shall obtain and pay for a license as required by Chapter 6.16 of this Code. The Fee for such license Shall be two hundred dollars per Year, per Vehicle Used in the Business for such collection; provided, however, that no license as herein provided for the collection and disposal of Rubbish Shall be issued without prior Council Approval. All Applications for a license to operate such collection and disposal service received by the Director of Public Works Shall forthwith be referred to the City Council for such action. 
B.  Beginning January 1, 1992, the City reserves the right to select one or more Person(s), firm(s) or corporation(s) to operate an exclusive Refuse collection system within the jurisdiction of the City. Any successful private Refuse collection systems, as Approved by the City, Shall pay an annual license Permit Fee as specified in the Franchise agreement with the City. All Applications for new licenses to operate such collection and disposal service Shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works at such time that proposals are requested by the City. 
(Ord. 0-20-91 § 6, 1991: Ord. 1471 Art. 3 § 18, 1975)  
5.02.670 - Selling from Vehicle, car, stand or trailer. 
Every Person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the Business of selling fruits or vegetables or other Goods, wares or merchandise from a Vehicle, car, stand or trailer, other than as a peddler, and having no fixed place of Business in the City, Shall pay a license tax of fifteen dollars per Day for each such Vehicle, car, stand or trailer, payable in advance. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 25, 2003)  
5.02.680 - Shoe stand. 
For every Person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the Business of shoe shining or shoe polishing stand, the tax is one hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 26, 2003)  
5.02.690 - Stamp redemption. 
For every Person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the Business of redeeming any stamps, coupons, tickets, cards or other devices issued for or with the Sale of Goods, wares or merchandise, which stamps, coupons, tickets, cards or other devices so issued Shall entitle the purchaser receiving the same to procure from said Person, firm or corporation, any Goods, wares or merchandise free of charge, upon the production of one or any number of such stamps, coupons, tickets, cards or other devices, the tax is seventy-five dollars per quarter. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 27, 2003)  
5.02.700 - Swap Meet. 
A.  For every Person, firm or corporation conducting, managing, carrying on or engaging in the Business of a Swap Meet, the tax is two hundred fifty dollars per quarter. 
B.  "Swap Meet", as Used in this chapter, means any Business wherein any Person, firm or corporation or agent thereof Rents spaces to various dealers or individuals for selling or offering for Sale, Goods, wares, merchandise, or things or articles of value, and wherein an admission Fee is charged to enter the area where the merchandise is being offered for Sale. 
C.  Receipts for the Space Rental Shall be Written in triplicate on numbered receipts, and Shall contain the name and address of the dealer or individual, and the make and license number of his automobile. One Copy of the receipt Shall be furnished to the dealer, one Copy filed with the Finance Department immediately after the Sale, and one Copy retained by the Swap Meet Operator for a period of five Years for audit purposes. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 28, 2003)  
5.02.710 - Trampoline Center. 
Every Person, firm or corporation engaged in or conducting, managing or carrying on the Business or operating or maintaining a Trampoline Center for Use, Used or operated or played as a game, or for amusement, for the operation of which a charge is made, Shall pay to the City a license Fee of fifty dollars per quarter for each separate Trampoline Center. 
(Ord. 0-26-03 § 29, 2003)  
5.02.720 - No fixed place of Business in the City. 
Every Person not having a fixed place of Business within the City who engages in Business within the City Shall pay a license tax at the rate set forth in Sections 5.02.380 through 5.02.470 for Persons engaged in the same type of Business, and having a fixed place of Business within the City, on Gross Receipts derived from within the City. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 3 § 25, 1975)  
5.02.730 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding three Months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 1471 Art. 3 § 26, 1975)  
Chapter 5.04 - CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS 
 
5.04.010 - Purpose. 
The City Council expressly finds that in order to protect the citizens of Colton from injury and to prevent fraudulent solicitation, for religious or charitable purposes, and further to prevent wrongful diversion of funds to purposes other than those represented and to secure the citizens of Colton against waste, and in the interest of public safety, peace, comfort and convenience, certain requirements are established as a condition precedent to any Person soliciting for the aforesaid purposes in the City. 
(Ord. 1195 § 1, 1964)  
5.04.020 - Permit—Application—Identity and purpose to be established. 
Any Person seeking to make any Appeal to the public collectively or in groups, or to individuals for a charitable or religious purpose by soliciting, collecting gifts, contributions, donations or subscriptions, or by promoting or conducting any Sale, bazaar, or exhibition, or by any other means whatsoever, Shall establish his identity, his authority to act for the cause which he represents and the time and manner thereof pursuant to the procedure Following for the purpose of obtaining a Permit from the City so to do. 
(Ord. 1195 § 2, 1964)  
5.04.030 - Permit—Application—Filing—Content. 
Any Person hereinafter referred to as Applicant desiring to do any of the Acts mentioned in Section 5.04.020 above Shall file an Application in the form of a declaration with the Chief of Police. Such Application Shall set forth the Following information: 
A.  The full name and address of the Applicant and whether he is or has been known under any other name; 
B.  The full name and address of the Person for whom he is soliciting; 
C.  Names and addresses, if any, of any other Person with whom Applicant is affiliated or for whom working; 
D.  The Days and hours he Shall solicit; 
E.  The purpose or purposes for which all proceeds of the solicitation are to be Used; 
F.  Whether records of the result of each Person soliciting are to be kept and if so, where; 
G.  Whether Applicant has been arrested or convicted of a crime other than traffic Violations; 
H.  The source and amount of compensation paid to the Applicant for such solicitation and whether he Shall receive a percentage of any solicitations; 
I.  Whether any Part of the results of the solicitation Shall be paid over to a Person other than the Applicant and if so, the Part or percentage thereof; 
J.  A statement as to that Part or portion or whether the entirety thereof of such contribution Shall be made available for the specific purpose of such solicitation. 
(Ord. 1195 § 3, 1964)  
5.04.040 - Investigation. 
The Chief of Police, upon receipt of an Application complying with the requirements of Section 5.04.030 and containing the information required hereby Shall conduct such investigation as he May deem necessary. 
(Ord. 1195 § 4, 1964)  
5.04.041 - Permit—Temporary. 
Upon receipt of an Application, the Chief of Police May issue a temporary Permit pending completion of his investigation. Such Permit Shall be revocable at anytime and Shall not be granted for a period exceeding sixty Days. 
(Ord. 1558 (part), 1979: Ord. 1535 § 2 (part), 1978)  
5.04.050 - Permit—Granting or denial—Conditions. 
Should the Chief of Police, after a complete investigation of the Applicant and of the representations contained in the Application, be of the opinion that the Applicant has not stated true facts in his Application, or that if a Permit should be granted to the Applicant a fraud in all probability would be perpetrated upon the public, the Chief of Police May refuse to issue such a Permit to such Applicant. 
Should the Chief of Police be satisfied that the Application is truthful, that the Applicant is acting in good faith and that in all probability a fraud would not be perpetrated upon the public, a Permit Shall be issued to such Applicant for such period of time as the Applicant May request; provided, however, that no Permit Shall be valid for a period of more than six Months from the date of issuance; and provided further that as a condition to granting such Permit the Chief of Police Shall require the Applicant to pay a sum to be determined by Resolution of the City Council for each Applicant to defray costs of such investigation. 
(Ord. 1535 § 2, 1978: Ord. 1195 § 5, 1964)  
5.04.060 - Permit—Exceptions. 
No Permit Shall be required for the solicitation of gifts, contributions, donations or subscriptions, or the promotion of any bazaar, Sale, or exhibition or other Act of Appeal to the public for a charity, made by the members of any religious or charitable organization which has been in existence and which regularly has maintained headquarters or a Place of Worship in the City for a period of at least one Year next Preceding the date on which such activity Shall be initiated; or Shall have a supervising organization or Committee or the membership in whole or Part Shall consist of or be open to Residents of the City and benefits therefrom Shall inure in whole or Part to Residents of the City. 
(Ord. 1195 § 6, 1964)  
5.04.070 - Permit—Revocation—Procedure. 
Any Permit issued May be revoked if the Permittee is not operating in accordance with the Application pursuant to which such Permit was issued or if further activity of the Permittee would operate to defraud the public. Such revocation May be made by a registered letter signed by the City Manager at the direction of the Chief of Police and directed to the address of the Applicant as stated upon the Application pursuant to which the Permit was issued. The Permit Shall become null and void on and after the third Day from the date after which the letter is deposited in the United States Post Office in Colton. 
(Ord. 1408 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1972; Ord. 1195 § 7, 1964)  
5.04.080 - Solicitation by mail—Permit not required. 
No Permit Shall be required for any solicitation through the United States mail. 
(Ord. 1195 § 8, 1964)  
5.04.090 - Telephone solicitation prohibited when. 
No Person Shall Use or cause to be Used a telephone to accomplish any of the Acts set forth in Section 5.04.010 unless such Person is a bona fide member of an organization as described in Section 5.04.060 above; and provided further, that such Person making such solicitation does not receive any compensation therefor. 
(Ord. 1195 § 9, 1964)  
5.04.100 - Time for solicitation. 
No Permit as herein contemplated Shall be issued to allow solicitations before nine a.m. in the morning or after sundown. 
(Ord. 1195 § 14, 1964)  
5.04.110 - Penalty for Violation. 
Any Person violating any of the provisions of this chapter Shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed sixty Days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 1195 § 10, 1964)  
Chapter 5.06 - CATV FRANCHISES 
 
5.06.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the Following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations Shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words Used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
"CATV" means a Community Antenna Television System as defined in this section. 
"City" means the City of Colton, California, a municipal corporation of the State of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
"Community Antenna Television System" means a system of Antenna, coaxial cables, wires, wave guides, microwave lengths, signal repeaters or other conductors, equipment or facilities, designed, constructed or Used for the purpose of providing television or FM radio or other signal service by cable or through its facilities as contemplated in this chapter. 
"Council" means the present Governing Body of the City or any future board constituting the legislative body of the City. 
"Franchise" means and includes any authorization granted under this chapter in terms of a Franchise, privilege, Permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the City. Any such authorization, in whatever term granted, Shall not mean and include any license or Permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a Business within the City in accordance with Chapter 5.04, relating to the Business License tax of the City. 
"Franchise Area" means the territory within the City throughout which Grantee is authorized to construct, maintain and operate its system and includes any enlargements thereof and additions thereto. 
"Grantee" means the Person, firm or corporation to whom or which a Franchise, as defined in this section, is granted by the Council under this chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said Person, firm or corporation. 
"Gross Annual Receipts" means any and all compensation and other consideration in any form whatever and any contributing grant or subsidy received directly or indirectly by a Grantee from Subscribers or Users in payment for television or FM radio or other signals or service received within the City, and any Fees or income received by Grantee for carrying advertising or Commercial Messages over the CATV facilities. Included in Gross Annual Receipts are installation and line extension charges levied by the Grantee to Subscribers. 
Gross Annual Receipts Shall not include any taxes or services furnished by the Grantee imposed directly on any Subscriber or User by any City, State or other governmental unit and collected by the Grantee for such governmental unit. 
"Property of Grantee" means all Property owned, installed or Used by a Grantee in the conduct of a CATV Business in the City under the authority of a Franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. 
"Street" means the surface of and the space above and below any Public Street, road, Highway, Freeway, lane, path, Alley, Court, Sidewalk, Parkway, drive or way, now or hereafter existing as such within the City. 
"Subscriber" means any Person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service of a Grantee. 
(Ord. 1570 § 1, 1979; Ord. 1405 § 1, 1972)  
5.06.020 - Exclusive Use of telephone facilities. 
When and in the event that the Grantee of any Franchise granted under this chapter constructs, operates and maintains a CATV system exclusively through telephone company facilities constructed, operated and maintained pursuant to a State-granted telephone Franchise and offers satisfactory proof that in no event during the life of the Franchise Shall the Grantee make any Use of the Streets independently of the telephone company facilities, the Grantee Shall be required to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter as a "licensee" and in such event whenever the term "Grantee" is Used in this chapter, it Shall be deemed to mean and include "licensee." 
(Ord. 1405 § 2, 1972)  
5.06.030 - Franchise to operate. 
A nonexclusive Franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system within all or any portion of the City May be granted by the Council to any Person, firm or corporation, whether operating under an existing Franchise or not, who or which offers to furnish and provide such system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
No provision of this chapter May be deemed or construed as to require the granting of a Franchise when in the opinion of the Council it is in the public interest to restrict the number of Grantees to one or more. 
(Ord. 1405 § 3, 1972)  
5.06.040 - Uses Permitted by Grantee. 
Any Franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter Shall authorize and Permit the Grantee to engage in the Business of operating and providing a CATV system in the City, and for that purpose to install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any Public Street, such wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, Attachments, and other Property as May be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system. No new poles May be installed where unusual circumstances exist and where express Written Permission is provided by the Public Works Director. 
The Grantee May make a charge to Subscribers for installation or connection to its CATV system and a fixed monthly charge as filed and Approved as provided in this chapter. No increase in the rates and charges to Subscribers, as set forth in the schedule filed and Approved with Grantee's Application, May be made without the prior Approval of the Council express by Resolution. 
(Ord. 1570 § 2, 1979: Ord. 1405 § 4, 1972)  
5.06.050 - Duration of Franchise. 
No Franchise granted by the Council under this chapter Shall be for a term longer than fifteen Years Following the date of acceptance of the Franchise by the Grantee or the renewal thereof. 
Any such Franchise granted under this chapter May be terminated prior to its date of expiration by the Council in the event that the Council has found, at a Public Hearing, after thirty Days' Notice of any proposed termination that: 
A.  The Grantee has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter or has, by Act or omission, violated any term or condition of any Franchise or Permit issued under this chapter; or 
B.  Any provision of this chapter has become invalid or unenforceable and the Council further finds that the provision constitutes a consideration Material to the grant of the Franchise; or 
C.  The City acquires the CATV system Property of the Grantee. 
(Ord. 1405 § 5, 1972)  
5.06.060 - Franchise payments. 
A.  Annual Franchise Fee. The Grantee of any Franchise Shall pay annually to the City during the life of the Franchise a sum equal to five percent of the Gross Annual Receipts of the Grantee derived from subscriptions and Users within the City. Such payments to be made to the City Treasurer. 
The Grantee Shall file with the City, within thirty Days after the expiration of any fiscal Year or portion thereof during which such Franchise is in force, a financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, showing in detail the Gross Annual Receipts, as defined in Section 5.06.010, of Grantee during the Preceding fiscal Year or portion thereof. It Shall be the duty of the Grantee to pay to the City within ten Days after the time for filing said statements, the sum prescribed in this section or any unpaid balance thereof for the calendar Year or portions thereof covered by such statements. 
In the event that the above payment is not received by the City within the prescribed time, Grantee Shall pay to the City liquidated damages of two percent per Month on the unpaid balance in addition thereto. 
The City Shall have the right to inspect the Grantee's records showing the Gross Receipts from which its Franchise payments are computed and the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under this chapter. No acceptance of any payment Shall be construed as a release or as in accord and satisfaction of any claim the City May have for further or additional sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation under this chapter. 
In the event of any holding over after expiration or other termination of any Franchise granted under this chapter, without the consent of the City, the Grantee Shall pay to the City a reasonable compensation and damages, of not less than one hundred percent of its total gross profits before depreciation and excluding any special charges during said period. 
(Ord. 0-3-96 § 1, 1996; Ord. 1570 § 3, 1979: Ord. 1405 § 6, 1972)  
5.06.070 - Limitations of Franchise. 
A.  Any Franchise granted under this chapter Shall be nonexclusive. 
B.  No privilege or exemption Shall be granted or conferred by any Franchise granted under this chapter except those specifically prescribed in this chapter. 
C.  Any privilege claimed under any such Franchise by the Grantee in any Street or other Public Property Shall be subordinate to any prior lawful Occupancy of the Streets or other Public Property. 
D.  All transmission and distribution Structures, lines and equipment of the Grantee within the City Shall be so located as to cause no Interference with the proper Use of Streets, Alleys and other public-ways and places and to cause no Interference with the rights of reasonable convenience of Property Owners who adjoin any of the Streets, Alleys or other public-ways and places. 
E.  In case of any disturbance of pavement, Sidewalk, Driveway or other surfacing, the Grantee Shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner Approved by the Public Works Director of the City, replace and restore all paving, Sidewalk, Driveway or surface of any Street or Alley disturbed in as good condition as before said work was commenced and Shall maintain the restoration in an Approved condition for the duration of the Franchise. 
F.  Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments, Alterations or installations, the Grantee Shall do so at such time as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to its customers and unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, it Shall give reasonable Notice thereof to its customers. 
G.  1.  Any such Franchise Shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original Grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of in whole or in Part either by forced or involuntary Sale, or by voluntary Sale, merger, consolidation; operation of Law or otherwise without the prior consent of the Council, after a Public Hearing, expressed by Resolution and then under such conditions as May therein be prescribed. Any such transfer or assignment Shall be made only by an instrument in writing, a duly executed Copy of which Shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk within ten Days after any such transfer or assignment. Said consent of the Council May not be arbitrarily refused; provided, however, the proposed assignee will show financial responsibility and Must agree to comply with all provisions of this chapter; and provided further, that no consent Shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other hypothecation as whole to secure an indebtedness. 
2.  A change in control, as defined below, is defined to be a transfer of the Franchise. Grantee Shall promptly notify grantor of any proposed change in control of the Grantee. Such change in control Shall make the Franchise null and void and terminate without further Act of the grantor, unless and until the grantor Shall have consented thereto. The grantor May condition said transfer upon reasonable terms and conditions. 
3.  For the purpose of this section, a presumptive change in control exists, upon the Sale or transfer of ten percent or more in any given Year of Grantee's stock, or the stock of any general partner of Grantee. In addition, the consent of grantor under the standards set forth herein will be necessary for the first Sale of or transfer of Grantee's stock which Sale or transfer, when added to all previous Sales or transfers, will result in more than fifty percent of the Grantee's stock, or the stock a general partner of grantor, having been sold or transferred since the effective date of the particular Franchise. In addition, a presumptive change in control will exist when Grantee causes a change in the identity or control of the managing agent (Operator) of Grantee's system; provided, that if the existing managing agent (Operator) is terminated for cause, consent for such termination Shall not be required but consent Shall be required for the selection of a new managing agent (Operator). 
H.  Time Shall be the essence of any such Franchise granted under this chapter. The Grantee Shall not be relieved of his obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter by any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance. 
I.  Any right or power in, or duly impressed upon, any officer, Employee, Department or board of the City Shall be subject to transfer by the City to any other officer, Employee, Department or board of the City. 
J.  The Grantee Shall have no recourse whatsoever against the City for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or of any Franchise issued under this chapter or because of its enforcement. 
K.  The Grantee Shall be subject to all requirements of City Ordinances, rules, regulations and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established including but not limited to those concerning the undergrounding of utilities, Street work, Street excavation, Use, removal and relocation of Property within a Street and other Street work. 
L.  Any such Franchise granted Shall not relieve the Grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space for any Department of the City, Utility company, or from others maintaining poles in Streets. 
M.  Any Franchise granted under this chapter Shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities owned, possessed, controlled, or exercisable by Grantee, or any successor to any interest of Grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation, or maintenance of any CATV system in the City and the acceptance of any Franchise under this chapter Shall operate as between Grantee and the City, as an abandonment of any and all of such rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities within the City, to the effect that, as between Grantee and the City, any and all construction, operation and maintenance by any Grantee of any CATV system in the City Shall be, and Shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be, under and pursuant to the Franchise, and not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity or authority whatsoever. 
N.  The Grantee Shall at all times during the life of this Franchise comply with all provisions of existing and future rules and regulations of the City, the State and the United States of America. 
O.  If at any time during the period of this Franchise, the City Shall lawfully elect to alter or change the Grade of any Street, Sidewalk, Alley or other publicway, the Grantee, upon reasonable Notice by the City, Shall remove, relay and relocate his wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. 
P.  Any fixtures placed in any publicway by the Grantee, Shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such publicway. 
Q.  The Grantee Shall on the request of any Person holding a Building moving Permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its wires to Permit the moving of Buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires Shall be paid by the Person requesting the same and the Grantee Shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The Grantee Shall be given not less than forty-eight hours' advance Notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
R.  When tree trimming is required, the Grantee Shall request the City Park Superintendent to trim trees upon and overhanging Streets, Alleys, Sidewalks and public ways and places of the City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the Grantee. Such requested tree trimming will be done by the City at the sole expense of the Grantee. 
S.  In all sections of the City where the cables, wires, or other like facilities of one or more public utilities engaged in providing electric or telephone service are placed underground, the Grantee Shall place its cables, wires, or other like facilities underground, unless microwave links or wireless transmission is utilized. In which case prior Approval Shall be obtained by the Public Works Director of the City. 
(Ord. 0-8-88 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1405 § 7, 1972)  
5.06.080 - Rights reserved to the City. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter Shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the City to acquire the Property of the Grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and just value, which Shall not include any amount for the Franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted, and nothing contained in this chapter Shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the City's right of eminent domain. 
B.  There is reserved to the City every right and power which is required in this chapter to be reserved or provided by any Ordinance of City, and the Grantee, by its acceptance of any Franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the City in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
C.  Neither the granting of any Franchise under this chapter nor any of the provisions contained in this chapter Shall be construed to prevent the City from granting any identical or similar, Franchise to any other Person, firm or corporation, within all or any portion of the City. 
D.  There is reserved to the City the power to amend any section or Part of this chapter so as to require additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise, on the Part of the Grantee. 
E.  Neither the granting of any Franchise nor any provision of this chapter Shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the City. 
F.  The Council May do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and May determine any question of fact which May arise during the existence of any Franchise granted hereunder. The City Manager is authorized and empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any Grantee under this chapter, either on behalf of the City, the Grantee, or any Subscriber, in the best interest of the public. Either the Grantee or any member of the public who May be dissatisfied with the Decision of the City Manager May Appeal the Matter to the Council for hearing and determination. The Council May accept, reject or modify the Decision of the City Manager, and the Council May adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of any Grantee from any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1405 § 8, 1972)  
5.06.090 - Permits, installation and service. 
A.  Within thirty Days after acceptance of any Franchise the Grantee Shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary Permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its Business, including, but not limited to, any Utility joint Use Attachment agreements, microwave Carrier licenses, and any other Permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
B.  Within ninety Days after obtaining all necessary Permits, licenses and authorizations, Grantee Shall commence construction and installation of the CATV system. 
C.  Within ninety Days after the commencement of construction and installation of the system, Grantee Shall proceed to render service to Subscribers, and the completion of the construction and installation Shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter, so that service to all areas Designated on the map accompanying the Application for Franchise, as provided in Section 5.06.210, Shall be provided to all Grantee's licensed Subscribers within such time and upon such conditions as Shall be determined by the City Council. 
D.  Failure to do any of the foregoing Shall be grounds for a termination of the Franchise. 
E.  The City Manager May extend the time for obtaining necessary Permits and authorizations and for beginning construction and installation for additional periods in the event the Grantee acting in good faith experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond his control. 
(Ord. 1405 § 9, 1972)  
5.06.100 - Location of Property of Grantee. 
A.  Any wires, cable lines, conduits or other Properties of the Grantee to be constructed or installed in Streets, Shall be so constructed or installed only at such location and in such manner as Shall be Approved by the Public Works Director acting in the exercise of his reasonable discretion. 
B.  The Grantee Shall not install any facilities or apparatus in or on other Public Property, places or rights-of-way, or within any privately owned area within the City which has not yet become a Public Street but is Designated or delineated as a proposed Public Street on any tentative Subdivision map Approved by the City, except those installed upon public Utility facilities now existing, without obtaining the prior Written Approval of the Public Works Director. 
C.  In those areas and portions of the City where the transmission and/or distribution facilities of one or more public utilities engaged in providing electric or telephone service are underground or hereafter May be placed underground, then the Grantee Shall likewise construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground. 
(Ord. 1405 § 10, 1972)  
5.06.110 - Removal and abandonment of Property of Grantee. 
A.  In the event that the Use of any Part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of three Months or in the event such system or Property has been installed in any Street or Public Place without complying with the requirements of Grantee's Franchise or this chapter, or the Franchise has been terminated, cancelled or has expired, the Grantee Shall promptly, upon being given thirty Days' Notice, remove from the Streets or Public Places all such Property of such system other than any which the Director of Public Works May Permit to be Abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the Grantee Shall promptly restore the Street or other area from which such Property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the Director of Public Works. 
B.  Any Property of the Grantee remaining in place thirty Days after the termination or expiration of the Franchise Shall be considered permanently Abandoned. The City Manager May extend such time not to exceed an additional thirty Days. 
C.  Any Property of the Grantee to be Abandoned in place Shall be Abandoned in such manner as the Director of Public Works prescribes. Upon permanent abandonment of the Property of the Grantee in place, the Property Shall become that of the City, and the Grantee Shall submit to the City Council an instrument in writing, to be Approved by the City Attorney, transferring to the City the ownership of such Property. 
(Ord. 1405 § 11, 1972)  
5.06.120 - Changes required by public Improvements. 
The Grantee Shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same Street or other Public Place, or remove from the Street or other Public Place, any Property of the Grantee when required by the Director of Public Works by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, Street vacation, Freeway and Street construction, change or Establishment of Street Grade, installation of sewers, drains, storm drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks or any other type of Structures or Improvements by public agencies; provided, however, that the Grantee Shall in all such cases have the privilege and be subject to the obligations to abandon any Property of the Grantee in place, as provided in Section 5.06.110. 
(Ord. 1405 § 12, 1972)  
5.06.130 - Failure to perform Street work. 
Upon failure of the Grantee to commence, pursue, or complete any work required by Law or by the provisions of this chapter by its Franchise to be done in any Street or other Public Place, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director, the City Manager may, at his option, cause such work to be done and the Grantee Shall pay to the City the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the City Manager to the Grantee within ten Days after receipt of such itemized report. 
(Ord. 1405 § 13, 1972)  
5.06.140 - Guarantee of faithful performance. 
A.  As a guarantee of faithful performance the Grantee Shall, concurrently with the filing of the acceptance of award of any Franchise granted under this chapter, provide the City Treasurer, with one or more of the Following instruments, in a total amount of forty-five thousand dollars: 
1.  Cash or its equivalent commercial bank paper; 
2.  An irrevocable commercial letter of credit in favor of the City; 
3.  A time certificate of deposit payable to the City; 
4.  An assignment of account to the City demand or time, in Approved form, savings and loan association paper; 
5.  An assignment of share account only to the City in Approved form. 
B.  All instrument in lieu of cash or certificate of deposit Must be subject to sight drafts at par by the City. Such drafts will be accompanied by a statement signed by the treasurer of the City that the moneys drawn Shall be Used solely for the purpose for which the instrument was required. Federally Insured Institutions only Shall be eligible to furnish in lieu paper. Time account assignments will have passbook Attached. 
C.  These instruments in a total amount of forty-five thousand dollars Shall remain in the possession of the City Treasurer during the construction period of the CATV system proposed, as referred to in subsection (A)(2) of Section 5.06.210. 
D.  Upon completion of construction of fifteen miles of the proposed CATV system by the Grantee as specified in subsection (A)(2) of Section 5.06.210, and of the public Buildings and educational facilities installations specified therein which lie within the City, and upon Approval by the City Council, the guarantee of faithful performance instruments Shall be reduced in amount from forty-five thousand dollars to twenty thousand dollars. It Shall remain at twenty thousand dollars until completion of cable installation to all Designated public Buildings and educational facilities outside the City limits which are required by the City Council, and as specified in subsection (A)(2) of Section 5.06.210. Upon satisfactory completion of the stated installations, the Grantee May request that all or Part of the Fees and payments due and payable thereafter under Section 5.06.060 or otherwise due from the Grantee, be waived, up to the full amount of the remaining Grantee instrument, as they fall due. Conditioned upon the faithful performance of Grantee, and upon the further condition that if Grantee fails to comply with any one or more of the provisions of this chapter, or of any Franchise issued to the Grantee under this chapter, there Shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the Grantee instruments any damages or loss suffered by the City as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any Property of the Grantee as prescribed by this section which May be in Default, plus a reasonable allowance for Attorneys Fees and costs, up to the full amount of the guarantee instruments; said condition Shall be a continuing obligation for the duration of the Franchise and any renewal thereof until the Grantee has liquidated all of its obligations to the City after acceptance of the Franchise or renewal by the Grantee or from its exercise of any privilege therein granted. 
(Ord. 1405 § 14, 1972)  
5.06.150 - Indemnification of City. 
A.  The Grantee Shall indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, boards, Commissions, agents and Employees against and from any and all claims, demands, actions, suits, liabilities, and judgments of every kind and nature and regardless of the merit of the same, arising out of or related to the exercise or enjoyment of any CATV Franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, including claims, demands, actions, suits, liabilities and judgments based upon any infringement or Violation or alleged Violation of any Copyright; and Grantee Shall reimburse the City for any costs and expenses incurred by City in defending against any such claim or demand or action, including any Attorney Fees, account Fees, expert witness or consultant Fees, Court costs, per diem expense, travel and living expense; and Grantee Shall upon demand of the City appear in and defend any and all suits, actions or other legal proceedings whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative or otherwise, brought by the third Persons or duly constituted authorities against or affecting the City, its officers, boards, Commissions, agents or Employees and arising out of or related to the exercise or enjoyment of the Franchise, or the granting thereof by the City; the foregoing obligation Shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or other security required under this chapter; provided, that neither Grantee nor City Shall make or enter into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, action or suit without first giving the other ten Days' prior Written Notice of its intentions to do so. 
B.  The Grantee Shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any Franchise granted under this chapter, furnish to the City and file with the City Clerk and at all times during the existence of any Franchise granted under this chapter, maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy, in protection of the City, its officers, boards, Commissions, agents and Employees, in a company Approved by and in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, protecting the City and all Persons against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death and Property damage occasioned by the operations of Grantee under such Franchise, with minimum liability limits of two hundred fifty thousand dollars for personal injury or death of any one Person, and five hundred thousand dollars for personal injury or death of two or more Persons in any one occurrence and one hundred thousand dollars for damage to Property resulting from any one occurrence. 
C.  The policy mentioned in the foregoing subsection Shall be primary insurance, Shall name the City, its officers, boards, Commissions, agents and Employees, as additional insured and Shall contain a provision that a Written Notice of cancellation, reduction, or other Material change in coverage of the policy Shall be delivered to the City Clerk thirty Days in advance of the effective date thereof. If the insurance is provided by a policy which also covers Grantee or any other entity or Person other than those above mentioned, then the policy Shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement. 
(Ord. 1405 § 15, 1972)  
5.06.160 - Inspection of Property and records. 
A.  At all reasonable times, the Grantee Shall Permit any duly authorized Representative of the City to examine all Property of the Grantee, together with any appurtenant Property of the Grantee situated within or without the City, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the Grantee or under its control which deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or Property of the Grantee with respect to its Franchise. If any such maps or records are not kept in the City, or upon reasonable request made available in the City, and if the City Manager determines that an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate, then all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making the examination Shall be paid by the Grantee. 
B.  The Grantee Shall prepare and furnish to the City Manager and/or Finance Director at the times and in the form prescribed by either of said officers, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or Property, as May be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights functions or duties of the City or any of its officers in connection with the Franchise. 
C.  The Grantee Shall at all times make and keep in the City full complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed or in Use in Streets and other Public Places in the City. 
D.  The Grantee Shall file with the Public Works Director, on or before the last Day in March of each Year, four copies of a current map or set of maps drawn to scale, showing all CATV system equipment installed and in place in Streets and other Public Places of the City. 
(Ord. 1405 § 16, 1972)  
5.06.170 - Operational standards. 
The CATV Shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest and best accepted standards in the Industry to the effect that Subscribers Shall receive the highest possible service. At a minimum, the Grantee Shall comply with all applicable Federal statutes, rules, and regulations regarding operational standards of CATV systems. 
(Ord. 1570 § 4, 1979: Ord. 1405 § 17, 1972)  
5.06.180 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
A.  When not otherwise prescribed in this chapter, all Matters required in this chapter to be filed with the City Shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
B.  The Grantee Must pay to the City a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for expenses incurred by it in publishing legal Notice and Ordinances in connection with the granting of the Franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such payment Shall be made in ten Days after the City furnishes the Grantee with a Written statement of the expense. 
C.  The Grantee Shall keep a maintenance service log which will indicate the nature of each service complaint, the date and time it was received, the disposition of the complaint and the time and date cleared. The log Shall be made available for periodic inspection by the City. 
D.  Grantee Shall bear the prime responsibility for appropriate corrective action whenever improper performance is detected in any Part of the system, regardless of whether public Utility Distribution Facilities are utilized. 
E.  No Person, firm or corporation in the existing service area of Grantee Shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that Grantee Shall not be required to provide service to any Subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection Fee or the applicable monthly service charge. 
G.  Grantee Shall without charge provide in the Franchise Area all basic Subscriber services, as defined in the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, of its system to all public Schools, to any Institution of general education, attendance at which satisfies the State Education Code and General Laws of the State of California, City Police and Fire Stations, City Recreation Centers and other such Buildings owned or controlled by the City as the City Manager Shall Designate. Grantee Shall without charge provide basic Subscriber services to Schools outside the City Franchise Area as directed by the City Council, but to include as a minimum all facilities of the Colton Unified School District. Such service Shall consist of a connection to the exterior of the Building or Property involved and the connection to the interior of the Building or Property to a television set if desired. Grantee Shall further make available at all times for City and public School Use the number of public Access, governmental, educational, and lease channels as provided in the Franchise between the City and the Grantee. 
H.  In the case of an Emergency or disaster as determined by the City Manager, the Grantee Shall upon request of the City Manager make available his facilities to the City for Emergency Use during the Emergency or disaster. 
I.  Neither the Grantee under this chapter nor any shareholder Shall engage in the Business of selling, repairing or installing television receivers, radio receivers or accessories for such receivers within the City during the term of the Franchise and the Grantee Shall not allow any of its shareholders to so engage in any such Business. 
J.  Any Franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter authorizes only the operation of the CATV system as provided in this chapter and does not take the place of any other Franchise, license or Permit which might be required by Law of the Grantee. 
K.  The Grantee Shall at all times employ ordinary care and Shall install and maintain in Use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or Nuisances to the public. 
L.  The Grantee Shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of General Order No. 95 of the Public Utilities Commission of the State and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installation of the City of public utilities serving the City. 
M.  All Structures and all lines, equipment and connectors in, over, under and upon the Streets, Sidewalks, Alleys and public ways or places of the City wherever situated or located, Shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable, substantial condition and in good order and repair. 
N.  The Grantee Shall maintain a force of one or more Resident agents or Employees at all times and Shall have sufficient Employees to provide safe, adequate and prompt service for its facilities. 
O.  The Grantee Shall limit failures to a minimum by locating and correcting malfunctions promptly, but in no event longer than twenty-four hours after Notice. 
P.  Copies of all petitions, Applications and communications submitted by the Grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other Federal, State or Local regulatory Commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any Matters affecting CATV operations authorized pursuant to this chapter, Shall also be submitted simultaneously to the City Manager. 
Q.  If, during the term of any Franchise, the Grantee receives refunds or any payment made for television or radio signals, it Shall without delay notify the City Manager, suggest a plan for flow-through of the refunds to its Subscribers and retain such refunds pending Order of the City Council. After considering the plans submitted by the Grantee, the City Council Shall order the flow-through of the refunds to the Grantee Subscribers in a fair and equitable manner. 
(Ord. 1570 § 6, 1979: Ord. 1405 § 19, 1972)  
5.06.190 - Use of Utility poles and facilities. 
When any portion of the CATV system is to be installed on public utilities poles and facilities, certified copies of the agreements for such joint Use of poles and facilities Shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 1405 § 20, 1972)  
5.06.200 - Adoption of rules and regulations by the City Council. 
A.  The City Council is authorized to adopt rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter governing the operation of CATV systems in the City and such rules and regulations Shall apply to and Shall govern the operations of the Grantee of any Franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The City Council May adopt rules or regulations or amend, modify, delete, or otherwise change such rules and regulations previously adopted in the Following manner: 
1.  The City Council Shall pass a Resolution of Intention describing the rules or regulations to be adopted, amended, modified, deleted, or otherwise changed and set a Day, hour and place for Public Hearing. Such Resolution Shall direct the City Clerk to publish the same at least once within fifteen Days of passage thereof. 
2.  The City Clerk Shall cause such Resolution to be published at least once in one newspaper of general circulation in the City and Shall cause a Copy of same to be mailed or delivered to any Grantee not less than ten Days prior to the time fixed for hearing thereon. 
3.  At the time for Public Hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the City Council Shall proceed to bear and pass upon such evidence, comments and objections as May be presented. Thereafter, the City Council by its Resolution May adopt, amend, modify, delete, or otherwise change said rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 1405 § 21, 1972)  
5.06.210 - Application for Franchise. 
A.  Application for a Franchise hereunder Shall be in writing, Shall be filed with the City Clerk, in a form Approved by the City Manager, and Shall contain but not be limited to the Following information: 
1.  The name and address of the Applicant. If the Applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner Shall also be set forth. If the Applicant is a corporation, the Application Shall also state the names and addresses of its Directors, main officers, major stockholders and associates, the names and addresses of Parent and subsidiary companies and the State of incorporation; 
2.  A statement and description in detail of the CATV system proposed to be constructed, installed, maintained or operated by the Applicant; the proposed location of such system and its various Components; the manner and time in which Applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the same; and particularly, the extent and manner in which existing poles or other facilities of other public utilities will be Used for such system; 
3.  A description, in detail, of the Public Streets, Public Places and proposed Public Streets within which Applicant proposes or seeks authority to construct, install or maintain any CATV equipment or facilities; a detailed description of the equipment or facilities proposed to be constructed, installed or maintained therein; and the proposed specific location thereof; 
4.  A map specifically showing and delineating the proposed Franchise Area or areas within which Applicant proposes to provide CATV services and for which a Franchise is required; 
5.  A statement or schedule in a form Approved by the City Manager of proposed rates and charges to Subscribers for installation and services, and a Copy of proposed service agreement between the Grantee and its Subscribers Shall accompany the Application. Where underground cable is required, or where more than one hundred fifty feet of distance from cable to connection of service to Subscribers, an additional installation charge over that normally charged for installation as specified in the Applicant's proposal May be charged, with Easements to be supplied by Subscribers. For remote, relatively inaccessible Subscribers within the City, service May be made available on the basis of cost of Materials, labor and Easements if required by the Grantee; 
6.  A Copy of any contract, if existing, between the Applicant and any public Utility providing for the Use of facilities of such public Utility, such as poles, lines, or conduits; 
7.  A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether Written, oral or implied, existing between the Applicant and any Person, firm or corporation with respect to the proposed Franchise or the proposed CATV operation. If a Franchise is granted to a Person, firm or corporation posing as a front or as the Representative of another Person, firm or corporation, and such information is not disclosed in the original Application, the Franchise Shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever; 
8.  A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant showing Applicant's financial status and his financial ability to complete the construction and installation of the proposed CATV system; 
9.  A statement indicating where other CATV Franchises are held and how many existing Subscribers are serviced; 
10.  The Council may, at any time demand, and Applicant Shall provide such supplementary, additional or other information as the Council May deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested Franchise should be granted; 
11.  A statement of intent with regard to program origination and acceptance of Local advertising Shall be included; 
12.  The number and identification of channels proposed to be carried on the CATV system; 
13.  A detailed listing of operating equipment including model numbers and types, with an "equal or better" guarantee; 
14.  A proposed Subscriber complaint processing and equipment repair procedure; 
15.  A proposed "proof of performance" description, listing tests to be performed and equipment utilized. 
B.  Upon consideration of any such Application, the City Council May grant a Franchise for CATV to such Applicant as May appear from the Application to be in its opinion qualified to render proper and efficient CATV service to television viewers and Subscribers in the City. If favorably considered, the Application submitted Shall constitute and form a Part of the Franchise as granted. 
C.  Prior to the granting of the Franchise pursuant to this chapter, the Council Shall pass a Resolution declaring its intention to grant the same, stating the name of the proposed Grantee, the character of the Franchise and the terms and conditions upon which it is proposed to be granted. The Resolution Shall fix and set forth the Day, hour and place when and where any Persons having any interest therein or any objection to the granting thereof May appear before the Council and be heard thereon. It Shall direct the City Clerk to publish the Resolution at least once within fifteen Days of the passage thereof in one newspaper of general circulation in the City. The Notice Shall be published at least ten Days prior to the date of hearing. At the time set for hearing, the Council Shall proceed to hear and pass upon all protests and its Decision thereon Shall be final and conclusive. Thereafter it May by Ordinance grant the Franchise on the terms and conditions specified in the Resolution of Intention to grant same, subject to the right of referendum of the people, or it May deny the same. If the Council determines that changes should be made in the terms and conditions upon which the Franchise is proposed to be granted, a new Resolution of Intention Shall be adopted and like proceedings had thereon. 
D.  Any Franchise issued pursuant to this chapter Shall include but not be limited to the Following conditions: 
1.  The CATV system Franchise in this chapter Shall be Used and operated solely and exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by Ordinance of the City and no other purpose whatsoever. 
2.  The inclusion of the foregoing statement and any such Franchise Shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the City to include any other reasonable condition, limitation or restriction which it May deem necessary to impose in connection with the Franchise pursuant to the authority conferred by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1405 § 22, 1972)  
5.06.220 - Effect of annexations. 
A.  In the event any new territory becomes annexed to the City, the City Council Shall determine which Grantee or Grantees Shall serve the new territory. 
B.  In the event any portion of the unincorporated territory covered by an existing Franchise or license granted by the County of San Bernardino is annexed to the City prior to the time that the Grantee of the County Franchise or license has commenced installation of a CATV system within said territory, all rights acquired by the Grantee under its County Franchise or license Shall terminate by operation of Law as of the date on which the annexation to the City becomes effective. 
C.  In the event any portion of unincorporated territory covered by an existing Franchise or license granted by the County is annexed to the City after the Grantee thereof has commended or completed construction and installation of a CATV system within such territory, the rights reserved under the Franchise or license to the County or to any Officer thereof Shall inure to the benefit of the City and all regulatory provisions of this chapter and any other rules and regulations applicable to CATV systems operating within the City, whether then in effect or subsequently adopted, Shall be applicable to and binding upon the Grantee. In addition, the Grantee Shall be obligated to pay annually to the City four percent of the Gross Receipts derived from its operations within annexed territory. 
(Ord. 0-28-88 § 11, 1988; Ord. 1570 § 8, 1979; Ord. 1405 § 24, 1972)  
5.06.230 - Franchise renewal. 
Any Franchise granted under this chapter is renewable at the Application of the Grantee, in the same manner and upon the same terms and conditions as required in this chapter for obtaining the original Franchise, except those which are by their terms expressly inapplicable; provided, however, that the Council May at its option waive compliance with any or all of the requirements of Section 5.06.210. 
(Ord. 1405 § 25, 1972)  
5.06.240 - Acceptance and effective date of Franchise. 
A.  No Franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter Shall become effective unless and until the Ordinance granting same has become effective and, in addition, unless and until all things required in this section and Sections 5.06.140 and 5.06.150 are done and completed, all of such things being declared to be conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any such Franchise granted under this chapter. In the event any of such things are not done and completed in the time and manner required, the Council May declare the Franchise null and void. 
B.  Within fifteen Days after the effective date of the Ordinance awarding a Franchise, or within such extended period of time as the City Council in its discretion May authorize, the Grantee Shall file with the City Clerk his Written acceptance, in form satisfactory to the City Attorney, of the Franchise, together with the acceptance Fee, bond and insurance policies required by Sections 5.06.060, 5.06.140 and 5.06.150, respectively, and his agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do all things required of him by the provisions of this chapter and the Franchise. The acceptance and agreement Shall be acknowledged by the Grantee before a notary public and Shall inform and content be satisfactory to and Approved by the City Attorney. 
(Ord. 1405 § 26, 1972)  
5.06.260 - Penalty for Violation. 
A.  From and after the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this chapter, it Shall be unlawful for any Person to establish, operate or to carry on the Business of distributing to any Persons in the City any television signals or radio signals by means of a CATV system unless a Franchise therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such Franchise is in full force and effect. 
B.  From and after the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this chapter, it Shall be unlawful for any Person to construct, install or maintain within any Public Street in the City, or within any other Public Property of the City, or within any privately owned area within the City which has not yet become a Public Street but is Designated or delineated as a proposed Public Street on any tentative Subdivision map Approved by the City, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a CATV system, unless a Franchise authorizing such Use of such Street or Property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such Franchise is in full force and effect. 
C.  It is unlawful for any Person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any Part of a Franchised CATV system within this City for the purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, or sound. 
D.  It is unlawful for any Person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise with any Part of a Franchised CATV system within this City for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the Owner of the system. 
E.  It is unlawful for any Person, without the consent of the Owner, to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment Used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. 
(Ord. 1405 § 27, 1972)  
Chapter 5.08 - HOTELS—LODGING HOUSES 
 
5.08.010 - Register to be kept—Proprietor's duties—Unlawful Acts. 
Every Person conducting any lodging house or Hotel in the City Shall at all times keep and maintain therein a Hotel register, in which Shall be inscribed with ink the name and home Street and Town address of each and every Guest or Person Renting or occupying a room or rooms therein. Such register Shall be signed by the Person Renting a room or rooms and the proprietor of such lodging house or Hotel or his or her agents Shall thereupon write opposite such name or names so registered the number of each room assigned to and occupied by each such Guest, together with the time when such room is Rented; and until all of the aforesaid entries have been made in such register, no such Guest Shall be Permitted to occupy privately any room in such house. When the Occupant or Occupants of each room so Rented Shall quit and surrender the same it Shall be the further duty of the proprietor of such Hotel or his or her agent to enter the time thereof in such register opposite the name of such Occupant or Occupants. It is unlawful for any Person except as provided in this chapter to let for sleeping or lodging purposes any room in any lodging house or Hotel in the City more than once between the hours of six in the evening and six in the morning of the next Day except to bona fide travelers with baggage. Erasures or Alterations on the register Shall not be Permitted or made for any purpose and it is unlawful to erase or obliterate a name or names or address or addresses or to Permit the same. Such register Shall be kept at all times open to the inspection of any Guest of such house or Hotel wherein such register is kept and of any peace officer. 
(Ord. 837 § 1, 1953)  
5.08.020 - Falsifying register—Persons wilfully writing untrue name or Designation prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any Person to write, or cause to be Written, or knowingly Permit to be Written, in any register in any lodging house or Hotel in the City, any other or different name or Designation than the true name or Designation of the Person registering therein, or the true name or Designation of a member of his or her immediate Family. 
(Ord. 837 § 2, 1953)  
5.08.030 - Falsifying register—Wilfully writing another's untrue name or Designation prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any Person to write, cause to be Written or Permit to be Written a false or untrue name or Designation of any Person whomsoever in any register of any lodging house or Hotel in the City. 
(Ord. 837 § 3, 1953)  
5.08.040 - Persons of the opposite sex jointly occupying rooms prohibited—Exceptions. 
It is unlawful for any two Persons of opposite sex, except husband and wife or Parent and Minor child, to occupy jointly and privately for lodging or sleeping purposes any room or rooms in any Dwelling, Apartment house, private rooming house, lodging house, Hotel or other Building in the City. 
(Ord. 837 § 4, 1953)  
5.08.050 - Penalty for Violation. 
Every Person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof Shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the City or County Jail for not exceeding ninety Days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 837 § 5, 1953)  
Chapter 5.12 - ADVERTISING NEAR LANDSCAPED FREEWAYS 
 
5.12.010 - Definitions. 
"Advertising Structure," "Signs," "Advertising Display," "Freeway" and "Landscaped Freeway," are defined herein as specifically set forth and defined in the Business and Professional Code of the State, and the same is adopted herein by reference. 
(Ord. 958 § 1, 1957)  
5.12.020 - Prohibited. 
No Advertising Display Shall be placed or maintained on Property adjacent to a section of Freeway which has been or hereafter May be landscaped as defined herein by reference if the Advertising Display is designed to be viewed primarily by Persons traveling on such landscaped section of a Freeway. 
(Ord. 958 § 2, 1957)  
5.12.030 - Removal. 
Any Advertising Structure or Sign which is now, or hereafter Shall be in Violation of the provisions of Section 5.12.020 hereof, Shall be removed within one Year from the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this chapter or within one Year from the date when the Project for the Landscaping of the particular section or sections of a Freeway has been completed or accepted, and the character of the section or sections has been changed from a Freeway to a Landscaped Freeway, whichever is later. 
(Ord. 958 § 3, 1957)  
5.12.040 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of Section 5.12.020 hereof Shall not apply to any Advertising Structure or Sign if the same is Used exclusively as follows: 
A.  To advertise the Sale or lease of the Property upon which such Advertising Display is placed; 
B.  To Designate the name of the Owner or Occupant of the Premises upon which such Advertising Display is placed, or to identify such Premises; 
C.  To advertise Goods manufactured, produced, or sold, or services rendered, on the Property upon which such Advertising Display is placed. 
(Ord. 958 § 4, 1957)  
5.12.050 - Penalty for Violation. 
Any Person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, Shall be punished by fine not to exceed three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail not to exceed ninety Days, or by both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the Court. 
(Ord. 958 § 5, 1957)  
Chapter 5.14 - MOBILE FOOD VEHICLES 
 
5.14.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The City expressly finds that mobile food vehicles have the potential to pose traffic hazards and special dangers to the public health, safety and welfare. It is the purpose and intent of the City, in enacting this section, to provide responsible companies and persons, which engage in the operation of a mobile food vehicle on public property, with clear and concise regulations to prevent safety, traffic and health hazards, as well as to preserve the peace, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 1, 2-2-2016)  
5.14.020 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, or operate any vehicle or conduct any business for the purpose of causing sale of, or offering for sale, any hot and/or cold foods and related goods or merchandise, from any mobile food vehicle parked, stopped or standing upon any public street, alley, parkway, sidewalk or public property in the City, except in accordance with all applicable provisions of this section. Mobile food vehicles on private property associated with temporary, private events shall be permitted and licensed under Chapter 5.44 of this Title, "Special Events." All mobile food vehicles and their operators conducting business in the city shall comply with the following: 
A.  Shall obtain a business license for each mobile food vehicle before vending in the City. In addition, the mobile food vehicle shall possess a valid Mobile Food Facility Health Permit issued by the County of San Bernardino, Division of Environmental Health Services ("county health department"). 
a.  Upon applying for a business license, evidence shall be submitted to the Business License Officer demonstrating that the operator or vendor has obtained a sellers permit from the State Board of Equalization; 
b.  The business license shall not be transferrable to a different vehicle, person, company, operator or vendor. The City shall be notified in writing if there are changes in the contact information for the person(s) responsible or company. 
B.  Properly licensed mobile food vehicles shall: 
a.  Have a decal and letter grade posted on the vehicle issued by the county health department; 
b.  Possess current San Bernardino County food handlers card for all employees handling food, and at least one original Managers Certificate. 
c.  Obtain property owner authorization in writing when temporarily or permanently vending on private property; 
d.  Carry evidence of property owner authorization at all times; 
e.  Not be stationed within a street or public way or within the clear sight triangle; 
f.  Not be stationed within three hundred feet from any operating commercial restaurant building in the City of Colton, unless the mobile food vehicle is operated by said vehicle or is authorized by a Special Event Permit; 
g.  Not be stationed in any location that blocks or otherwise interferes with the free movement of vehicles, pedestrians, or accessible (handicap) parking or path of travel. 
h.  Not be stationary on any site for a period exceeding sixty minutes unless a readily available toilet and handwashing facility are provided within two hundred feet of the vehicle. After the allotted time, vehicles shall not vend on the same property, or within five hundred feet of that property, for a period of two hours; 
i.  Not back up in a street or public way to make or attempt to make a sale; 
j.  Not operate between the hours of nine p.m. and eight a.m. within any residentially designated area and shall not operate within one hundred fifty from any residential designated and built property. 
k.  Shall be equipped with refuse containers large enough to contain all refuse generated by the operation of such vehicle, and the operator of the food vehicle shall pick up all refuse generated by such operation within a fifty-foot radius of the vehicle before such vehicle is moved; 
l.  A commercial property or shopping center, which has three or more mobile food vehicles at the same time, shall be required to obtain a Special Event Permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 5.44. 
m.  Prominently display the company's name, address and phone number with two-inch minimum letters and numbers on both sides of the vehicle. 
n.  One portable sign, not to exceed twenty square feet and a height of four feet, may be displayed outside of a mobile food vehicle when displayed in conjunction with an operating mobile food vehicle. The sign shall be considered part of the mobile food vehicle and cannot be placed where the vehicle would otherwise be prohibited. The sign shall be removed upon the mobile food vehicle leaving the property. 
o.  Shall be subject to other regulations in the Colton Municipal Code, including but not limited to noise and light/glare regulations; 
p.  Other non-motorized mobile food vending apparatuses (e.g., push carts, bicycle carts), not classified as mobile food vehicles, shall be regulated by Chapter 5.16, Peddlers, Solicitors, Canvassers. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 1, 2-2-2016)  
5.14.030 - Fees. 
Fees for a business license to operate a mobile food vehicle shall be as prescribed in Chapter 5.02, Section 5.02.390 (Classification A) of this Title. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 1, 2-2-2016)  
5.14.040 - Liability. 
No person shall drive or operate or cause or permit to be driven any mobile food vehicle in the City unless the operator or vendor thereof shall have obtained a liability insurance policy from a responsible and solvent corporation, authorized to issue such policies under the laws of the state, insuring such operator or vendor and covering the mobile food vehicle. The City of Colton shall be named as an additional insured under the policy. The Development Services Director may waive the insurance requirement for special events with a valid Special Event Permit. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 1, 2-2-2016)  
5.14.050 - Actions as a result of violations. 
The Development Services Director or his/her designee may deny an application for a mobile food services business license if there is evidence on the record that the mobile food service vehicle has operated at an event, within the City, in violation of the law, and/or poses a threat to the public's health, safety and welfare. 
A.  License Denial—Notice. Notice of the denial of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds for denial and the opportunity to appeal the denial. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address within five days following denial of the license application. 
B.  Appeals. Denial of a business license for a mobile food service vehicle may be appealed by applicant to the Code Compliance and Housing Appeals Board (CCHAB). Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk, within fourteen days after notice of the action has been mailed to appellant's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The CCHAB shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the manner as provided in Chapter 8.04, Section 8.04.090. The decision and order of the CCHAB on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
C.  Revocation of license. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the after notice and hearing by CCHAB, for any of the following causes: 
a.  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the Application for license; and 
b.  Any violation of this chapter. 
The decision and order of the CCHAB on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 1, 2-2-2016)  
Chapter 5.15 - HOUSE NUMBERS ON CURBS 
 
5.15.010 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to paint or cause to be painted any house numbers on street curbs within the City, or charge a fee or solicit contributions for same, without a valid permit and business license, issued as provided in this chapter. As used in this section, the words "paint" or "cause to be painted" include any means by which house numbers are affixed or applied to a street curb, including but not limited to paint of any kind applied in any manner and decals of any type which are designed to adhere to a street curb. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 2, 2-2-2016)  
5.15.020 - Applications. 
To obtain a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, an application shall be filed with the Public Works Department containing the following information: 
A.  The location or area in which the applicant intends to paint house numbers on curbs; 
B.  The specific days on which the applicant intends to paint curbs; 
C.  Such other relevant information as determined to be necessary by the Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 2, 2-2-2016)  
5.15.030 - Fees. 
Applicants shall pay a license tax based upon Gross Receipts at the rates and classifications set forth in Section 5.02.400 (Service-oriented Businesses). Non-profit charitable and religious organizations shall pay a non-refundable fee of $25.00, as prescribed in Section 5.02.040.F., which shall cover both permit and business license. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 2, 2-2-2016)  
5.15.040 - Display of Permit. 
Every person to whom a permit and license has been granted shall display the permit in a conspicuous place, or on the front of his or her garment, at all times while canvasing neighborhood to sell services. Failure to display or exhibit the permit is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 2, 2-2-2016)  
5.15.050 - Prior approval required. 
Prior to painting house numbers, the permit holder shall obtain the written consent of an adult owner and/or occupant of the abutting property. The permit and business license shall be on display in a conspicuous place and available for inspection by the owner and/or occupant of the property. In addition to written consent from the owner and/or occupant, the form used for obtaining consent shall also specify the exact fee or donation which is expected to be paid. The silence of the owner and/or occupant of the failure or omission of any occupant to complete or sign the form or to in any other manner indicate consent or refusal to have house numbers painted on the curb shall not constitute consent or in any way be relied on by the permit holder as indicating consent. No person other than an adult owner and/or occupant who has consented in writing shall have any responsibility for payment of the fee or donation. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 2, 2-2-2016)  
5.15.060 - Standards. 
The Public Works Department shall establish standards which shall govern the appearance of house numbers on curbs and the manner in which they may be applied, including but not limited to standards relating to the size, color and location of the numbers and materials used to apply the numbers. The standards shall be provided in writing to every person to whom the permit is issued and the permit holder shall sign a copy of the standards which includes a statement indicating that the permit holder has read and understands the standards and will follow them in applying curb numbers. The signed copy shall be retained in the Department's files relating to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 2, 2-2-2016)  
5.15.070 - Liability. 
The issuance of a permit hereunder shall not be construed as imposing any responsibility or liability on the City or any of its officers or employees for claims for property damage or personal injury in any way arising out of, or relating to, the house number painting activities of the permit holder. It is unlawful for the permit holder to in any way represent or imply to anyone that the permit holder is a representative, or is acting for or on behalf of, the City or any other public agency in offering to paint house numbers on curbs. 
A.  Permit holder shall indemnify, defend and save the City, its authorized agents, officers, representatives and employees, harmless from and against any and all penalties, liabilities or loss resulting from claims of court action and arising out of any accident, loss or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of any work undertaken under the permit granted pursuant to this application. 
B.  Permit holder shall comply with terms and conditions of the permit and all applicable rules and regulations of the City of Colton and other public agencies having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 2, 2-2-2016)  
5.15.080 - Conditions. 
The issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned on compliance by the applicant with all provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to any special conditions which the Public Works Department determines to be necessary for the purpose of protecting the condition and use of City rights-of-way and public improvements located thereon and the health, safety and general welfare of the property owners abutting on the rights-of-way on which the applicant intends to paint house numbers. Such special conditions may include, but are not limited to, limits on the house during which the permit holder may solicit orders and the hours during which the house number painting activity may take place and a permit expiration date which shall not be later than the sixtieth day following the date on which the permit is issued. It is unlawful for the permit holder or any employee or representative of the permit holder to solicit orders or engage in house number painting activities in violation of any such special conditions. Special conditions applicable to a permit shall be specified in writing on the permit or in a written attachment thereto. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 2, 2-2-2016)  
5.15.090 - Employee list. 
Before issuance of any permit, the applicant shall file with the Public Works Department a list of the names and addresses of all persons who will be in the employ of, or act as representatives of, the permit holder, for the purpose of carrying on the activities authorized by the permit. The permit holder shall notify the Public Works Department in writing of any additions to the list within seventy-two hours following the addition of any new employee or representative. The permit holder shall have a person on location to act as manager at all times during which the street numbering activities are conducted. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 2, 2-2-2016)  
5.15.100 - Records. 
The permit holder shall maintain a record of the streets and curb numbers in which he or she paints street address numbers. A list of such streets shall be forwarded to the Public Works Director upon completion of the work on a weekly basis. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 2, 2-2-2016)  
5.15.110 - Cancellation and revocation. 
A permit may be cancelled by the Public Works Department and business license revoked by the Business License Officer if it is determined that the permit holder or his representatives have violated any of the requirements of this chapter or have engaged in any other conduct or activity on the basis of which it is determined that the permit should be cancelled and the business license revoked for the protection of public health, safety or general welfare. Notice of cancellation and/or revocation shall be in writing and shall specify the reasons for the cancellation and/or revocation. The cancellation and/or revocation shall be effective immediately upon confirmation of delivery to the permit holder or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 2, 2-2-2016)  
5.15.120 - Appeal. 
The cancellation of a permit as provided in CMC Section 5.15.110 shall be final on the expiration of ten days following the effective date of the revocation unless the permit holder files a written notice of appeal to the City Council pursuant to CMC Chapter 5.44.220. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 2, 2-2-2016)  
5.15.130 - Penalty. 
Violation of any requirement or prohibition of this chapter is a misdemeanor and is punishable as set forth by Title 9, Chapter 5 (Offense Against Property), Section 9.24.040 and is subject to administrative penalties as may be set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 2, 2-2-2016)  
Chapter 5.16 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, adopted Feb. 2, 2016, amended Ch. 5.16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.16, §§ 5.16.010—5.16.220, pertained to solicitors—canvassers, and derived from Ord. 800, §§ 1—12, adopted in 1950; Ord. 1198, § 1, adopted in 1964; Ord. 1408, §§ 1, 2, adopted in 1972; Ord. 1535, § 1, adopted in 1978; and Ord. 1558, adopted in 1979. 
 
5.16.010 - Defined. 
A.  A "Peddler" is defined as any individual, whether resident of the City or not, traveling either by foot, automobile, truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or along the streets of the City, selling and making immediate delivery of, or offering for sale and immediate delivery of, any goods, wares, merchandise or anything of value, in possession of the person. "Goods" shall include any items identified in Colton Municipal Code Section 12.44.010 as "any consumable items, foods, beverages, merchandise or wares, being offered for sale," as well as flowers, fruit and other perishable items. 
B.  A "Canvasser" or "Solicitor" is defined as any individual, traveling either by foot, automobile, truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or along the streets of the City taking or attempting to take orders for Sale of Goods, wares or merchandise, Personal Property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery services to be furnished or performed in the future. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.020 - Permit and license—Required. 
It is unlawful for any Peddler, Solicitor or Canvasser as defined in Section 5.16.010 of this chapter to engage in such Business or activity within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a Permit and license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.030 - Permit and license—Application—Filing and information required. 
Applicants for Permit and license under this chapter must file with the City an Application in writing on a form to be furnished by the City Manager, or his or her designee, which shall give the Following information: 
A.  Name, address and telephone number of the Applicant; including: 
a.  The true and fictitious names, aliases and residences of the applicant if an individual; the true and fictitious names, aliases and residences of all members of the applicant if the applicant is a firm, association or partnership; the true and fictitious names, aliases and residences of the principal officers of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; and 
b.  The birth date and social security number of each and every person enumerated in subdivision (a); 
c.  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
B.  A brief description of the nature of the Business or activity, and the Goods or Services to be sold; 
C.  The length of time for which the right to do Business is desired; 
D.  A copy of the State of California Sales Tax Permit (Revenue & Taxation Code § 6066) for the applicant's activities as proposed in the application; 
E.  A copy of the articles of incorporation for the corporate entity or non-profit. 
F.  The geographic area(s) where the Goods or Services proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the Sale thereof, and the proposed method of delivery; 
G.  Such other reasonable information as to identify the background of the persons enumerated in division (A) as the Chief of Police may require, including but not limited to, fingerprints and photograph(s) of Applicant(s). The fingerprints shall be submitted via LiveScan™, or equivalent direct input process, to the California Department of Justice with criminal history results directed to the mnemonics of the Colton Police Department at least thirty calendar days in advance of the proposed activity; 
H.  A statement as to whether or not the Applicant has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor, or Violation of any municipal Ordinance, within the past ten years, including the nature, place and date of any conviction for the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; and 
I.  If food products are sold, the applicant shall obtain a Health Permit issued by the County of San Bernardino, Division of Environmental Health Services ("county health department"). 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.040 - Permit and license—Application—Fee. 
At the time of filing the Application a Fee in an amount to be determined by Resolution of the City Council Shall be paid to the City to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.050 - Investigation of Applicant. 
Upon receipt of such Application, the original shall be referred to the Chief of Police, who shall cause such investigation of the Applicant's Business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. The applicant shall cooperate with the Police Department in conducting their investigation and shall, if requested, provide the Police Department with other documents and materials which may be requested that reasonably relate to the course of the department's investigation. Within forty-five calendar days of the date the application is filed with the City, the Chief of Police shall report to the issuing department recommending approval or denial of the permit and stating the reasons therefore. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.051 - Permit—Temporary. 
Upon receipt of an Application, the City may issue a temporary Permit pending completion of the background investigation. Such Permit shall be revocable at any time and shall not be granted for a period exceeding one year. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.060 - Permit and license—Application—Disapproval—Non-issuance. 
If as a result of such investigation, the Applicant's character or Business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police Shall endorse on such Application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the Application to the Business License Officer Shall notify the Applicant that his Application is disapproved and that no Permit and license will be issued. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.070 - Permit and license—Application—Approval—Issuance—Record. 
If as a result of such investigation, the character and Business responsibility of the Applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of Police Shall endorse on the Application his Approval for the carrying on of the Business applied for and return the Application to the Business License Officer who Shall, upon payment of the prescribed license Fee, issue the Applicant his Permit and license. Such license Shall and Shall show name, address and photograph of the licensee, the class of license issued and the kind of Goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of Fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same Shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any Vehicle Used in such soliciting or canvassing. The Business License Officer Shall keep a permanent record of all permits and licenses issued. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.080 - Time for solicitation. 
No Permit as herein contemplated shall be issued to allow peddling, canvassing or solicitations before nine a.m. in the morning or after sundown. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.090 - Fee—Designated. 
Fees for a permit and license for Peddling, Soliciting, or canvassing in the City shall be as prescribed in Chapter 5.02 of this Title. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.130 - Fees Exemption. 
Whenever any person intends to peddle or solicit goods, wares, services or merchandise for the purpose of raising funds of soliciting donations for a tax exempt organization (i.e., registered 501(c)(3) organizations), said applicant may apply to the Business License Officer for a permit to be issued with payment of one-half of the adopted permit fee. No exemption shall be provided for the Police background check. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.140 - Exemptions from Chapter 5.16. 
This chapter shall not apply to children, under the age of eighteen years, selling items without compensation for schools, charitable organizations, scouts, athletic teams, or other such organized fundraising events. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.150 - Display of Permit. 
Every person to whom a permit and license has been granted shall display the permit in a conspicuous place, or on the front of his or her garment, at all times while peddling, soliciting or canvasing. Peddlers, Solicitors, and Canvassers are required to exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen or Police Officer. Failure to display or exhibit the permit is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.160 - Duty of Police to enforce provisions. 
It Shall be the duty of any Police Officer of the City to require any Person seen soliciting or canvassing, and who is not known by such Officer to be duly licensed, to produce his Peddler's, Solicitor's or Canvasser's license and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any Person found to be violating the same. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.170 - Record of convictions for Violations to be kept. 
The Chief of Police Shall maintain a record and report to the Business License Officer all convictions for Violation of this chapter and the Business License Officer Shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of Violation therein. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.180 - Permit and license—Revocation. 
Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the Code Compliance and Housing Appeals Board after Notice and hearing, for any of the Following causes: 
A.  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the Application for license; 
B.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his Business as Solicitor or as Canvasser; 
C.  Any Violation of this chapter; 
D.  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or 
E.  Conducting the Business of soliciting, or of canvassing, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace of the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.190 - Hearing for license revocation—Notice. 
Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit or license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such Notice Shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five calendar Days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.200 - Appeal from Permit or license denial or Fee adjustment Decision—Hearing procedure. 
Any Person aggrieved by the action of Business License Officer in the denial of a Permit or license as provided in Section 5.16.060, or the action of the City in the assessing of the Fee as provided in Section 5.16.140 Shall have the right of Appeal to the Code Compliance and Housing Appeals Board. Such Appeal Shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk, within fourteen calendar Days after Notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such Person's last known address, a Written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the Appeal. The Code Compliance and Housing Appeals Board Shall set a time and place for a hearing on such Appeal and Notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in Section 5.16.200 for Notice of hearing or revocation. The Decision and order of the Code Compliance and Housing Appeals Board on such Appeal Shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
5.16.210 - Penalty for Violation. 
Any Person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine in accordance with the most recently adopted citation fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 3, 2-2-2016)  
Chapter 5.20 - JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS—PAWNBROKERS—LOAN OFFICES 
 
5.20.010 - Junk Dealers and Collectors—Secondhand Dealers—Pawnbrokers—Definitions—Permit required. 
The terms "Junk Dealer," "Junk Collector," "Secondhand Dealer" and "Pawnbroker," as Used in this chapter, Shall have the same meanings and definitions as prescribed in the California Business and Professions Code, Section 21600 et seq. and California Financial Code, Section 21000 et seq. No license to conduct, manage, or carry on the Business of Junk Dealer, junk Collector, Secondhand Dealer or pawnbroker within the City Shall be issued to any Person, firm, or corporation until a Permit in writing is granted by the Chief of Police, as provided in Section 5.20.020. 
(Ord. 0-12-01 § 1, 2001)  
5.20.020 - Junk Dealers and Collectors—Secondhand Dealers—Pawnbrokers—Permit—Application and Fee—Appeals process. 
A.  Any Person, firm or corporation desiring to manage, conduct or carry on the Business of a Junk Dealer, junk Collector, Secondhand Dealer or Pawnbroker at any place within the City Shall first make Application to the Chief of Police for a Permit to do so. The Application Shall state the name of the Person or Persons desiring to conduct, manage or carry on such Business and the place where the same is to be located. 
B.  A nonrefundable Fee, in an amount determined by Resolution of the City Council, Shall be paid upon submittal of a Permit Application or renewal Application. The Application Fee is for the purpose of defraying the expense Incidental to the processing of said Application. 
C.  Any Applicant aggrieved by a Decision of the Chief of Police with reference to the issuance, conditional issuance, denial, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a Permit pursuant to this section May Appeal the Matter to the Mayor and City Council in accordance with the Following provisions: 
1.  Within ten calendar Days after Written Notice is provided, the Applicant May demand a hearing before the Mayor and City Council as to why the Application should or should not be denied, renewed, issued with conditions, suspended or revoked. 
2.  Such Appeal Shall be presented in writing to the City Clerk along with a statement of the reasons for the Appeal. Upon receipt of the Written Appeal, the City Clerk Shall schedule the Matter before the City Council. such Appeal Shall be heard by the City Council within thirty Days of the receipt of the Written Appeal by the City Clerk. 
3.  At the time set for such hearing, the Mayor and City Council Shall hear the Applicant for the Permit, who May present any facts to show why such Permit should or should not be denied, renewed, issued with conditions, suspended or revoked, and Shall hear from other Persons who May attend the hearing and present reasons why the Permit should or should not be denied, renewed issued with conditions, suspended or revoked. 
4.  At the close of the Public Hearing, the Mayor and City Council Shall determine from the facts produced at the hearing, and from any other facts presented, whether or not the Permit should be denied, renewed, issued with conditions, suspended or revoked, and Shall adopt a Written Resolution accordingly. 
5.  The City Clerk Shall serve Written Notice of the action of the Mayor and City Council to the Applicant within ten calendar Days of such Decision. 
(Ord. 0-13-01 § 2, 2001)  
5.20.030 - Junk Dealers and Collectors—Secondhand Dealers—Pawnbrokers—Penalty for Violation. 
Any Person violating Sections 5.20.010 and 5.20.020 is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, Shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety Days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 610 § 3, 1940)  
5.20.040 - Report required. 
Every Junk Dealer, Secondhand Dealer, Pawnbroker, loan broker and every proprietor, keeper or Owner of any office or other place of Business where money is loaned on Personal Property for a compensation, Shall daily make out and deliver to the Chief of Police, every Day before the hour of twelve noon, on a blank form to be furnished to him by the Chief of Police for that purpose, a full, true, and complete report of all the Property and other valuable Goods, wares, merchandise, or things received on deposit or purchased during the Preceding twenty-four consecutive hours, together with the time, meaning the hour of the Day, when received on deposit, in pawn or purchase, and a description of the Person or Persons by whom left in pledge, or deposited or from whom purchased, and also the true name, as nearly as the same is known to the said Pawnbroker, Junk Dealer, Secondhand Dealer, loan broker, or other Person hereinbefore Designated. The report Shall be Written in the English language in a clear and legible manner. 
(Ord. 565 § 1 (part), 1937)  
5.20.050 - Property holding period. 
All the Property and other valuable Goods, wares, and merchandise received on deposit or purchased should be kept intact in its original state by every Junk Dealer, Secondhand Dealer, Pawnbroker, loan broker and proprietor or Owner of any office or any other place of Business where money is loaned on Personal Property for compensation, for a period of thirty calendar Days from the Day of the purchase, receipt or acquisition of the same, and Shall be Exhibited to the Chief of Police upon demand being made by the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 565 § 1 (part), 1937)  
5.20.060 - Police Chief to furnish form for report—Filing. 
The Chief of Police of the City Shall furnish blanks free of charge, for all Persons required to make reports in accordance with Section 5.20.040, which blanks May be obtained by requests made to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police, upon receipt of the reports Shall file the same in his office, and the same Shall be open to inspection only to the Police Department of the City, or upon order of a duly authorized Court made for that purpose. 
(Ord. 565 § 2, 1937)  
Chapter 5.24 - MASSAGE PARLORS AND MASSAGE TECHNICIANS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, adopted Feb. 2, 2016, amended Ch. 5.24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.24, §§ 5.24.010—5.24.190, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 1143 (part), adopted in 1962; Ord. 1621, § 1(part), adopted in 1982; Ord. O-06-98, §§ 1—8, adopted in 1998; Ord. O-12-01, § 4, adopted in 2001. 
 
5.24.010 - Definitions. 
The following words as used in this chapter shall have the signification attached to them in this chapter unless otherwise clearly apparent from the context: 
"CAMTC Certificate" means a certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council to a Person who has obtained the right to use the title Certified Massage Therapist or Certified Massage Practitioner. 
"Cosmetology Establishment" means an establishment which is licensed pursuant to all applicable Federal, State and Local Laws, rules and regulations to provide primarily the following types of services: (1) shaving or trimming the beard or cutting the hair of a Person; (2) giving facial and scalp Massages or treatments to a Person; (3) shampooing, arranging, dressing, curling, waving, relaxing, permanent waving, coloring or straightening the hair of a Person; (4) removing superfluous hair from the body of any Person by the Use of depilatories, tweezers or chemicals; and (5) cutting, trimming, polishing, tinting, coloring, cleansing, or manicuring the nails of any Person. 
"Licensed Massage Technician" means any Person who administers Massage upon another human being in exchange for anything of value whatsoever while in the possession of a valid CAMTC Certificate. 
"Massage" means and includes any method of treating or manipulating the external parts of the human body for remedial, hygienic, relaxation or any other purpose, whether by means of pressure on, friction against or rubbing, touching, stroking, tapping, kneading, pounding, vibrating or other manner of touching external parts of the human body with the hands or by means of an instrument, such as any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powders, creams, ointment or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. 
"Massage Parlor" means any business wherein any Person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of the same engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, for money or any other consideration whatsoever, the administration to another Person of a Massage or a bath or health treatment involving a Massage. "Massage Parlor" shall not include Cosmetology Establishments. 
"Operator" means all Persons who have an ownership interest in a Massage Parlor or a Cosmetology Establishment and who are responsible for the Day to Day operations of the establishment. 
"Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other group or combination of the same acting as an entity. 
"Unlicensed Massage Technician" means any Person who administers Massage upon another human being in exchange for anything of value whatsoever without a valid CAMTC Certificate. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.020 - Business License—Required/Fee. 
A.  The fee for an owner or operator of a Massage Parlor shall be set in accordance with Chapter 5.02. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.030 - Massage Parlor Permit. 
A.  It is unlawful for any Person to own or operate, in or upon any fixed premises within the City, a Massage Parlor in the absence of a Permit issued pursuant to the provisions hereinafter set forth. 
B.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in subsection A. of this section, Persons who own or operate licensed Cosmetology Establishments and who wish to provide incidental Massage services pursuant to Section 5.24.190, need not obtain a Permit pursuant to this section. 
C.  Each applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee, in an amount determined by Resolution of the City Council, at the time they submit a Permit application or renewal application under this section. The application fee is for the purpose of defraying the expense of investigation, administration and issuance of said Permit. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.040 - Unlicensed Massage Technicians. 
A.  It is unlawful for any Person to engage in, conduct or carry on, attempt to engage in, conduct or carry on, or Permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on the business of an Unlicensed Massage Technician at any location within the City, including a Massage Parlor and a Cosmetology Establishment. 
B.  The requirements of this section shall have no Application and no effect upon, and Shall not be construed as applying to, any physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist fully licensed by the State, or any nurse, assistant, trainee or other Person administering under the immediate direction, supervision and control of any physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist duly licensed by the State. This section does not apply to any treatment administered in good faith in the course of the practice of any healing art or professions by any Person licensed to practice any such art or professions under the Business and Professions Code of the State or any other Law of this State. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.050 - Permit Application contents. 
A.  An applicant for a Massage Parlor Permit shall submit the following information: 
1.  Full name and any aliases heretofore used or currently used, and current addresses; 
2.  Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen Years; 
3.  The business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
4.  Any Massage or similar Business License history of the applicant, including whether such Person, in previous operation, in this or another area, has had his or her license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and any business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation; and 
5.  A full list of all Licensed Massage Technicians who will practice at the premises. For each Licensed Massage Technician listed, applicant shall provide the current CAMTC Certificate number and a copy of the CAMTC Certificate. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.060 - Permit—Procedure. 
Upon payment of all fees, the accurate submission of all information required by the application, and upon proper inspection, the appropriate Permit shall be granted. Any Person denied a Permit pursuant to these provisions may appeal to the City Council in writing, stating reasons why the Permit should be granted. The City Council may grant or deny the Permit. All Permits issued hereunder are nontransferable; provided, however, that a change of location of a Massage Parlor may be permitted pursuant to Section 5.24.080. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.070 - Display of Permit and Certificates. 
Every Person to whom a Massage Parlor Permit has been granted shall display the Permit and the current CAMTC Certificate held by each Licensed Massage Technician employed therein in a conspicuous place at the premises. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.080 - Change of location. 
A change of location of Massage Parlor premises shall be Approved by the Chief of Police provided all applicable laws are complied with and the change of location fee of ten dollars is first paid. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.090 - Permit—Expiration and renewal. 
A.  All Permits issued under provisions hereof shall expire on the first day of January of each year. A renewal Permit may be issued upon application to the collections officer and the payment of a renewal fee of ten dollars. Any application for renewal must be made on or before the fifteenth day of January of each year. In the event of failure to so apply for renewal of a Permit on or before the fifteenth day of January, a Person whose Permit has expired shall be deemed a new applicant and shall have to requalify under the provisions herein. With each new year's renewal application, Persons holding a Massage Parlor Permit must submit a list of all Licensed Massage Technicians who will practice at the premises. For each Licensed Massage Technician listed, applicant shall provide the current CAMTC Certificate number and shall provide copies of CAMTC Certificates of Licensed Massage Technicians who have been employed by the Massage Parlor during the prior year. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.100 - Facilities. 
No Massage Parlor Permit shall be issued unless an inspection discloses that the Massage Parlor complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
A.  A readable sign in compliance with this Code shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the business as a Massage Parlor. 
B.  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code, and additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than forty watts shall be provided each enclosed room or booth where Massage services are being rendered. 
C.  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code. 
D.  Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing any instruments used for Massage Shall be provided. 
E.  Hot and cold running water shall be provided. 
F.  Closed cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen. 
G.  Adequate dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for the patrons. Such facilities shall be equipped with adequate locking devices. 
H.  All walls, ceilings, floors, steam or vapor rooms, and all other physical facilities for the Massage Parlor shall be kept in good repair and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
I.  Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for patrons receiving Massage services. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.110 - Employee—Restrictions. 
No Person holding a Massage Parlor permit may hire any Unlicensed Massage Technician or permit any Unlicensed Massage Technician to perform Massages at the premises. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.130 - Inspection. 
The Chief of Police and/or the collections officer of the City, or their Representatives, may inspect any Massage Parlor or Cosmetology Establishment in which Incidental Massage services are performed pursuant to this Chapter upon either one week's written notice or immediately with a search warrant for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this Chapter are met. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.140 - Records of treatment. 
Every Person owning or operating a Massage Parlor under a Permit as herein provided, and any Person owning or operating a Cosmetology Establishment in which Incidental Massage services are performed pursuant to this Chapter, shall keep a record of the date and hour of each treatment, the name and address of the patron, and the name of the technician administering such treatment. Identical records shall be kept of treatment rendered off the premises, and, in addition, shall describe the address where the treatment was rendered. Such records shall be maintained for a period of two years. Such records shall be open to inspection upon one week's written notice or immediately with a search warrant by officials charged with the enforcement of these provisions for the purposes of Law enforcement and for other purposes related to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.150 - Grounds for revocation. 
A.  A Massage Parlor Permit may be revoked as set forth in Section 5.24.160 on one or more of the following grounds: 
1.  That the holder is guilty of fraud or deceit in her or his application for a Permit; 
2.  That the holder is permitting the practice of Massage in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to, or gratify the lust or passions or sexual desires of another, or that the holder is permitting the practice medicine without a license or engaging in other similar unauthorized practices; 
3.  That the holder has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude. The conviction of a felony shall include the conviction of an offense which, if committed within the State, would constitute a felony under the laws thereof; or 
4.  That the holder has employed, allowed or permitted an Unlicensed Massage Technician to perform Massage at the premises. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.160 - Revocation and Appeal. 
If any Person holding a Permit to carry on the business of a Massage Parlor, as provided in this Chapter, shall conduct or carry on such business contrary to the provisions of this Chapter or any other law relating to or regulating such business, it shall be subject to suspension, revocation, and any other penalty permitted under this Code. 
No Permit shall be suspended or revoked until after a hearing has been conducted before the City Council relating to such suspension or revocation. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and shall be served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon, which notice shall state the grounds of complaint against the holder of such Permit, or against the business carried on by her or him and shall also state the time when and the place where such hearing will be held. Such notice shall be served upon the holder of such Permit by delivering the same to such Person, his manager or agent, or to any Person in charge of, or employed in the place of business of such licensee or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of such Person with some Person of suitable age and discretion. In the event the holder of such license cannot be found, and a service of such Notice cannot be made upon him or her in the manner herein provided, then a copy of such notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to such holder or such licensee at his place of business or residence at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.170 - Abatement. 
Any Massage Parlor or Cosmetology Establishment in which Incidental Massage services are performed pursuant to this Chapter that is operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a Public Nuisance. The City Attorney or the District Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecution in a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. They shall also take such other steps, and shall apply to such courts or court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief, as will abate or remove such Massage Parlor or Cosmetology Establishment and restrain and enjoin any Person from operating, conducting, or maintaining a Massage Parlor or Cosmetology Establishment contrary to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.180 - Severability. 
This Chapter and the various parts, sections and clauses thereof are declared severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. The City Council of the City of Colton declares that it would have passed this Chapter and each part thereof, regardless of the fact that one or more parts thereof be declared unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
5.24.190 - Cosmetology Establishments providing Incidental Massage services. 
A.  Every Cosmetology Establishment providing Massages pursuant to this Chapter shall be duly and adequately licensed at all times pursuant to all State and Local Laws, rules and regulations, including but not limited to, Chapter 5.02 of this Code. 
B.  Massage services shall be performed only by Licensed Massage Technicians. 
C.  Massages shall be provided only in clearly designated, lighted and accessible locations within the Cosmetology Establishment. The provision of Massages, as well as the location in which the all Licensed Massage Technicians operate, shall comply with the Federal, State and Local health, safety and building standards applicable to Cosmetology Establishments, including those statutory and regulatory standards applicable to the operation of Cosmetology Establishments. 
D.  Massage services shall be Incidental to the primary cosmetology services of the Cosmetology Establishment. No more than one Licensed Massage Technician shall be permitted to operate in a Cosmetology Establishment for every three cosmetologists operating in the same Establishment at any one time. If less than three cosmetologists are operating in the Establishment at any one time, there shall be no more than one Licensed Massage Technician operating in the same Establishment at that time. 
E.  It is unlawful for any Person to own or operate a Cosmetology Establishment in which Licensed Massage Technicians operate if the establishment does not comply with all applicable Federal, State and Local health, safety and building standards, including those statutory and regulatory standards applicable to the operation of Cosmetology Establishments. 
(Ord. No. O-03-16, § 4, 2-2-2016)  
Chapter 5.32 - DANCES—DANCE HALLS* 
 
5.32.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter certain words and phrases Shall be construed as set forth in this section. 
"Dine and Dance Clubs" and "Nightclubs" means all Hotels, Restaurants, cafes, road houses, inns, taverns or any place open to the public, where bona fide meals are served, and where the public May dance with or without charge. 
"Nonprofit Organization" means any lawfully organized nonprofit club, society, association or other organization, organized or incorporated for benevolent, charitable, dramatic or literary purposes, which has an established membership and holds meetings at regular intervals for purposes other than to conduct a Public Dance. 
"Notice" means Written Notice, given by personal service upon the addressee, or given by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the Person to be notified at his or her last known address. Service of such Notice Shall be effective upon the completion of personal service, or upon the placing of the same in the custody of the United States Postal Service. 
"Public Dance" or "Dance Club" or "Public Dance Hall" means any place where dancing is regularly conducted on certain Days as a Business, whether for profit or not for profit, and to which the public is admitted, either with or without charge, or at which the public is allowed to participate in the dancing, either with or without charge. 
"Permit" means a Written Permit required and issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-22-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.32.020 - Permit—Required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any Person, firm, association of Persons, or corporation, to conduct or assist in conducting any Dine and Dance Club, Nightclub, Public Dance, Dance Club or Public Dance Hall as these are defined in Section 5.32.010, without first obtaining a Permit to do so as provided in this chapter. 
B.  The Following Shall be exempt from the requirements of obtaining a Permit pursuant to Section 5.32.020: 
1.  Dancing activities by members and Guests of a Private Club where admission is not open to the public; 
2.  Dancing conducted by or on behalf of a Nonprofit Organization when the proceeds, if any, arising from such Public Dance are Used for the purposes of the Nonprofit Organization and no more than one dance is conducted in any one Month. 
(Ord. 0-22-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.32.030 - Permit—Application. 
A.  Any Person, firm, association of Persons, or corporation required to obtain a Permit pursuant to this chapter Shall file a Written Application with the Chief of Police. The Application Shall be signed and acknowledged by the Applicant and Shall include the Following information: 
1.  The name and permanent address of Applicant; 
2.  A detailed description of the location of the dance activities; 
3.  The dates and hours proposed, and the admissions Fee, if any, to be charged; 
4.  The name or names of the Person or Persons having a financial interest in, or having the management or supervision of, Applicant's Business; 
5.  A statement of the nature and character of Applicant's Business, if any, to be carried on in conjunction with such dancing activities; 
6.  Whether or not the Person or Persons having the management or supervision of Applicant's Business have been convicted of a crime within the last five Years, the nature of such offense, and the sentence received therefor; 
7.  Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the Person or Persons having the management or supervision of Applicant's Business as the Chief of Police May deem necessary. 
B.  The Chief of Police May require a waiver of privilege and authorization for release of information and an agreement holding harmless any Persons providing information to the Police Department, and all Employees and officers reporting on the Matter, from the Applicant and any Persons named in the Application as interested in the Business. The Chief of Police May also require a release from liability or damage for the Use of the information by City officials in connection with any Public Hearing conducted for the purpose of Appealing a Decision of the Chief of Police. 
C.  A nonrefundable Fee, in an amount determined by Resolution of the City Council, Shall be filed upon submittal of a Permit Application or renewal Application. 
D.  The Chief of Police, upon receipt of a Written Application for a Permit or renewal Application, Shall conduct an appropriate investigation to determine whether the Permit should be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Chief of Police Shall consider any relevant factual Material relating to such Application, and Shall issue a dance Permit as required by this chapter, upon his or her satisfaction that all applicable provisions of this chapter have been or will be met. 
E.  Applicants applying for a renewal Permit Shall file a renewal Application for Permit no later than thirty Days prior to the expiration of the current Permit. 
(Ord. 0-22-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.32.040 - Permit—Granting—Renewing. 
A.  Prior to granting a Permit or renewal Application for Permit, the Chief of Police Must first satisfy himself or herself that the conduct of the proposed Dine and Dance Club, Nightclub, Public Dance, Dance Club or Public Dance Hall will comport with the public welfare, and for this purpose May consider any facts or evidence bearing on the place where the proposed Dine and Dance Club, Nightclub, Public Dance, Dance Club or Public Dance Hall is to be located, the character, reputation and moral fitness of those who will be in charge of it, and any other facts or evidence intended to enlighten the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police Shall consider the Following: 
1.  Whether the operation, as proposed by the Applicant would comply with all applicable Laws, including, but not limited to, the City's Building, Fire, Zoning and Health Regulations; and 
2.  Whether the Applicant, each Person who has a financial interest in the Business, and each Person who will be directly engaged in the management or operation of the Business: 
a.  Has not been convicted in a Court of competent jurisdiction within the past five Years of any of the Following: fraudulent Business practices, selling or trafficking in stolen Goods, illegal drug activity, illegal gambling, prostitution, assault, battery, rape or other criminal sexual assault, or lewd conduct. If the Dine and Dance Club, Nightclub, Public Dance, Dance Club or Public Dance Hall will be patronized by Minors, the above listed Persons Shall also not have been convicted in a Court of competent jurisdiction within the past five (5) Years of any of the Following: child abuse, sexual misconduct with a Minor, or the illegal serving, providing or selling of Alcoholic Beverages to underage Persons, and 
b.  Is not required to register under Penal Code Section 290 or Health and Safety Code Section 11590; 
3.  Whether the Applicant has not knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the Permit Application process, or on any document required by the City in conjunction with the Application; and 
4.  Whether the location for which the Permit is sought is suitable for the type of operation proposed, and will not pose a Nuisance to the neighborhood or disrupt the peace and solitude of a Residential area. 
B.  The Chief of Police Shall render a Decision on a Written Application for Permit within thirty Days of the receipt of a completed Application or Permit or Application for the renewal of a Permit. 
C.  All Permits issued by the Chief of Police in accordance with this chapter Shall be for a period not to exceed twelve Months. 
(Ord. 0-22-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.32.050 - Permit—Conditions. 
The Chief of Police may, in his or her discretion, impose conditions on the Approval of a Permit to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to protect the public health, safety and welfare. At a minimum, however, all Permits Shall be deemed to include the Following conditions: 
A.  Interior Illuminations. All interior areas where dancing is Permitted Shall maintain an interior illumination of not less one foot candle at floor level for exit areas as provided by the Uniform Building Code. 
B.  Disorderly Conduct. No Person in charge or assisting in the conduct of a Building or location where dancing is Permitted Shall Permit any intoxicated, boisterous or disorderly Person to enter, be in or remain in, or to assist in any portion of the Building where dancing is Permitted. No Person in an intoxicated condition Shall enter or remain in any Building or location where dancing is Permitted or conduct himself in a boisterous or disorderly manner in a Building or location where dancing is Permitted. 
C.  Nontransferability of Permit. Each Permit issued is nontransferable, separate and distinct and no Person Shall exercise the privileges granted under this chapter except the Person, firm, corporation or association or Persons to whom the same was issued and at the specific place for which it was issued. 
D.  Permit Posting and Availability. Each Permit Shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or upon the Premises for which it was issued, and Shall be shown to any City official upon demand. 
E.  Financial Interests and Management. The Permittee Shall make available to the City, upon Written request to do so, a list of the current names and addresses of all Persons who are directly engaged in the management or operation of the Business, all Persons having a financial interest in the Business and all Employees or agents. The Permittee Shall, at the Permittee's sole expense, cause each Person thereafter acquiring a financial interest in the Business, and each Person who becomes directly engaged in the management and operation of the Business to be fingerprinted by the Police Department. 
F.  Prohibitions on Mosh Pits, Crowd Surfing and Stage Diving. No Permittee Shall Permit or allow any dance activities characterized by violent physical contact between and among patrons, or activities where patrons are suspended above the shoulders of other patrons for the purpose of maneuvering such patrons from one Person to another, or activities characterized by having patrons or Performers diving or leaping into a crowd of Persons. Such prohibited activities Shall include, but not be limited to mosh or slam-dancing, crowd or body surfing or stage diving. Patrons engaging in such prohibited activities Shall be deemed to engage in disorderly conduct subject to the provisions of subsection B, of this section. 
G.  On-Site Security. Each Person, firm, corporation or association operating, conducting or carrying on a Dine and Dance Club, Nightclub, Public Dance, Dance Club or Public Dance Hall under the provisions of this chapter Shall employ, at his or her own expense, special security officers, who Shall be in attendance at all times that dancing is allowed, Permitted or conducted at the Establishment for which a Permit is issued. Each special security officer Shall, at a minimum, have training in powers of arrest as specified in California Business and Professions Code Section 7545.2, and Shall possess a guard registration card issued by the California Department of Consumer Affairs Collection and Investigative Services Division. Such special security officers Shall keep the peace at such dances and Shall enforce all Laws applicable thereto, including the conditions of Approval under which the Establishment is required to operate. 
(Ord. 0-22-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.32.060 - Permit—Denial. 
If the Chief of Police finds that any of the facts prohibiting issuance of a Permit or the renewal of a Permit as set forth in Section 5.32.040 exist, the Chief of Police Shall not approve the Application and Shall give Written Notice of his or her Decision to the Applicant and any other Person requesting such Notice, within ten calendar Days of reaching such determination. 
(Ord. 0-22-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.32.070 - Permit—Suspension, nonrenewal and revocation. 
A.  Whenever the Chief of Police finds that the Permit is being exercised contrary to the requirements of this chapter or the conditions of Approval Attached to the Permit, the Chief of Police May suspend or fail to renew any Permit issued pursuant to this chapter upon finding that: 
1.  The operation, as conducted by the Permittee, does not comply with applicable Laws, including but not limited to, the City's Building, Fire, Zoning and Health Regulations; or 
2.  The Business has been cited and has had an applicable alcohol beverage license revoked by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control for acts in Violation of an alcohol license; or 
3.  The proprietor or Person in charge thereof violates or Permits any infraction of any such rules or any Law of the State or any Ordinance of the City, including the conditions of Approval Attached to the dance Permit; or 
4.  A disturbance of the peace in or upon or about the Premises for which the Permit was issued has occurred and the disturbance is caused, acquiesced in, not adequately protected against by reasonable means, or Permitted by the Permittee, its agents, servants, officers or Employees. For purposes of this section, disturbances of the peace Shall include, but not be limited to, public drunkenness, drinking in public, public urination, selling or trafficking in stolen Goods, theft, acts of vandalism, littering, Graffiti, illegal drug activity, illegal gambling, prostitution, assault, battery, rape or other criminal sexual assault, lewd conduct, curfew Violations, child abuse, sexual misconduct with a Minor, or the illegal serving, providing or selling of Alcoholic Beverages to underage Persons; or 
5.  The Permittee has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the Permit Application or on any document required in conjunction therewith; or 
6.  Any Person who has or acquires a financial interest in the Business or any Person who is or becomes directly engaged in the management or operation of the Business has been convicted in a Court of competent jurisdiction of an offense punishable in California or other competent jurisdiction, the underlying facts of which indicate a lack of such qualities as are essential to protect the public health, safety or welfare; or 
7.  The Use for which the Permit has been issued has not been conducted for a period of thirty consecutive Days. 
B.  Any Violation of any provision of this chapter Shall also constitute a Nuisance per se pursuant to California Government Code Section 38775 which the City is entitled to abate pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 731. 
C.  The Chief of Police, in the case of a suspension or nonrenewal, Shall serve the Permittee with Notice of a Written order of suspension or nonrenewal, which Shall be effective immediately if personally served or after same has been deposited with the United States Postal Service. 
D.  The determination of the Chief of Police with regard to a suspension or nonrenewal of a dance Permit Shall be Appealable to the City Council in the manner and time set forth in Section 5.23.080. 
E.  A Written order of suspension Shall be deemed a revocation of the Permit to which it relates unless the Permittee, within ten calendar Days after receiving Notice pursuant to subsection C of this section, files an Appeal from the Written order in the manner set forth in Section 5.32.080. A Written order of nonrenewal Shall be deemed final upon the expiration of the prior Permit unless the Permittee, within ten calendar Days after receiving Notice pursuant to subsection C of this section, files an Appeal from the Written order in the manner set forth in Section 5.32.080. 
F.  When an Appeal is taken, the order Shall be stayed pending a determination thereon by the Mayor and City Council. 
(Ord. 0-22-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.32.080 - Permit—Appeals. 
A.  Any Applicant aggrieved by a Decision of the Chief of Police with reference to the issuance, conditional issuance, denial, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a Permit May Appeal the Matter to the Mayor and City Council in accordance with the Following provisions: 
1.  Within ten calendar Days after Written Notice is provided, the Applicant May demand a hearing before the Mayor and City Council as to why the Application should or should not be denied, renewed, issued with conditions, suspended or revoked. 
2.  Such Appeal Shall be presented in writing to the City Clerk along with a statement of the reasons for the Appeal. Upon receipt of the Written Appeal, the City Clerk Shall schedule the Matter before the City Council. Such Appeal Shall be heard by the City Council within thirty Days of the receipt of the Written Appeal by the City Clerk. 
3.  At the time set for such hearing, the mayor and City Council Shall hear the Applicant for the Permit, who May present any facts to show why such Permit should or should not be denied, renewed, issued with conditions, suspended or revoked, and Shall hear from other Persons who May attend the hearing and present reasons why the Permit should or should not be denied, renewed, issued with conditions, suspended or revoked. 
4.  At the close of the Public Hearing, the Mayor and City Council Shall determine from the facts produced at the hearing, and from any other facts presented, whether or not the Permit should be denied, renewed, issued with conditions, suspended or revoked, and Shall adopt a Written Resolution accordingly. 
5.  The City clerk Shall serve Written Notice of the action of the Mayor and City Council to the Applicant within ten calendar Days of such Decision. 
(Ord. 0-22-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.32.090 - Persons employed as dancing partners—Unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any Person, corporation or association of Persons to employ any Person at a salary or on a Commission, or for anything of value, directly or indirectly whose duty or Business it is or Shall be to dance with or act as dancing partners at any Dine and Dance Club, Nightclub, Public Dance, Dance Club or Public Dance Hall or for any Person to engage in such employment. 
(Ord. 0-22-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.32.100 - Violation—Penalty—Permit rendered void. 
Any Person, association of Persons, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof Shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars and not less than twenty-five dollars, or by imprisonment in the City Jail for a period not exceeding thirty Days and not less than five Days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and upon such conviction, any Permit which May have been granted to such Person, association of Persons, or corporation, to conduct, maintain or carry on any Public Dance Hall or Public Dance, Shall be rendered void, ipso facto, and Shall be revoked by the Chief of Police as provided in Section 5.32.070. 
(Ord. 0-22-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 5.36 - POOL AND BILLIARDS* 
 
5.36.010 - License required—Fee. 
All Owners, possessors or managers of pool or billiard Establishments in the City Shall pay a license Fee as required under the Business License Classification A (Gross Receipts). 
(Ord. 0-15-95 § 1 (part), 1995)  
5.36.020 - Permit—Application. 
Any Person who desires to conduct, maintain, or own in the City, a billiard room or poolroom, with over two pool tables (three or more), Shall make Application therefor in writing for a Conditional Use Permit to the City. Such Application Shall be made on a form prescribed by the City. 
(Ord. 0-15-95 § 1 (part), 1995)  
5.36.030 - Persons under fourteen—Allowing on Premises prohibited—Exception. 
It is unlawful for any Owner, manager, or other Person in charge of any pool or billiard Establishment in the City, either by himself or through an agent, clerk, or Employee, to Permit or allow any Person under the age of fourteen Years (unless accompanied by a Parent or legal guardian) to visit or play any game therein. 
(Ord. 0-15-95 § 1 (part), 1995)  
5.36.040 - Persons under fourteen—Age misrepresentation prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any Person under the age of fourteen Years to misrepresent his age to any Owner, manager, agent, or Employee of any pool or billiard Establishment in the City for the purpose of visiting or playing any game therein. 
(Ord. 0-15-95 § 1 (part), 1995)  
5.36.050 - Age statement—Owner's protection from prosecution. 
Such Owner or proprietor of a pool or billiard Establishment in the City May require a Written statement as to the age of any Person desiring to visit or play any game in such pool or billiard Establishment in the City; and when such statement is Secured in good faith it Shall protect such Owner or proprietor from prosecution. 
(Ord. 0-15-95 § 1 (part), 1995)  
5.36.060 - Age statement—Filing—Open to Police inspection. 
All such signed statements Shall be kept on file and Shall at all times be open to the inspection of any Police Officer of the City. 
(Ord. 0-15-95 § 1 (part), 1995)  
5.36.070 - Wagers on games prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any such Owner, or Person in charge of such pool and billiard Establishment, to allow any wager to be made on any game played therein. 
(Ord. 0-15-95 § 1 (part), 1995)  
5.36.080 - Signs to be posted setting forth rules and regulations. 
At least four Signs Shall be posted and maintained at conspicuous places in and about the billiard room or poolroom, printed in bold one-inch-high letters, placed on a contrasting background, and setting forth the substance of the rules and regulations contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-15-95 § 1 (part), 1995)  
5.36.090 - Compliance with State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC). 
All billiard room or poolroom Establishments in the City Shall be in compliance with requirements issued by the State Alcohol and Beverage Control (ABC) Board. 
(Ord. 0-15-95 § 1 (part), 1995)  
5.36.100 - Violation of Sections 5.36.010 through 5.36.080—Penalty. 
Chapter 18.60, Sections 18.60.030 and 18.60.040 Shall govern for the purpose of enforcement of Sections 5.36.010 through 5.36.080. 
(Ord. 0-15-95 § 1 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 5.38 - FILM PERMITS 
 
5.38.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the Following words or phrases Shall have the meanings as set out herein. 
"Charitable Films" means Motion Pictures produced by a Nonprofit Organization, which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No Person, directly or indirectly, Shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the film, tapes or photos. 
"Chief of Police" means Chief of Police or his Designee. 
"City" means any Department or staff. 
"City Manager" means City Manager or his Designee. 
"Film Permit" means that Permit required to be obtained from the City prior to engaging in staging or shooting Motion Pictures within the City boundaries. 
"Motion Pictures" means and include all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial Motion Pictures, television shows or programs, video tapes, documentaries, advertisements or commercials and still photography. 
"News Media" means the filming, televising or video taping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast by reporters, photographers or cameramen. 
"Production Company" means any entity or individual writing, editing, recording or shooting Motion Pictures, Charitable Films or Student Films within the City boundaries. 
"Student Films" means Motion Pictures produced as Part of the instructional program of an accredited School or college. 
(Ord. 0-3-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.38.020 - Requirements. 
A.  No Production Company Shall Use any public or Private Property Facility or residence for the purpose of making Motion Pictures without first obtaining a filming Permit from the City unless exempt under Section 5.38.070, Permit exemptions. 
B.  The City Council may, at such time as they deem necessary, establish a Permit issuance Fee. Such Permit issuance Fee Shall not exceed the reasonable cost of issuing the Permit, and Shall be in addition to any Fee payable for the Use of Public Property for such purposes. 
(Ord. 0-3-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.38.030 - Application—Filing and Fee. 
A.  Filing. 
1.  Applications Shall be filed at least three Business Working Days prior to initiating any staging or production on the identified location. 
2.  The Film Permit issuing authority Shall be the City Manager. 
3.  Applications May be obtained and Shall be filed with the City Manager's Office or the official Designated by the City Manager as the Film Permit coordinator. 
B.  Fee Schedule. 
1. Application and Permit Fee 	$200.00 
2. Temporary Business License Fee 	10.00 
3. Use of City personnel Actual cost 	(refer to Section 5.38.040) 
4. User Fee 	$0.00 
 
(Ord. 0-3-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.38.040 - Payment—Special City Services. 
A.  The Production Company Shall reimburse the City for City personnel provided to the company (i.e., police, utilities, fire and Streets) for the purpose of assisting the production. 
B.  A deposit May be required based on the City Department staffing and activity, referred to in subsection A of this section, if the actual cost cannot be determined prior to the start of the production. 
(Ord. 0-3-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.38.050 - Rules and regulations. 
A.  Rules. As the issuing authority for the City, the City Manager is authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations, governing the form, time and location of any Motion Picture activity set forth within the City. All the rules and regulations governing the Motion Pictures Shall be based upon the Following criteria: 
1.  The health and safety of all Persons; 
2.  Avoidance of undue disruption of all Persons within the selected area; 
3.  The safety of Property; and 
4.  Traffic congestion at selected locations. 
B.  Regulations. 
1.  The Production Company Shall be required to submit a Film Permit Application request at least three Business Working Days prior to the date on which such entity desires to conduct an activity for which the Film Permit is required. Should any Part of the activity interfere with traffic or involve potential public safety hazards, the City Manager May require at least fifteen Working Days Notice in advance to issue the Film Permit. 
2.  No Motion Pictures, including set up, dismantling or other production activity Shall be done before six a.m. or after ten p.m. Should the Production Company requests to film outside these hours (i.e., earlier than six a.m. or later than ten p.m.), in a residential area, the Production Company is required to notify the affected parties (e.g., neighbors) three Days prior to initiating production. This Notice Must include the date(s), hours, company, and contact name and telephone number in order to accommodate any telephone inquiries. 
3.  The Production Company Must note the Use of gunfire, explosions, sirens, public address systems, animals, bullhorns, or other Noise-creating devices on the Application. Such Uses May require the City assign standby personnel to the site (Section 5.38.030). Failure to notify the City regarding these types of Uses May result in immediate suspension or revocation of the Film Permit by the City Manager. 
4.  The Production Company Shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment and the cleanup of trash and debris. The area Used Shall be clean of trash and debris upon completion of production at the site and restored to its original state before leaving the site. 
5.  The Production Company Shall obtain the Property Owner's Written Permission and/or lease for Use of Property not owned or controlled by the City. Written Permission Must be received from affected Property Owners and Tenants at least three Business Working Days in advance of initiating production. Said Written authorizations Shall be available for review by the City when deemed necessary. 
6.  A parking plan Shall be submitted for all Vehicles parked on the City Streets and roads. This parking plan Shall be Attached to the Application when submitted to the City Manager or his Designee for review. Prior to parking equipment, trucks, and/or cars in no parking zones, the Production Company Shall obtain proper clearance from the Chief of Police. 
7.  When filming in a Flood control channel the Production Company Must vacate the channel when the Permit indicates, to allow for water releases. When filming in or on Flood control Properties, the Flood control agency Must be named as an additional insured. 
8.  For Motion Pictures that would impair traffic flow, the Production Company Shall consult with and comply with the orders of the Chief of Police. As deemed necessary or requested by the Chief of Police, the Production Company Shall furnish and install advance-warning Signs and any other traffic control devices in conformance with the manual of traffic controls, State of California, Department of Transportation. All appropriate safety precautions Must be taken and Approved by the Chief of Police. 
9.  For Student Films, the Production Company Shall submit a letter Written on School letterhead by a School Administrator or instructor stating the Applicant is currently enrolled in a recognized U.S. Education Institution. This letter Shall indicate the Motion Picture is not for commercial release and that the Production Company agrees in writing to pay the City all waived Fees in the event the Motion Picture is released for Commercial Purposes. 
(Ord. 0-3-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.38.060 - Permit—Modifications. 
Upon the request of the Production Company, the City Manager Shall have the power, upon a showing of good cause, to change the date for which the Permit has been issued, provided established limitations are complied with in respect to time and location. 
(Ord. 0-3-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.38.070 - Permit—Exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter Shall not apply to or affect reporters, photographers and/or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, or similar entities engaged in on the spot broadcasting of news events concerning those Persons, scenes or occurrences, which are in the news and of general public interest. 
B.  The production of Motion Pictures solely for private-Family Use. 
C.  The production of Motion Pictures for Use by the City of Colton. 
D.  The production of Charitable Films. 
E.  The production of Student Films. 
(Ord. 0-3-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.38.080 - Liability provisions. 
A.  Liability Insurance. Before issuing a Permit, a certificate of insurance will be required in an amount not less than one million dollars naming the City as a co-insured for protection against claims of third Persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths, and Property damages. The City Officers and Employees Shall be named as additional insured. The certificate Shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after thirty Days Written Notice to the City. A Copy of the certificate will remain on file. 
B.  Workers Compensation Insurance. The Production Company Shall comply with all applicable Federal and State requirements for workers compensation insurance for all Persons operating under a Permit. 
C.  Hold Harmless Agreement. The Production Company Shall execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by the City prior to the issuance of the Film Permit. 
D.  Faithful Performance Bond. To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, the Production Company May be required to post a refundable faithful performance bond (amount to be determined based on the activity) at the time Application is submitted. Upon completion of production at the site and inspection of the site by the City, the bond May be returned to the Responsible Party. 
(Ord. 0-3-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.38.090 - Failure to obtain a Permit or abide by its terms. 
A.  Failure to comply with the terms of the Film Permit Shall constitute grounds for its revocation by the City Manager or Designee. 
B.  Violation of the terms and conditions of the Film Permit or Violations of any provision of this chapter is considered a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 0-3-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 5.40 - TRAMPOLINE CENTERS 
 
5.40.010 - Definitions. 
A.  As Used in this chapter, "Trampoline" means rebound-tumbling equipment utilizing a fabric bed or surface designed to provide resilience by virtue of its own elasticity or that provided by an elastic or spring suspension system, or both, within a stable frame and intended to be Used for jumping, bouncing, or acrobatic tumbling. 
B.  "Trampoline Center" means a place where Trampolines or rebound-tumbling equipment is provided and maintained for public Use. 
(Ord. 1064 § 1, 1960)  
5.40.020 - License required. 
Every Person, firm or corporation Exhibiting, showing or operating a Trampoline Center and charging a Fee for the same Shall procure a license and pay a quarterly license Fee under and pursuant to Ordinance No. 412 of the City and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. 1064 § 2, 1960)  
5.40.030 - Liability insurance required. 
An Operator of a Trampoline Center Shall procure and at all times maintain in full force and effect a policy of liability insurance for each Trampoline, insuring the same against liability arising from personal injury within limits of not less than twenty-five thousand dollars for any one Person for each occurrence and fifty thousand dollars for any one occurrence. The Operator Shall file a true Copy of his insurance policy or policies with the Director of Finance and Shall authorize his insurance Carrier to notify the Director of Finance in the event of any lapse in said insurance. 
(Ord. 1500 § 1, 1976: Ord. 1408 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1972; Ord. 1064 § 3, 1960)  
5.40.040 - Equipment—Layout requirements. 
A.  Trampoline equipment Shall be located on a level surface in such a way as to be within view of the Operator or attendant at all times. 
B.  The spacing of Trampoline units Shall conform to the Following minimum dimensions as measured from the inside edge of the frame: 
1.  Three feet between sides of units; 
2.  Four feet between ends of units; 
3.  Five feet from ends to nearest Fence, Building, or other similar construction; 
4.  Three feet from sides or corners to nearest Fence, Building, or other similar construction. 
C.  The area surrounding the Trampoline equipment Shall be surfaced to prevent a dust Nuisance and have a reasonably level surface of pea gravel or equivalent type of Material from a safety and dust control standpoint. 
(Ord. 1064 § 4, 1960)  
5.40.050 - Equipment—Condition. 
Trampoline equipment Shall be maintained in good state of repair. Trampoline equipment which has broken webbing Shall not be Used. The Operator thereof Shall take precautionary measures to prevent broken springs from disengaging from the assembly. 
(Ord. 1064 § 5, 1960)  
5.40.060 - Pit construction—Depth. 
Pits for rebound tumbling centers Shall be so constructed that they will not interfere with the operation of the equipment and of a depth not less than three feet nor more than four feet at centers. 
(Ord. 1064 § 6(A), 1960)  
5.40.070 - Pit construction—Framing. 
Such pits Shall be so framed that the Trampoline equipment is held in a level position and is supported on a solid stable surface. Lumber Used as framing for pits Shall be not less than two inches in thickness and Shall be securely connected together. 
(Ord. 1064 § 6(B), 1960)  
5.40.080 - Padding. 
The frames of Trampoline equipment Shall be completely padded to provide reasonable safety. Pads two inches thick filled with cotton liners Shall be deemed to meet this requirement. 
(Ord. 1064 § 7, 1960)  
5.40.090 - Fencing. 
The entire Trampoline Center Shall be completely enclosed by fencing not less than five feet in height. 
(Ord. 1064 § 8, 1960)  
5.40.100 - Inspection. 
The Building official Shall inspect annually, or as frequently as he deems advisable, every Trampoline Center. 
(Ord. 1064 § 9, 1960)  
5.40.110 - Conformance to Uniform Building Code. 
Nothing herein Shall modify, change or alter any applicable provision, not in conflict herewith, of Chapter 15.04 adopting the Uniform Building Code of the City. 
(Ord. 1064 § 10, 1960)  
5.40.120 - Rules and regulations. 
The Owner or Operator of a Trampoline Center Shall enforce, and all customers using Trampoline equipment Shall observe and obey the Following rules and regulations which Shall be printed in clear, easily read letters not less than one inch in size, and posted in one or more conspicuous and well-lighted locations within the Trampoline Center: 
A.  Not over one Person on the apparatus at a time; 
B.  No flips, twists, or similar difficult routines unless under the immediate supervision of a qualified instructor, or until qualified as demonstrated by an officially acceptable certificate or as determined by the Operator. In case of dispute with a patron, the Operator's ruling Shall be final; 
C.  No Use of equipment in shoes or in bare feet; 
D.  All patrons Shall strictly and promptly comply with requests or requirements of Operator; 
E.  No Use while under the influence of any Alcoholic Beverage or when not in condition to safely Use the equipment, as determined by Operator; 
F.  No jumping from apparatus to apparatus or to any point outside the frame of the apparatus; 
G.  No actions allowed which will or May seriously distract or interfere with a Performer; 
H.  No children under six Years of age Shall be allowed; 
I.  No Smoking, eating or drinking while using the equipment. 
(Ord. 1064 § 11, 1960)  
5.40.130 - Supervision. 
A.  A Trampoline Center, whenever open for Use, Shall be under direct supervision of as many supervisors as are necessary to comply with the posted rules. 
B.  The supervisor Shall be observing all equipment units whenever they are in Use. 
C.  Each unit Shall be numbered or otherwise clearly Designated. 
D.  A suitable loudspeaker system Shall be maintained to enforce the rules except where there are less than eight units. 
E.  There Shall be at least one supervisor on active supervising duty for each twelve units or fractional Part which are in Use. 
(Ord. 1064 § 12, 1960)  
5.40.140 - Qualifications of supervisors. 
A Trampoline supervisor Shall be: 
A.  Eighteen Years of age or over; 
B.  Of good moral character; 
C.  Trained and experienced in the supervision and control of personnel, both skilled and unskilled, in the art of rebound tumbling; 
D.  Physically and otherwise fully fit to manage the Facility. 
(Ord. 1064 § 13, 1960)  
5.40.150 - Accident handling and reporting. 
The Operator of a Trampoline Center Shall: 
A.  Direct to competent care for handling and disposition all accidents and injuries; 
B.  Unless the County Health Officer agrees to accept a verbal or telephonic report, report in writing to the County Health Officer all accidents of a nature to cause unconsciousness, broken or sprained extremities or bones, removal, breaking or loosening of teeth, hemorrhaging or lacerations which May require suturing and eye injuries; 
C.  Maintain on the Premises records of all medical aid or care administered; 
D.  Keeping in a place readily available at all times to himself and his Employees, the telephone number of available Emergency Service. 
(Ord. 1064 § 14, 1960)  
5.40.160 - Telephone required. 
The Operator of a Trampoline Center Shall maintain on the Premises a telephone which Shall be available for Emergency Use at all times during which the Trampoline Center is in operation. 
(Ord. 1064 § 15, 1960)  
5.40.170 - First aid equipment. 
The Operator of a Trampoline Center at all times Shall maintain on the Premises and replenish as necessary an adequate first aid kit of at least sixteen units, as recommended by the American Red Cross First Aid Manual. 
(Ord. 1064 § 16, 1960)  
5.40.180 - Sanitation of Premises required. 
The Operator of a Trampoline Center Shall keep the Premises and all facilities in a clean condition. He Shall provide, as needed to prevent litter, waste containers and appropriate Signs. 
(Ord. 1064 § 17, 1960)  
5.40.190 - Drinking facilities. 
The Operator of a Trampoline Center Shall provide on the Premises drinking facilities which Shall consist of either a sanitary drinking fountain or bottled water and paper cups available in a suitable sanitary dispenser. 
(Ord. 1064 § 18, 1960)  
5.40.200 - Toilet facilities. 
On the Premises of a Trampoline Center the Operator Shall, at all times maintain not less than one water-flush type toilet for each sex. 
(Ord. 1064 § 19, 1960)  
Chapter 5.44 - SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
5.44.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The intent of this chapter is to provide a regulatory framework for Permitting Special Events. The Use of City Streets or other City-owned or controlled Property and Private Property by large groups causes wear and tear on the turf, Park equipment and facilities. Further, it requires City staff time to provide coordination. Such Uses also subject neighboring Residents to excessive Noise and traffic, particularly when the Property or Facility is small or the Use is intense. As such, the purpose of this chapter is to ensure that Special Events are conducted so as not to violate any other Ordinance or regulation of the City or cause any detrimental effects to surrounding Properties and the community. The provisions set forth in this chapter Shall establish criteria for characterizing events as "Special Events" and standards and conditions for approving and Permitting such Special Events. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.020 - Definitions. 
The Following words, terms and phrases when Used in this chapter Shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Administrative Authority" means the City Manager of the City of Colton or his or her Designee. 
"Air-Medical Operations Permit" means a Permit issued by the Fire Chief or his or her Designee, allowing the landing and takeoff of EMS air rescue or air Ambulance helicopters for the purposes of Special Event stand-by services. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Colton or his or her Designee. 
"Departmental Service Charges" means the actual costs which a Department of the City incurs in connection with activities for which a Permit is required under this chapter, including, but not limited to, the costs of administration or coordination services, support personnel, equipment, Materials and supplies. 
"Free Speech Rights" means expressive activity protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article 1, Section 2 of the California Constitution, provided that such activity is the principal purpose of the event. 
"Indigent Natural Person" means a Person eligible for County relief and support as an indigent Person under Section 17000 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code. 
"Medical Operations Permit" means a Permit issued pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1797.201, which gives the City the right to require and evaluate, modify, approve or reject the "medical operations plan" of any Applicant wishing to conduct a Special Event within the City. 
"Parade" means a Parade, procession, march, pageant, review, ceremony or exhibition which is conducted in, on, upon or along any portion of any Public Street, Sidewalk or other Property owned or controlled by the City, so as to impede, obstruct, impair or interfere with the free Use of such Public Street, Sidewalk or other Public Property of the City; except, however, the provisions of this chapter Shall not apply to funeral processions. 
"Special Event" means any temporary event, as further described herein, not exceeding thirty Days whether indoors or outdoors, or on improved or unimproved public or Private Property, which is inconsistent with the permanent Use to which the Property May legally be put, or the Occupancy levels Permitted thereon. "Special Event" Shall also refer to any activity that May result in the closure of any Public Streets, or any activities which May temporarily require the installation of Materials or devices using Building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, flammable or similar Materials. "Special Events" May include, but are not limited to, short-term events such as any show, circus, concert, festival, carnival, dance open to the public, exhibition, lecture, auction, rave, boxing match, wrestling match, walk-a-thon, marathon run, cycling event, sporting event, Permitted film production event, farmers' market, pumpkin patch, outdoor Sales, including, but not limited to, Vehicle Sales, or any combination thereof which members of the public are invited for free or admitted for a Fee. All "Special Events" Shall be classified under one of the Following categories: 
1.  "Major Special Events" Shall mean those events that impact multiple Departments within the City and (a) have participation by five hundred or more Persons, or (b) will result in the closure of a City roadway, Street, Right-of-Way, or Highway, or more than fifty percent of a City Park (i.e., carnivals, Parades, festivals, car races, marathon events, Street fairs). 
2.  "Minor Special Events" Shall mean those events that impact multiple City Departments and (a) have participation by less than five hundred Persons, or (b) will have an impact on City rights-of-way (i.e., 5K/10K races, Bicycle rides, boxing matches, Block parties, grand openings). 
3.  "Miscellaneous Special Events" means those events which impact only one City Department, including, but not limited to, the Following Departments: 
a.  Community Development; 
b.  Police; 
c.  Community Services; or 
d.  Fire. 
"Miscellaneous Special Events" include, but Shall not be limited to, Park and Facility usage, such as usage of the Fleming Park band shell, which does not fall into the categories of major or Minor Special Events as defined in this section, as well as short-term or long-term Use of athletic Fields by sports organizations, sports leagues or athletic leagues which serve youth (seventeen Years of age or younger) or adults (eighteen Years of age or older). 
4.  "Working Day" means a weekday (e.g., Monday through Thursday) in which City hall is open and conducts Business. Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays are not Working Days within the meaning of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-13-06 § 2, 2006; Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.030 - Special Events Committee established. 
A Special Events Committee composed of Representatives from each City Department is hereby established. The Committee will meet on an as-needed basis to review Special Event Applications. The chair for the Special Events Committee Shall be the Administrative Authority. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.040 - Permit required. 
No Person or organization Shall conduct, operate, maintain, organize, advertise, or sell or furnish tickets for a Special Event or Permit its Premises to be Used for any Special Event without first obtaining a Special Event Permit as provided for by this chapter. Special Event Permits for events which fall into the "major," "minor" and "miscellaneous" Special Events categories Shall be Approved by the Administrative Authority and issued prior to the commencement of the Special Event. No Permit issued under the provisions of this chapter Shall be transferable or movable to another location or another Applicant. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.050 - Permit Application—Filing and Fee. 
A.  Applications for Permits to conduct Special Events Shall be completed in writing on a form provided by the City and Shall be filed within the time frames below: 
1.  Major Special Events. Applications Shall be filed with the Administrative Authority not less than sixty Working Days prior to the opening date of the event. 
2.  Minor Special Events. Applications Shall be filed with the Administrative Authority not less than thirty Working Days prior to the opening date of the event. 
3.  Miscellaneous Special Events. Applications Shall be filed with the Department directly affected by the event, according to City policy as established by City Council Resolution, not less than seven Working Days prior to the event. If an Application on its face demonstrates that the Applicant wishes to exercise his or her Free Speech Rights, as defined in this chapter, such Application Shall be filed not less than four Working Days prior to the event. 
B.  Only one "Major Special Event" or one "Minor Special Event" Permit May be obtained every three Months for any particular event site. This subsection, however, Shall not apply to an event involving an exercise of Free Speech Rights. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided by this Code or other applicable Law, rule or regulation, or by the terms of a Permit, license, lease or contract which has been specifically authorized by the City Council, the Permit Application Fee for Use of City Streets or other City-owned or controlled Property and Private Property pursuant to this chapter Shall be established by the City Council by Resolution and is non-refundable. The Applicant Shall obtain all required Permits and pay all Fees required under this chapter and any other Permits and Fees required under this Code. Any Applicant who pays an Application Fee under this chapter for a City-sponsored Special Event Shall be exempt from paying a Business Application Fee under Chapter 5.02 of this Code. 
D.  Any 501(c)(3) Nonprofit Organization May claim an exemption from the established Fee schedule by filing proof of such status and explaining why such an exemption is appropriate. Such an exemption Shall only be granted when the Administrative Authority determines that there is an alternate source of funding available to cover the cost of the City inspection necessitated by the event. 
E.  Any indigent, natural Person who cannot apply for a Permit because of an inability arising from such indigence to pay this Application Fee Shall not be required to pay the Fee. Application for indigent status Shall be made at the time the Permit Application and Shall be accompanied by such relevant information and documentation as may, in the opinion of the Administrative Authority, be reasonable necessary to verify such status. 
F.  If an Application is filed after the time prescribed in this chapter, the Administrative Authority Shall immediately investigate to determine if he or she has sufficient time to process the Application, what the effects of the proposed Special Event on traffic and other conditions May be, and whether Police Services May be available for such Special Event. The Applicant Shall have the opportunity to demonstrate that the circumstances giving rise to the proposed Special Event did not reasonably allow the Applicant to file for a Permit within the time prescribed and that imposition of the time limitation would unreasonably restrict the right of free speech or assembly. If such demonstration is made, and the Administrative Authority makes none of the findings set forth in Section 5.44.070 of this chapter, he or she Shall issue a Permit despite the lack of advanced Notice. 
(Ord. 0-13-06 § 1, 2006; Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.060 - Permit Application—Required information. 
Applications Shall be upon a form which is furnished by or acceptable to the Administrative Authority. Each Application Shall provide full, complete and detailed information including, but not limited to, the Following: 
A.  All Special Events: 
1.  The name, address, telephone number and California Driver's License number or California Identification number of both the Applicant and any alternative contact Person; 
2.  If the event is proposed to be sponsored by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the organization, and the authorized head of the organization. If the Application is made by a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners Must appear. If the Application is a corporation, the Application Must be signed by the president, vice president and secretary thereof and Must contain the addresses of the corporate officers and a certified Copy of the articles of incorporation Shall be submitted with the Application; 
3.  The name, address and telephone number, and California Driver's License number or California Identification number of the Person(s) who will be present and in charge of the event on the Day(s) of the event. All Persons listed pursuant to this subsection Shall be deemed responsible for the Special Event and any and all conditions imposed pursuant to a Permit; 
4.  The nature/purpose of the event; 
5.  Date and estimated start and ending time of the event, and Days and hours of operation, including set-up and clean-up times; 
6.  Location of the event, including its boundaries; 
7.  Site Plan and/or Building Elevations for the event; 
8.  Estimated number of participants and spectators in the event, including estimated number of vendors and contractors involved with the event; 
9.  Number of Applicant's agents or Employees to be working at the event; 
10.  The type and estimated number of Vehicles, animals, and Structures which will be Used at the event; 
11.  The size, shape and Material of Signs or banners to be posted at the event or along a Parade route, if any, and the method of posting. All Signs posted Must be in compliance with the regulations concerning Signs as set forth in Chapter 18 of this Code; 
12.  Description of the availability of water and toilets; 
13.  Description of any sound amplification equipment which will be Used at the event. Any amplification of sound Must comply with the City's Noise standards as set forth in Chapter 10.16 of this Code; 
14.  Whether any food, beverages or merchandise will be sold at the event; 
15.  Whether any Alcoholic Beverages will be sold or dispensed at the event. Any Sale or consumption of Alcoholic Beverages at a Special Event Must comply with the City's regulations regarding the public consumption and possession of alcohol beverages as set forth in Section 9.20 of this Code; 
16.  Whether volunteers will be employed to monitor the event; 
17.  Description of Vehicle Parking Spaces needed, Vehicle Access and on-site traffic control for the event. A Plot plan showing arrangement of the facilities including those for parking, egress and ingress Shall be submitted with the Application; 
18.  Description of type of Medical Services and fire protection services to be provided for the event such as first aid stations, medical triage areas and stand-by ground Ambulances; 
19.  If medical aircraft such as air rescue or air Ambulance Services will be utilized, a description of the type of aircraft, the estimated arrival time, location of the landing site and contact Person responsible for air operations; 
20.  A statement of any specialized medical resources or personnel that are required by the rules or regulations of the event, above the level of advanced first aid, in order for the event to be conducted, i.e. physicians for boxing matches; 
21.  Number of tickets sold at a previous event, if applicable, and number of tickets anticipated to be sold at the event; 
22.  If it is proposed or expected that spectators or participants will remain at Night or overnight, a statement of arrangements for illuminating the Premises and for camping or similar facilities; 
23.  A statement of the proposed cleanup of the Premises and removal of trash after the event has concluded; 
24.  The name, telephone number, address and Business License number of any Business providing security officers. 
B.  Additional information required for Parades, races and other events affecting City rights-of-way: 
1.  The assembly point for the event, the time at which units of the Parade or other event will begin to assemble; 
2.  The route to be traversed; 
3.  Whether the Parade or other event will occupy all or only a portion of the Streets proposed to be traversed; 
4.  The intervals of space to be maintained between units of a Parade or other event; 
5.  The number, types and size of floats, if any; 
6.  Material and maximum size of any Signs or banners to be carried along the route. 
C.  The Administrative Authority May request supplemental Application information from the Applicant which the Administrative Authority deems reasonably necessary, under the particular circumstances of the Special Event Application, to determine whether to approve, deny or conditionally approve a Special Event Permit Application. A request for supplemental Application information Shall not effect the relevant Application processing time period set forth in this chapter. 
D.  An Application will be deemed incomplete if it tacks any information required by Section 5.44.060 of this chapter. An incomplete Application Shall not trigger the relevant Application processing times prescribed in Section 5.44.050 of this chapter until the Applicant submits a full, complete and detailed Application. The City reserves the right to amend or modify the Permit Application form at any time. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.070 - Permit issuance or denial. 
A.  The Administrative Authority Shall approve, conditionally approve or deny Applications for Special Event Permits based, on compliance or noncompliance with the provisions set forth within this chapter. The Administrative Authority May refer the Application to such appropriate City Departments as he or she deems necessary from the nature of the Application for review, evaluation, investigation and recommendations by the Departments regarding Approval or disapproval of the Application. 
B.  The Administrative Authority Shall issue the Permit, conditioned upon the Applicant's Written agreement to comply with any and all terms of this chapter and any conditions imposed on the issuance of the Permit, unless he or she finds that: 
1.  The information contained in the Application is false or intentionally misleading, the Applicant failed to remit Fees and deposits, or failed to provide proof of insurance and an indemnification agreement if required, or failed to provide supplemental Application information after having been notified; 
2.  The temporary Use of the City's rights-of-way or Property will endanger public health, welfare or safety for the reasons set forth herein, and reasonable adjustments to the community traffic control, Street and Property maintenance, or police, fire or Ambulance protection would not alleviate such danger: 
a.  An Application received prior in time has been Approved for the same time and place so close as to cause undue traffic congestion or exceed the ability of the City to provide police and other services for both Uses, events or activities; 
b.  The time, route or size of the proposed Use, event or activity will disrupt traffic within the City beyond practical solution; 
c.  The proposed Use, event or activity will prevent proper police, fire or Ambulance Service to contiguous areas or interfere with Access to fire stations and fire hydrants; 
d.  The location of the proposed Use, event or activity will substantially interfere with construction or Maintenance Work scheduled upon or along the City Streets or rights-of-way; 
e.  The preparation for or the conduct of the proposed Use, event or activity will unduly impede, obstruct or interfere with the City's ability to perform municipal functions or furnish City services in the vicinity of the event area; 
f.  The Parade or other event moving along a route within the City and on City rights-of-way will not move from its point of origin to its point of termination in three hours or less; 
g.  The event Shall occur at a time when a School is in session, at a route or location adjacent to the School or class thereof, and the Noise created by the activities of the event would substantially disrupt the educational activities of the School or class thereof; 
h.  The event Shall occur at a route or location adjacent to a Hospital, fire station or Place of Worship and the Noise or other disruptions created by the event would substantially disrupt the activities of said Hospital, fire station or Place of Worship. 
C.  Within thirty Working Days after the filing of the Permit Application for a "Major Special Event," the Administrative Authority Shall issue, conditionally approve or deny the Permit, and Shall notify the Applicant, in writing, of the action taken. 
D.  Within five Working Days after the filing of the Permit Application for a "Minor Special Event," the Administrative Authority Shall issue, conditionally approve or deny the Permit, and Shall notify the Applicant, in writing, of the action taken. 
E.  Within five Working Days after the filing of the Permit Application for a "Miscellaneous Special Event," the Department Head, or his or her Designee, of the Department directly affected by the event Shall issue, conditionally approve or deny the Permit and Shall notify the Applicant, in writing, of the action taken. If a Permit Application on its face demonstrates that the Applicant wishes to exercise his or her Free Speech Rights, as defined in this chapter, the Department Head, or his or her Designee, Shall issue, conditionally approve or deny the Permit Application within three Working Days after the filing of the Permit Application and Shall notify the Applicant of the action taken. 
F.  In those instances when issuance or denial occurs three Days or less before the proposed Use, event or activity the Administrative Authority is authorized to Use other reasonable means of notification provided the Applicant is provided with actual notification. 
G.  If the Administrative Authority denies the Permit, he or she Shall set forth the reasons for denial. The Administrative Authority's Decision Shall be final unless Appealed. 
H.  If the Application could be Approved subject to conditions, as authorized in Section 5.44.080 of this chapter, the Administrative Authority Shall, instead of denying the Application, conditionally approve the Application subject to such corrections and conditions. The conditions imposed Shall provide only for such modifications of the Applicant's proposal as are reasonably necessary to avoid situations described in subsections (B)(2)(b) through (B)(2)(h) of this section. 
(Ord. 0-13-06 § 3, 2006; Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.080 - Permit conditions. 
The Administrative Authority May condition the issuance of a Special Events Permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner of the event, and such requirements as necessary to protect the safety of Persons and Property, and the control of traffic, provided such conditions Shall not unreasonably restrict Free Speech Rights. Such conditions include, without limitation: 
A.  Alteration of the date, time, route or location of the event proposed on the event Application; 
B.  Conditions concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of Parade or other events occurring along a route; 
C.  Conditions concerning accommodation of Pedestrian, adequate Parking Space, or vehicular traffic and control, including restricting the event to only a portion of a Street traversed; 
D.  Requirements for the Use of traffic cones, delineators or barricades; 
E.  Requirements for the provision of first aid, medical or sanitary facilities; 
F.  Requirements for Use of event monitors, and providing Notice of Permit conditions to event participants; 
G.  Restrictions on the number and type of Vehicles, animals or Structures at the event, and inspection and Approval of floats, Structures and decorated Vehicles for safety purposes; 
H.  Compliance with animal protection Ordinances and Laws; 
I.  Requirements for Use of trash containers, cleanup and restoration of City Property or Right-of-Way; 
J.  Restrictions on Use of amplified sound; 
K.  Notification to Businesses and residences along the affected Street(s); 
L.  Compliance with any relevant Ordinance or, Law and obtaining any legally required Permit or license; 
M.  Restrictions on the consumption of Alcoholic Beverages; 
N.  Inspection by City staff or Designee(s) before, during and after the event; 
O.  Requirements for additional Police Officers or Security Officers for an event of five hundred or more participants. Said Security Officers Must be Uniformed guards licensed by the State and in possession of a valid guard card at all times during the Special Event. Said Security Officers Must present their valid guard cards upon the request of any Police Officer. This subsection, however, Shall not apply to an event involving an exercise of Free Speech Rights; 
P.  Requirements for additional fire protection if the event is located in or near a Hazardous fire area; 
Q.  Requirements for the provision of fire protection equipment or the removal of flammable vegetation, Materials or other fire hazards; 
R.  Requirements for an ample supply of portable water for drinking and sanitation purposes on the Premises of the event. All water Shall meet Federal, State and County Health and Safety Standards; 
S.  Requirements that food concessionaires be licensed and operated under a valid Health Department Permit pursuant to State and Local Laws and that an adequate supply of food available at the event for each Day of operation to adequately feed the number of Persons expected to be in attendance; 
T.  Requirements for the Use of electrical illumination for Special Events occurring after dark; 
U.  Requirements for the Use of overnight camping facilities and overnight areas that meet the requirements of Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations for Mobilehome Parks, special Occupancy trailer Parks and campgrounds, including travel trailer Parks, recreational trailer Parks, temporary trailer Parks, Incidental camping areas and tent camps, for events that allow Persons attending the event to remain on the Premises overnight. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.090 - Business License required. 
A Business License Shall be required for any Special Event which involves the conduct of Business within the City of Colton as defined by Chapter 5.02 of this Code. Said Permit Application Shall be reviewed and Approved by the Administrative Authority and the Business License officer or his or her Designee, under the provisions of this Code. Any Applicant who pays an Application Fee under this chapter for a City-sponsored Special Event Shall be exempt from paying a Business Application Fee under Chapter 5.02 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.100 - Medical Operations Permit required. 
A special Medical Operations Permit Shall be required for any Special Event, where, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, it is essential for public safety in a Place of Assembly or any other place where people congregate, due to the number of Persons participating in the Special Event or the Projected impact to the Emergency Medical Services System within the City. Where required, the Owner, agent or licensee Shall submit for Approval to the Fire Chief, or his or her Designee, a medical operations plan in accordance with the criteria established by the Emergency Medical Service office of the Colton Fire Department. This plan May require the Owner, agent or licensee to employ one or more medically qualified Persons, including medically trained Fire Department personnel, as required and Approved, to be on duty at such a place. Such individuals Shall be subject to the Fire Chief's Orders, or his or her Designee's, at all times when so employed and Shall be in Uniform and remain on duty during times that such places are open to the public, or when such activity is being conducted. Before each performance or the start of such activity, such individuals Shall inspect the required medical equipment to see that they are in the proper place and in good working order, and Shall keep a diligent watch for medical emergencies during the time such place is open to the public or such activity is being conducted. Events that May require a special Medical Operations Permit include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Any event in which specialized Emergency Medical Services are provided above the level of Advanced First Aid, such as Emergency Medical Technician-1, Paramedics, nurses, physician assistants and/or physicians; 
B.  Any event, by the rules of the event, which requires the need to have contract Emergency Ambulance Service providers or personnel on site in order to conduct said event, (i.e., boxing matches, BMX Bicycle races or similar high-risk injury activities); 
C.  Any event utilizing standby air rescue or air Ambulance Services. 
D.  Any event the Fire Chief or his or her Designee deems May adversely impact the Emergency Medical Services response capability of the City of Colton based upon: 
1.  The location of the event; 
2.  Projected event participation; or 
3.  Any other applicable criteria as established by the Fire Chief. 
E.  Public safety agencies conducting Special Events within the City May be exempt from some requirements upon Approval of the Fire Chief or his or her Designee. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.110 - Air-Medical Operations Permit required. 
A special Air-Medical Operations Permit Shall be required for all events utilizing standby air rescue or air Ambulance Services. The Fire Chief or his or her Designee Shall direct the landings and takeoffs of all EMS air rescue or air Ambulance operations within the City of Colton. Standby Fire Department and/or Police Department resources May be required during landing or takeoff operations for safety and security reasons. An air-medical operations plan Shall be submitted, for the Approval of the Fire Chief or his or her Designee, to include the Following information: 
A.  Name of the air rescue or air Ambulance provider; 
B.  Contact Person for air operations; 
C.  Type and size of aircraft; 
D.  Patient transport capability; 
E.  Level of medical staffing; 
F.  Frequency or list of frequencies available for ground-to-air contact; 
G.  Landing zone site and alternate landing zone site; 
H.  Security for landing zone site. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.120 - Park events—Additional requirements. 
In addition to any and all regulations or conditions that May be imposed pursuant to this chapter, Applicants Must also comply with all regulations affecting the Use of City Parks as provided in Chapter 12.24 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.130 - Parades—Prohibition of throwing objects. 
All Parade participants are prohibited from throwing any objects from any float, Vehicle, horse or movable object during the Parade procession. This prohibition does not preclude Parade participants from handing out any objects, such as candy, pamphlets or any Written Materials along the side of the Parade route. Those handing out such Materials Must not impede the flow of traffic in the Parade or cause unnecessary or disruptive delays of the Parade. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.140 - Hours of operation. 
All events which are subject to this chapter Shall close and cease operation continuously between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of each and every Day, unless otherwise provided in a Permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.150 - Departmental services charge. 
A.  In addition to the payment of the Permit Application Fee, an Applicant Shall pay the City for all City Departmental Service Charges incurred in connection with or due to the Applicant's activities under the Permit. Additionally, if City Property is destroyed or damaged by reason of the Applicant's Use, event or activity, the Applicant Shall reimburse the City for the actual replacement or repair cost of the destroyed or damaged Property. 
B.  At least three Days prior to a Parade, event or activity Permitted under this chapter, the Applicant Shall pay to the City a deposit in an amount sufficient to cover the total estimated City Departmental charges which the Administrative Authority estimates will be incurred in connection with the Permit. 
C.  City Departments Shall submit the final invoices and billings for Departmental charges actually incurred to the Administrative Authority no later than ten Working Days after the expiration date of the Permit. 
D.  If the deposit is less than the final charges pursuant to this section, the Applicant Shall pay the difference to the City within ten Working Days of billing. If the deposit is more than such final charges, the City Shall refund the difference to the Applicant within the twenty Working Days after the expiration of the Permit. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.160 - Security for cleanup. 
A.  At the time of filing an Application for Special Event the Applicant Shall submit an agreement on a form provided by the City and signed by the Applicant stating that, within twenty four hours after the conclusion of the Special Event, the Applicant will clean and restore or cause to be cleaned or restored to its original condition the Property upon which the Special Event is to occur and remove any Notices posted pursuant to Section 5.44.200 of this Code. 
B.  To ensure the Property is restored to the condition it existed in immediately prior to the effective date of the Permit, the Administrative Authority Shall require a cash deposit or other City Attorney-Approved form of financial arrangement from an Applicant as a condition to the issuance of Permit. The deposit Shall be in the amount established by Resolution adopted by the City Council. 
C.  A Designated Representative of the City Shall inspect the Property within three Days of the expiration date of the Permit to determine whether the Applicant has complied with this section. 
D.  The security deposit, pursuant to subsection (C) of this section, Shall be refundable on compliance with the provisions and requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to the removal of trash and debris, temporary Signs, temporary circulation Improvements, temporary fencing and appurtenant accessory facilities and Structures and the cleanup of the site. In the event the Applicant fails to comply with the terms of this chapter and remove all temporary facilities and Structures or clean the site in a manner satisfactory to the Administrative Authority, the City May do so cause the same to be done immediately after twenty hours of the conclusion of the event and the actual costs thereof and any storage costs incurred by the City Shall be charged against the Applicant and its cash deposit or bond or against the liability insurance provider. In the event the City removes or causes to be removed any temporary Improvements, Notice Shall be given to the Applicant indicating that the City has removed such temporary facilities or Structures and that they will be destroyed and/or will become the Property of the City within thirty Days of such Notice if neither the Applicant nor any Representative of the same has contacted the City prior to the expiration of the thirty-Day period. All Notices Shall be sent to the Applicant's address as provided on the Special Event Permit Application unless the Applicant supplies the City a substitute address in writing. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.170 - Liability and Property damage insurance. 
A.  Concurrent with the issuance of a Permit under this chapter, and as a condition precedent to the effectiveness of the Permit, the Applicant Shall procure and maintain in full force and effect during the term of the Permit a policy of insurance from an insurance company with an A.M. Best's insurance rating of A:VIII or better, authorized to do Business in the State, and which policy includes the City, its boards, officers, agents and Employees as named insureds or additional named insureds. Proof of insurance Shall be submitted to the Administrative Authority not less than fifteen Days prior to Major Special Events, not less than ten Days prior to Minor Special Events, and not less than two Days prior to Miscellaneous Special Events. The minimum limits of liability coverage Shall conform to a schedule as adopted by Resolution of the City Council. 
B.  If the Administrative Authority determines that a particular Use, event or activity which is for a Permit period of no more than one Day does not present a substantial or significant public liability or Property damage exposure for the City or its officers, agents and Employees, the Administrative Authority May give a Written waiver of the insurance requirements of this section. 
C.  This requirement, as set forth in subsection (A) of this section, however, Shall not apply to an event involving an exercise of Free Speech Rights provided that, to the extent possible, such an event is redesigned or rescheduled to respond to specific risks, hazards and dangers to the public health and safety identified by the Administrative Authority as being reasonably foreseeable consequences of the event. 
D.  A claim for exclusion and alternative treatment under subsection (C) of this section Shall be filed with and at the same time as the Special Event Application and an agreement or proof of insurance, as applicable, Shall be filed prior to Permit issuance. The Administrative Authority May require such proof and documentation as he or she deems reasonably necessary to verify the constitutionally protected status of the event and the applicability of subsection (C) of this section. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.180 - Hold-harmless agreement. 
Prior to the issuance of a Special Event Permit or temporary Use Permit, the Applicant Shall provide the City with an executed hold-harmless agreement on a form provided by the Administrative Authority, which Shall substantially state that the Applicant agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, defend and reimburse the City, its officers, Employees, volunteers and agents from any liability, damage, penalty, expense or loss of any nature, including but not limited to, liability for injury to or death of Persons, or damage to Property arising out of or in connection with the Special Event or approximately caused by the negligent or intentional Act or omission of the Applicant, any officer, Employee or agent of the Applicant, or any Person who is under the Applicant's control. In addition, such an agreement Shall provide that in the event a claim is made against the City of Colton, its officers, Employees, volunteers or agents by suit or otherwise, whether the same be groundless or not, arising our of such negligent or intentional Act or omission, the Applicant Shall defend and indemnify the City, its officers, Employees, volunteers or agents for any judgment rendered against it or any sums paid out in settlement or otherwise. The City Shall choose its legal counsel in defending the City from any and all liability, damage, penalty, expense or loss of any nature arising out of or in connection with the Special Event or approximately caused by the negligent or intentional Act or omission of the Applicant, any officer, Employee or agent of the Applicant, or any Person who is under the Applicant's control. Such agreement Shall be filed with the Administrative Authority prior to the issuance of the Permit. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.190 - Clearances and inspections—Posting Permit. 
No Special Event Permit Shall be issued until clearance and inspections from the appropriate agencies and Departments have been completed. The Special Event Permit and all Business Permits relating to the event Must be posted on the Premises in a conspicuous place, and a Copy thereof Must be in the possession of the individual responsible for the supervision of the event. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.200 - Notice of Street closures. 
If a Special Event requires the closure of a Street or Streets, the Applicant of the Special Event May be required to provide proof to the Administrative Authority of one of the Following: 
A.  Notice via United States Mail to Property Owners and Occupants whose Property is located on the closed Streets that a Street closure will occur on a date or dates certain due to a Special Event; 
B.  Notice via publication in a newspaper of general circulation that a Street closure will occur on a date or dates certain due to a Special Event; 
C.  Notice via posting at Properties located on the closed Streets that a Street closure will occur on a date or dates certain due to a Special Event. Such Notice Shall be posted according to specifications as provided by the Administrative Authority, including, but not limited to, the distance required between Notices, quantity of Notices, and the size of such Notices. Pursuant to Section 5.44.160 of this Code, within twenty-four hours of the completion of the event, the Applicant Must remove all such Notices posted. 
D.  Such Notices Shall be mailed, published or posted not less than twenty Days prior to Major Special Events and not less than ten Days prior to Minor Special Events. Notices for Miscellaneous Special Events Shall be mailed, published or posted as provided by the Administrative Authority. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.210 - Inspections. 
The Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Community Development Director or their Designees May conduct, at any time, on-site inspections of Special Events Permitted pursuant to this chapter for compliance with the imposed requirements and the medical operations plan or air-medical operations plan. In addition to any and all regulations or conditions that May be imposed pursuant to this chapter, Applicants Must also comply with all Fire Code regulations and requirements as set forth in this Code, including payment for inspection costs by the Fire Chief or Designee. The Chief of Police or the Fire Chief, or his or her Designee, reserve the right to: 
A.  Require immediate correction of hazards, dangerous conditions or deficiencies that have been deemed to place the public health or safety at risk for harm or injury; and, 
B.  Revoke the Special Event Permit immediately if substantial Violation or noncompliance with the previously submitted plans is deemed to place the public health or safety at risk for harm or injury. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.220 - Appeals. 
A.  Any Applicant May Appeal the final Decision of the Administrative Authority or the revocation of a Permit granted pursuant to this chapter to the City Council within two Days thereafter. Appeals Shall be filed with the City Clerk, either by personal service, fax or first class mail (postage prepaid). Any such Appeal Shall set forth the reasons for the Appeal and Shall be accompanied by an Appeal filing Fee. The Appeal filing Fee Shall be established by the City Council by Resolution. Failure of any Person to receive Written Notice Shall not invalidate same. The City Council Shall act upon the Appeal at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting held more than five Working Days and less than ten Working Days after the filing of the Appeal. If no such meeting is scheduled, or if a regularly scheduled meeting is not held within such times, the Mayor May call a special City Council meeting to consider and act upon such Appeal within ten Working Days after the filing of such Appeal. The Decision of the City Council regarding such an Appeal Shall be final. 
B.  If there is insufficient time for a timely Appeal to be heard by the City Council prior to the date on which the proposed Use event or activity is scheduled, the Applicant may, at his or her option, request an Appeal before the City Manager or a Neutral Hearing Officer. Any such Appeal Shall set forth the reasons for the Appeal and Shall be accompanied by an Appeal filing Fee. The Appeal filing Fee Shall be established by the City Council by Resolution. Upon request for an Appeal, the City Manager or Neutral Hearing Officer, Shall hold a hearing no later than two Working Days after the filing of the Appeal but in any case before the date of the proposed Special Event, and will render his or her Decision no later than one Working Day after hearing the Appeal but in any case before the date of the proposed Special Event. Upon such Appeal, the City Manager or Neutral Hearing Officer May reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the determination of the Administrative Authority or impose any conditions upon Approval that the Administrative Authority could have imposed. The Decision of the City Manager or Neutral Hearing Officer regarding such an Appeal Shall be final. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.230 - Right to judicial Appeal. 
Any Person who has been denied issuance of a Permit under this chapter for an activity involving Free Speech Rights Shall have the right to judicial review pursuant to the terms and procedures of Section 1094.8 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.240 - Revocation of Permit. 
A.  A Special Event Permit May be revoked if the Administrative Authority or Community Development Director finds that one or more of the Following conditions exists: 
1.  The Special Event Permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner. 
2.  The Applicant fails, neglects or refuses to fulfill any of the conditions imposed upon the granting of the Permit. 
3.  The Applicant violates or attempts to violate any Law of the State, or the provisions of this chapter, or any other Law, Ordinance or policy of the City. 
4.  Failure to comply with Notice to correct hazards, dangerous conditions or other deficiencies that are deemed to place the public health or safety at risk for harm or injury. A revocation under this subsection Shall become effective immediately upon order by the Chief of Police services or Fire Chief. 
B.  All revocations Shall be in writing and Shall set forth the basis for the revocation. The Permit Shall be reinstated as soon as the conditions constituting the revocation have abated. 
C.  When any Permit is revoked pursuant to this section, the Permit Shall be reinstated as soon as the conditions constituting the revocation have abated. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.44.250 - Violations. 
Any Person who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter, or of any conditions Attached hereunder, or who falsifies any information on any Application hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth by State Law and is subject to administrative penalties and fines as set forth in Chapter 8 of this Code. Any Special Event otherwise in accordance with this chapter Shall be a Public Nuisance which May be enjoined or abated as allowed by Law. The City retains any and all civic remedies, including the right of civil injunction for the prevention of the Violations and for the recovery of money damages therefore. 
(Ord. 0-17-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 5.45 - RESIDENTIAL SALES 
 
5.45.010 - Residential Sales prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any Person to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, Sales of Personal Property to the general public by means of a "garage" Sale, "patio" Sale, "Yard" Sale, or other Sale similarly conducted on any residentially zoned Premises, except as Permitted in this chapter or authorized by the Zoning Ordinance (No. 964) or other Law. 
(Ord. 1483 (part), 1975)  
5.45.020 - Application. 
Any Person (herein the Applicant) intending to conduct a "garage" Sale, "patio" Sale, "Yard" Sale, or similar Sale of Personal Property to the general public on residentially zoned Premises or from a residence or residential garage Shall, concurrently with the payment of a two-dollar Fee, file an Application with the City Finance Department. The Applicant Shall declare under penalty of perjury, or by affidavit, in the Application, that all items to be sold are lawfully possessed, owned, utilized and maintained by such Applicant in connection with the Use of the Premises and have not been acquired, possessed or consigned for the Sale. The Applicant Shall state the date (or dates), hours and place of the proposed Sale, the name and permanent address of each Person who will participate in conducting such Sale, and that the Applicant and each of said Persons know the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-3-89 § 1 (part), 1989: Ord. 1483 (part), 1975)  
5.45.030 - Time and place of Sale. 
Only one such Sale May be conducted at the same address in any calendar quarter (for example: January 1st through March 31st). No Sale Shall continue more than three Days. Sales Shall be conducted between the hours of eight a.m. and eight p.m. only. A Permit Shall be issued for only one location. 
(Ord. 0-3-89 § 1 (part), 1989: Ord. 1483 (part), 1975)  
5.45.040 - Display. 
Merchandise offered for Sale Shall not be displayed or stored in Public Streets or rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 0-3-89 § 1 (part), 1989: Ord. 1483 (part), 1975)  
5.45.050 - Sign. 
Signs regarding the Sale Shall not be displayed except (a) during the time for the Sale and (b) on the Premises for the Sale, as shown on the Permit. 
(Ord. 1483 (part), 1975)  
5.45.060 - Exemptions. 
No Fee Shall be charged for a Permit hereunder to be issued to any charitable, religious or Nonprofit Organization, or for a Sale the proceeds of which will be Used solely for charitable, religious, public or civic purposes. 
(Ord. 1483 (part), 1975)  
5.45.070 - Council action. 
In the event that the Council is informed that there have been Violations of this chapter at a certain Premises or by a certain Applicant it May give Notice and conduct a hearing with regard thereto. If after such a hearing it finds good cause therefor, it May order that further Permits for such Premises or Applicant Shall be issued only by the Council and it May revoke any Permits then in force. 
(Ord. 1483 (part), 1975)  
5.45.080 - Court Sales. 
This chapter Shall not apply to Sales conducted pursuant to process or order of any Court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1483 (part), 1975)  
5.45.090 - Penalty. 
Any Person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof Shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten Days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 1483 (part), 1975)  
Chapter 5.47 - CITATIONS 
 
5.47.010 - Issuance authority. 
The Assistant City Manager and his/her Designee are authorized to issue citations for Violations of this title. 
(Ord. 0-4-89 § 1, 1989)  
Chapter 5.48 - TAXICABS 
 
5.48.010 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purpose of this chapter the Following terms Shall have the Following meanings unless from the particular context it clearly appears that some other meaning is intended: 
1.  "Carrier" means and includes every Person, firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture or other form of Business organization engaged in operating, or causing to be operated, any Taxicab. 
2.  "Driver's Permit" means the Permit issued by the Chief of Police to any Person to operate or to drive a Taxicab as defined by this chapter. 
3.  "Taxicab" includes every Vehicle Used for the public transportation of passengers for hire, over the Streets of the City, but not over defined routes, and not on a shared-ride basis. Dial-A-Ride is not a Taxicab. Dial-A-Ride is not included. Ambulance is not included. 
4.  "Taximeter" means mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a Taxicab is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled, or for waiting time, or both, and upon which such charge is plainly registered by means of figures, including dollars and cents. 
B.  Words Used in this chapter in the present tense include the future; words Used in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; and the singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular. 
(Ord. 0-4-87 § 1, 1987)  
5.48.020 - Pre-existing provisions. 
This chapter supersedes Resolution 3313 with regards to Taxicabs. This chapter does not regulate Dial-A-Ride or Ambulances. The adoption of this chapter does not invalidate the provisions of Resolution 3313 as to Ambulances or Dial-A-Ride. Existing Taxicab Permits Shall remain valid. Carriers holding Permits as of the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this chapter May continue to operate pursuant to such Permits. They Shall in all respects comply with the requirements hereof on and after sixty Days from the date the Ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective. 
(Ord. 0-4-87 § 12, 1987)  
5.48.030 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful to operate a Taxicab, as herein defined, upon any Street within the City without having obtained a Permit to do so in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-4-87 § 2, 1987)  
5.48.040 - Permit Application procedure. 
A.  Any Carrier desiring to operate a Taxicab Shall file a petition therefore with the City Clerk. Such petition Shall be duly verified. Said petition Shall set forth the Following information: 
1.  Name, age, and address of the petitioner, if a natural Person, or if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, address of its principal place of Business, and the names of all of its officers together with their respective residence addresses; or if a partnership, association or unincorporated company, then the names of the partners or Persons comprising the partnership, association or company, together with their respective ages and residence addresses; 
2.  The trade name or style, if any, under which the petitioner proposes to operate; 
3.  Full information pertaining to the extent, character and nature of the proposed operation; 
4.  The manner, i.e., on-call twenty-four hours per Day, Colton telephone number, proposed rates, etc., in which such proposed operations are to be conducted; 
5.  The type, model, number, capacity and condition of the Vehicles proposed to be operated; 
6.  The petitioner, at the time of filing the petition with the City Clerk, Shall also submit an Approved inspection sheet, completed during the past twelve Months, prior to filing of the petition, for each Vehicle to be operated within the City limits. This inspection sheet will be completed by a mechanic as certified by the State of California Bureau of Consumer Affairs. The mechanic Shall be qualified and independent. The mechanic Shall not be an Employee of petitioner. The inspection site May be either in the City in which the petitioner's principal place of Business is located or in the City. This inspection sheet will include, but not be limited to, the condition of the Following items: current appropriate State of California registration; compliance with California Vehicle Code Section 27908, Carrier identification of Vehicle, headlights, windshield wipers, horn, turn signals, doors, glass, body, paint, identification number, identification lights, meter and seal, cleanliness and sanitary condition, tires, tail and brake lights, fuses and red lanterns, brakes, mechanical, chart of rates. This inspection sheet Shall also include the date of inspection, Vehicle number, license number, speedometer reading, Permit number. It Shall also include any other pertinent remarks by the inspector, his signature and his authority to complete this inspection; 
7.  A full statement of the petitioner's assets and liabilities. 
B.  At or before the time said petition is filed with the City Clerk, the petitioner Shall have paid to the Finance Department, a nonrefundable filing Fee of five hundred dollars, plus fifteen dollars for each Vehicle proposed to be covered by the Permit. 
C.  The City Clerk Shall, upon receipt of such petition, forward the same to the Chief of Police, who Shall make a full and complete inquiry into the facts set forth therein, and who Shall recommend to the City Council as soon as reasonably possible the granting or denying of a Permit upon the proposed terms, or upon terms other than proposed. The City Council Shall conduct a Public Hearing on the Application. The City Council May issue or deny the Permit and May approve, disapprove or modify the recommendations of the Chief of Police. 
D.  Anything therein to the contrary notwithstanding, no Permit issued hereunder Shall be effective until and unless the petitioner Shall pay all Business License Fees and comply with all other rules, regulations, statutes, resolutions and Ordinances appertaining thereto. 
(Ord. 0-4-87 § 3, 1987)  
5.48.050 - Display of Permits—Suspension and Appeal. 
A.  Permittees Shall comply with California Vehicle Code Section 27908. Permits and certificates issued by the City Shall be affixed and displayed on Taxicabs as required by the Chief of Police. Each Taxicab Shall be clearly identified with exterior markings which are different and distinct from any other Permittee as Approved by the Chief of Police and includes a distinctive scheme of color and Design and the telephone number and name of Permittee. 
B.  The Chief of Police May suspend any Permit referred to herein where the Permittee violates any Law or does not comply with the terms of this chapter, or commits fraud of any nature upon the general public, or for any reason for which a Permit May be refused as set forth hereinbefore; provided, however, that no such suspension Shall be in effect for a period longer than from the time of suspension to the time of the next regular City Council meeting when the City Council May legally consider the suspension and act thereon. 
C.  As soon thereafter as practicable, the Council Shall have a hearing in reference thereto. Such Permittee May demand and receive from the City Clerk a Written certified statement as to the reasons for such suspension at any reasonable time prior to such meeting. The Council May revoke a Permit after the hearing. 
(Ord. 0-4-87 § 4, 1987)  
5.48.060 - Insurance. 
Each petitioner operating pursuant to this chapter Shall have ability to respond in damages resulting from the ownership or operation of Vehicles and arising by reason of personal injury to, or death of, any one Person of at least one hundred thousand dollars, and of at least three hundred thousand dollars for such injury to, or death of, two or more Persons in any one accident, and for damages to Property of at least fifty thousand dollars resulting from any one accident. Ability to respond in damages May be maintained by any of the procedural alternatives set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 16500. Certificates of insurance Shall be filed with the City Clerk. Said insurance policy Shall name the City as an additional insured. 
(Ord. 0-4-87 § 5, 1987)  
5.48.070 - Driver's Permit. 
A.  It is unlawful for any Person to drive, operate or be in charge of any Taxicab operated under this chapter without first having obtained a Driver's Permit, issued pursuant to this chapter, to do so. 
B.  At the time of Application for said Driver's Permit, the Applicant Shall have paid to the Finance Department a nonrefundable Fee of twenty dollars to cover the expenses incurred. 
C.  No Driver's Permit Shall be issued to any Person not duly licensed under the California Vehicle Code with a valid Class 3 Driver's license, to drive the type of Vehicle for which the Permit is granted. If, for any reason the Class 3 Driver's license is void, then said Driver's Permit Shall also be void. Without limitation of the foregoing, a Driver's Permit May be denied to any Person convicted of a felony within five Years immediately Preceding his Application or convicted on two occasions of a felony, or within a period of five Years, immediately Preceding his Application, convicted of reckless driving or driving under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs, or convicted of Violation of any of the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the State of California, or who cannot speak English. Falsification on the Application is grounds for refusal of said Permit. 
D.  Before a Permit is granted to any Applicant, said Applicant Shall present himself to the Police Department to be fingerprinted and photographed. The Applicant Shall supply such information as is needed for the Application. 
E.  Upon obtaining said Driver's Permit, said Driver Shall expire one Year from the date of issue. Applications for renewal Shall be made within thirty Days from the date of expiration of said Driver's Permit. The renewal Fee, to be paid to the Finance Department, Shall be ten dollars per Year. Permits are personal and not transferable. 
G.  The Chief of Police May at any time suspend or revoke any such Driver's Permit so issued for any reason mentioned in this section or for any Violation of the provisions of this chapter by the holder of such Driver's Permit, or for the existence of any cause which would have been grounds for denying such Permit when applied for, whether it existed when Application was made for such Driver's Permit or came into existence thereafter. 
H.  In the event of refusal to approve an Application to issue a Driver's Permit or in the event of a suspension or revocation of said Driver's Permit by the Chief of Police, said Applicant or Permittee May Appeal said Decision to the City Council. The Council Shall conduct a hearing and then May in its discretion affirm, reverse or modify the action taken by the Chief of Police. 
I.  With Approval of the Chief of Police of Colton, a Driver's Permit or Business License to drive Taxicab issued by another California City May be substituted for the Colton Driver's Permit referred to in this section. In that event no Colton Driver's Permit is necessary. Persons who hold a current valid Driver's Permit from another City May apply to the Colton Chief of Police to have that Permit accepted as a Colton Driver's Permit. In the absolute discretion of the Chief of Police he May require such Persons to apply for and obtain a separate Colton Driver's Permit. He May accept the other City's Permit in which event he Shall do so in writing. 
(Ord. 0-4-87 § 6, 1987)  
5.48.080 - Manner of operation. 
A.  Every Driver of a Taxicab Shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger safely and expeditiously to his destination, unless otherwise directed by the passenger. 
B.  The passenger engaging a Taxicab Shall have the exclusive right to the full and free Use of the passenger compartment and the whole thereof and the Carrier of said Vehicle Shall not, until said passenger has reached his destination, solicit or take on any additional passengers whatsoever without the expressed consent of all passengers then in the Vehicle. 
C.  It is unlawful for any Driver of any Vehicle licensed herein, while driving said Vehicle, to cruise, loiter or Stop on a Public Street for the purpose of soliciting passengers. It is lawful, however, for such Vehicle while proceeding to a regularly assigned taxistand, regularly established call station, or to the Carrier's principal place of Business, to accept employment when hailed down from the Street or Curb; provided, however, that such action is not in Violation of any rules and regulations of the California Vehicle Code, and is not causing an unsafe condition. 
D.  No Taxicab for which a Permit Shall have been granted Shall remain standing or Stopped for Business upon any portion of any Public Street within the City for the period of longer than prescribed by Law or in any case, except in emergencies or without fault of the Operator, for longer than three minutes; provided, that the City Council May Designate taxistands, at which Taxicabs May be parked. The Council May specify the nature, size and extent of such stands. 
(Ord. 0-4-87 § 7, 1987)  
5.48.090 - Rates. 
A.  Every Carrier operating a Taxicab service Shall file with the Chief of Police a true and correct statement of the established rates to be charged for the transportation of passengers in all Taxicabs by said Carrier. Said Carrier Shall not change or modify such established rates in any manner without filing said modified or changed rates with the Chief of Police, thirty Days before the effective date of said changes or modifications. Rates Shall be posted in each Vehicle and clearly visible to passengers. 
B.  All disputes as to the interpretation of fares as determined from the established rate schedule Shall be determined by the officer in charge of the Police Station. 
C.  It is unlawful for any Carrier or Driver to charge or collect any sum not in accordance with the rates so fixed by said rate schedule so filed with the Chief of Police. 
D.  It is unlawful for any Person to refuse to pay the lawful fare of any Taxicab after employment or hiring of the same with intent to defraud. 
E.  It is unlawful for any Driver, upon receiving full payment for a fare or for services rendered, to refuse to give a receipt upon request of the Person making such payment. 
(Ord. 0-4-87 § 8, 1987)  
5.48.100 - Equipment and records. 
A.  Before being placed in service each Taxicab Shall be Approved by the Chief of Police. Taxicabs Shall be of a Design and type of construction as Shall comply with regulations pertaining to such equipment adopted from time to time by the City Council. Such Vehicles Shall at all times be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and in a good state of repair, and Shall be subject to inspection at all times by the Chief of Police, or his Representatives. Annually each Vehicle of each Permittee Shall be inspected. An inspection sheet on each Vehicle Shall be filed with the Chief of Police. The inspection Shall be the same as is required for a petition to operate as outlined in subsection 5.48.040(A)(6) of this section. The inspection Shall be made at the expense of the Carrier by an independent qualified mechanic who is not an Employee of the Carrier. Any Vehicle which is unsafe, unserviceable or mechanically defective Shall be retired from service upon order of the Chief of Police, and not be again operated in such service, except with his Approval. The Chief of Police Shall have the authority to accept an inspection certificate transmitted from the Police Department of another California City on the Permittee's Taxicab if such inspection is performed in essentially the same manner as required by this chapter. 
B.  The Carrier Shall cause each Taximeter to be inspected and tested for accuracy at least once every six Months. The Carrier Shall cause to be placed on the Taximeter a label having printed thereon the Following: "This Taximeter was inspected and tested on (Date of Inspection) and found to comply with the standard of accuracy prescribed by the Bureau of Weights and Measures of San Bernardino County." 
C.  Each Carrier Shall maintain a log of complaints and the Carrier's response to such complaints. Every complaint Shall be entered therein. The details of such entry Shall be in the form prescribed by the Chief of Police. Said log Shall be available for public inspection and retained as a permanent record of the Carrier. 
D.  The Chief of Police Shall have the right to inspect the books and records of any Carrier at any and all reasonable times. Carriers Shall keep adequate and complete books and records as determined by the Chief of Police. The failure to keep and allow inspection of such books and records Shall be grounds for suspension of any Permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. 0-4-87 § 9, 1987)  
5.48.110 - Power and authority. 
A.  The City Council May by Resolution change the Fees fixed by this chapter and adopt rules and regulations supplemental to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The Chief of Police is charged with the duty of enforcement of all provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The Decisions of the City Council are conclusive and final. 
D.  No Permit Shall be sold, transferred, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise conveyed without the consent of the City Council. Any such conveying without the prior consent of the City Council Shall revoke the certificate. 
(Ord. 0-4-87 § 11, 1987)  
5.48.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any Person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter Shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six Months, or both. 
(Ord. 0-4-87 § 10, 1987)  
Chapter 5.49 - AMBULANCES 
 
5.49.010 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise stated, words and terms are defined as follows: 
"Advanced Life Support (ALS) or Limited Advanced Life Support (LALS) Ambulance" means an Ambulance which has equipment and supplies in addition to those carried by a basic life support Ambulance, as specified by Law. 
"Ambulance" means any privately or publicly owned Vehicle, helicopter or boat specially designed, constructed, modified, equipped, arranged, maintained and operated for the sole purpose of transporting sick, injured, wounded, invalid, convalescent or otherwise incapacitated Persons or expectant mothers. 
"Ambulance Attendant" means a qualified individual who acts as an Attendant on an Ambulance and who occupies the Patient compartment while transporting any individual in apparent need of medical attention. 
"Ambulance Service" means any private or public organization, individual or agency which operates one or more Ambulances or other medical transportation means. 
"Ambulance Service Operator" means any Person or agency who operates an Ambulance Service. 
"Driver" means a qualified Person who operates an Ambulance, as specified in Section 5.49.190 of this chapter. 
"Emergency Call" means a request for the dispatch of an Ambulance to transport or provide other assistance for a Person who apparently has a sudden or unforeseen need of medical attention. 
"Emergency Medical Technician-I (EMT-I)" means a certified individual authorized to provide basic life support under Health and Safety Code Section 1797.80. 
"Emergency Medical Technician II (EMT-II)" means a certified individual authorized to provide Limited Advanced Life Support (LALS) under Health and Safety Code Section 1797.82. 
"Emergency Medical Technician-Paramedic (EMT-P)" or "Paramedic" means a Person specially trained in the provision of Emergency cardiac and noncardiac care appropriately certified under Health and Safety Code Section 1797.84. 
"Emergency Service" means the functions performed in response to an Emergency Call. 
"Fire Chief" means the public official in charge of the Fire Department or such official's Designee, which as required by Law May be a medical doctor or other medically trained and certified individual. 
"Local EMS Agency" means the Inland Counties Emergency Medical Agency or any successor agency Designated pursuant to the Emergency Medical Services System and the Prehospital Emergency Medical Care Personnel Act (Health and Safety Code Section 1797 and Following). 
"Non-Emergency Transportation" means transportation of Patients to or from health care facilities by private request of a Patient or a health care Facility not involving dispatching through the City of any Emergency Medical Service personnel or equipment. 
"Patient" means a sick, injured, wounded, invalid, convalescent or otherwise incapacitated Person or expectant mother. 
"Permittee" means any Person who possesses a current Permit granted by the Council to operate an Ambulance Service within the City. 
"Special Event" means any situation where a publicly announced event places a grouping or gathering of people in one general locale sufficient in number or subject to an activity that creates the need to have one or more Ambulances at the site. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.020 - Permits required for Non-Emergency Transportation—Exceptions. 
A.  Required. It is unlawful for any Person, either as Owner, agent or otherwise, to operate, conduct, advertise or otherwise engage in or profess to be engaged in a non-Emergency Ambulance Service or the Business or service of the Non-Emergency Transportation of Patients upon the Streets or any public way or place in the City, except in conformance with a valid Permit to do so issued by the Fire Department. 
B.  Exceptions. The equipment and personnel standards specified in this chapter apply to all Ambulance Services; however, the Permit and Fee requirements Shall not apply to: 
1.  Publicly owned and operated Ambulances; 
2.  Vehicles operated as Ambulances at the request of Local authorities during any "State of War Emergency," duly proclaimed "State of Emergency" or "Local Emergency," as defined in the California Emergency Services Act (Chapter 7 of Division 1 of Title 2 of the Government Code), as amended; 
3.  Fixed-wing airplanes; or 
4.  Non-Emergency Ambulances which do not originate in the City, regardless of the destination. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.030 - Non-Emergency Patient transportation Permit—Fees. 
Permit Fees for the Non-Emergency Transportation of Patients Shall be set from time to time by Resolution of the City Council. Permit Fees for nonprofit Ambulance Services May be waived by the City Council if public need and necessity require it. Permit Fees Shall be paid before a Permit is issued or renewed. On revocation of a Permit, the Permit Fees Shall be forfeited to the City. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.040 - Application—Contents. 
Prerequisites to the issuance of a Permit or renewal of a Permit for an Applicant Shall include the payment of a nonrefundable Application Fee to be set by Resolution of the City Council separate from the Permit Fee and the filing with the Fire Department of a Permit Application in writing, under Oath, and on a form to be furnished by the Fire Department. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.050 - Application—Investigation by Fire Chief. 
Upon receipt of a completed Application, the Fire Chief, Shall conduct an investigation to determine if the public health, safety, welfare, convenience and necessity require the granting of an original, additional or renewal Permit and Shall further determine if the Applicant meets all requirements of this chapter. Upon completion of his investigation, the Fire Chief Shall recommend to the City Council that a Permit be granted or denied for the Ambulance Service. The City Council Shall hold a Public Hearing regarding the Application. No Permit Shall be issued by the Fire Chief until the City Council has determined that the public health, safety, welfare, convenience and necessity require the granting of such Permit for the particular Ambulance Service. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.060 - Permit—Issuance or denial. 
A.  The City Council May provide non-Emergency Ambulance Service through the Fire Department and/or it May order the issuance of one or more Permits to conduct non-Emergency Ambulance Services in the City upon finding that the public health, safety, welfare, convenience and necessity require the availability of such Ambulance Service and that the Applicant meets all requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Bonding of Applicant. Before any Permit is issued to any provider other than the Fire Department under the provisions of this chapter, the Council Shall require the Applicant, as a condition to the issuance of the Permit, to post with the clerk of the Council a surety bond in the sum of seven thousand five hundred dollars Furnished by a corporation authorized to do Business in the State, payable to the City. The bond Shall be conditioned upon the full and faithful performance by the Permittee of his obligations under the applicable provision of this chapter and Shall be kept in full force and effect by the Permittee throughout the life of the Permit and all renewals thereof. The Council, upon recommendation of the Fire Department, from time to time May by Resolution establish such additional or lower bond requirement for individual Permittees as May be deemed necessary in the event it is determined the foregoing bond requirements constitute insufficient or more than sufficient protection to the City, as the case May be. The bond requirement May be waived by the City Council if public need and necessity require it. 
C.  Liability Insurance. Any Permittee other than the Fire Department Shall obtain and keep in force during the term of the Permit professional liability, public liability and bodily injury insurance issued by a solvent and responsible insurance company authorized to do Business in the State, insuring the Owner of such non-Emergency Ambulance Service, and also naming the City and its officers, Employees and agents as additional insureds, against loss by reason of injury or damage that May result to Persons or Property from negligent operation or defective construction of such Ambulance or from negligent treatment of any individual or from Violation of this chapter or of any other Law of the State or the United States. The policy Shall be in the sum of not less than one million dollars for personal injury to or death of any one Person in any single accident; and the limits of each such Vehicle Shall not be less than five hundred thousand dollars for damages to or destruction of Property in any one accident. Such limits Shall not be deemed as a limit of the indemnification and hold harmless statement contained in Applicant's Permit, and if the City becomes liable for an amount in excess of such insurance coverage for Acts or omissions not covered by insurance, the Applicant Shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City and its officers, Employees, and agents for the whole amount thereof. The policy Shall be primary and noncontributing to any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the City. The policy Shall contain provisions waiving the insurer's right of subrogation. Workers compensation insurance Shall be carried covering all Employees of the Permit holder. Before the Fire Chief issues a Permit, copies of the policies or certificates evidencing such policies Shall be filed with the Fire Department. All policies Shall contain a provision requiring a thirty-Day Notice to be given to the Fire Department prior to cancellation, modification or reduction in limits. The amounts of public liability insurance for bodily injury and Property damage Shall be subject to review and adjustment at the Council's option. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.070 - Grounds for denial of Application and suspension or revocation of Permit. 
A.  The City Council is not obligated to issue any Permit under this chapter unless in its discretion it determines that the public health, safety, welfare, convenience and necessity require the availability of such Ambulance Service and that the Applicant meets all requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The City Council May order the denial of a Permit on the ground of infeasibility. Whenever a new Application is filed under the provisions of this chapter for a Permit to provide non-Emergency Ambulance Service in the City where services already exist, the Council, after due investigation, May find and determine, as a Matter of fact, that there does not exist in the City sufficient potential need for non-Emergency Ambulance Service to justify the granting of an additional separate and distinct Permit for Use within the City. Predicated on such findings, the City Council May deny the Application for Permit on the grounds that the granting of such new Permit is not economically or financially feasible and not in the public interest and welfare. 
C.  An Application for a Permit or a renewal thereof May be denied and an existing Permit May be suspended or revoked if the Applicant or Permittee or any partner, officer or Director: 
1.  Violates or has violated any applicable statute, regulation, Ordinance, Local EMS Agency protocol, section of this chapter or Fire Department rule or regulation which relates to the Permit activities; 
2.  Is or has been convicted of any offense relating to the Use, Sale, possession or transportation of narcotics or habit-forming drugs; 
3.  Commits or has committed any Act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit whereby another is injured, or whereby the Applicant or Permittee has benefitted, or any Act involving moral turpitude; 
4.  Has misrepresented or omitted a Material fact in obtaining a Permit; 
5.  Aids or abets or has aided or abetted an unPermitted or uncertified Person to evade the provisions of this chapter; 
6.  Fails or has failed to make and keep records showing his transactions as a Permittee, or fails or has failed to have such records available for inspection by the Fire Chief or his duly authorized Representative for a period of not less than three Years after completion of any transaction to which the records refer, or refuses or has refused to comply with a Written request of the Fire Chief or make such records available for inspection or Copying; 
7.  Accepts or has accepted a Non-Emergency Call when either unable or unwilling to provide the requested service or fails to inform the Person requesting such service of any delay and fails to obtain the consent of such Persons before causing an Ambulance to respond from a location more distant than the one to which the request was directed; 
8.  Was previously the holder of a Permit issued under this chapter, which Permit has been revoked or not reissued or the terms or conditions of a suspension have not been fulfilled or corrected; 
9.  Is acting or has acted in the capacity of a Permitted Person or firm under this chapter without having a Permit therefor; 
10.  Is entering or has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to or is or has been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude, and the time for Appeal has elapsed or the judgment of conviction has been affirmed on Appeal, irrespective of an Order granting probation Following such conviction suspending the imposition of sentence, or of a subsequent Order under the provisions of Section 1203.4 of the Penal Code allowing such Person to withdraw his plea of guilty and to enter a plea of not guilty, or setting aside the plea or verdict of guilty, or dismissing the accusation of information; 
11.  Is required to register as a sex offender under the provisions of Section 290 of the California Penal Code; 
12.  Habitually or excessively Uses or is addicted to the Use of narcotics or dangerous drugs; 
13.  Is a habitual User of intoxicating beverages to excess; 
14.  Within the three-Year period immediately Preceding the Application, has been under suspension, revocation or probation by the Department of Motor Vehicles for a cause involving the safe operation of a motor Vehicle, or has been convicted of any of the Following offenses: failure to Stop and render aid in an accident involving injury or death, driving while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs, or reckless driving involving bodily injury; 
15.  Has been involved within the three Years immediately Preceding the Application in any motor Vehicle accident causing death or personal injury; 
16.  Has been involved in three or more motor Vehicle accidents within the Year immediately Preceding the Application; or 
17.  Has operated an authorized Emergency Vehicle in Violation of the rules and regulations relating to authorized Emergency Vehicles as promulgated by the Commissioner of the California Highway Patrol. 
D.  Suspension of a Permit is not a condition precedent to revocation of a Permit. 
E.  The City Council May suspend or revoke any Permit if in the discretion of the City Council it finds that the public health, safety, welfare, convenience and necessity no longer require the availability of such Ambulance Service or that the Applicant no longer meets all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.080 - Non-Emergency Ambulance transportation Permit—Contents. 
The Permit Shall specify the dates of issuance and of expiration, the geographical limits, if any, of the territory within which the Permittee May provide non-Emergency Ambulance Service, the number of Ambulance units to be Used by the Permittee, the class or classes of service to be provided, and any special conditions or waiver of requirements deemed appropriate by the Fire Chief. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.090 - Permit—Amendment of conditions. 
Upon Written request by the Permittee, the Fire Chief May amend the conditions specified in a Permit if he finds such changes in substantial compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such amendment Shall not affect the expiration date of the existing Permit, nor Shall it authorize a change in ownership from that specified in the original Permit. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.100 - Permit—Transfer to another Person. 
No Permit Shall be transferred to another Person except upon prior Approval of the City Council, upon recommendation of the Fire Chief. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.110 - Permit—Renewal. 
Permits Shall be renewed annually by the Fire Chief upon Application of the Permittee if the Permit holder proposes no substantial change in the content of the Permit and if the Fire Chief determines that the need for the non-Emergency Ambulance Service still exists, that the Permit holder has during the period of the expiring Permit operated in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the Fire Department, and that he is capable of continuing operation in conformity with the rules and regulations of the Fire Department. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.120 - Changes, conditional operation and temporary Variance. 
A.  In the event of a proposed change in ownership of any kind or nature, any interruption of service of more than twenty-four hours' duration, or any substantial change in the Ambulance Service which causes or threatens to cause the Ambulance Service to be carried out differently than specified in the current operating Permit, the Permittee Shall notify the Fire Chief immediately in writing, stating the facts of such change. 
B.  Upon request by the Permittee, the Fire Chief May grant a temporary Variance in writing from the condition specified in the original Permit if he finds that such change is in substantial compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If the Fire Chief finds that such change is not in substantial compliance with this chapter, he May suspend, revoke or amend the Permit by Written Notice. In all cases when a change of ownership occurs in an Ambulance Service, an Application for new Permit Shall be filed with the Fire Department within thirty Days. In no case Shall any temporary Variance be valid for more than sixty Days without Written Approval of the City Council. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.130 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  If the renewal of a Permit is denied by the Fire Chief or if the Fire Chief suspends or revokes a Permit, the Permittee Shall be given Written Notice specifying not only the action taken, but in the event of a suspension or revocation, the effective date thereof. Such notification Shall be by registered or certified mail. 
B.  The Permittee Shall, upon Written request, be entitled to a hearing before the Fire Chief. The Permittee's request for a hearing Shall be made within ten Days of receiving the Notice of denial, revocation or suspension. The Permittee Shall then be afforded a hearing prior to the effective date of denial, suspension or revocation. The technical rules of evidence Shall not apply to the hearing, but the witnesses, including the Permittee, Shall swear or affirm to tell the truth under penalty of perjury. The Fire Chief may, after such hearing, affirm, modify or set aside the original Decision. The Fire Chief Shall notify all public safety agencies, City Communications Departments and all Hospitals in the respective Permit area if the Permit renewal is denied or if a Permit is suspended or revoked. 
C.  If the Fire Chief denies the renewal of or suspends or revokes a Permit, the Permittee Shall have the right to demand a hearing by the City Council. A request for a hearing Shall be made in writing to the clerk of the Council within fifteen calendar Days Following the denial, suspension or revocation of the Permit. Upon receipt of a Written request, the clerk of the Council Shall set the Matter for hearing on a date not more than sixty Days Following receipt of the Written request and Shall give Notice to the appellant and the Fire Chief of the date set for the hearing. At the hearing, the Council Shall hear the appellant, the Fire Chief, and any other interested Persons who May present evidence relevant to the Decision of the Fire Chief. The technical rules of evidence Shall not apply to the hearing, but the witnesses, including the Permittee, Shall swear or affirm to tell the truth under penalty of perjury. Within thirty Days Following the conclusion of the hearing, the Council Shall issue its Order whether or not the Permit should be issued or the suspension or revocation sustained. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.140 - Back-up Emergency Service requirements. 
Each Permittee Shall provide back-up Emergency Ambulance Service (of the class or classes specified in his Permit) on a continuous twenty-four hours per Day basis. If for any reason an Operator Stops providing the prescribed class or classes of Ambulance Service on a continuous twenty-four hours per Day basis, he Shall immediately Stop any advertisement of Emergency Services which have been discontinued and immediately notify the Fire Chief. This continuous service requirement does not apply to a Permittee that provides only standby services at Special Events. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.150 - Conformance with service areas/zones. 
A.  If the City Council by Resolution divides the City into Ambulance Service areas or zones, no Ambulance Operator Shall, but for the exceptions below, provide Ambulance Service for Ambulance calls originating within the City outside the territorial limits fixed in the Permit issued to him. 
B.  Exceptions. A Permittee May provide service for Ambulance calls outside the territorial limits fixed in the Permit issued to him: 
1.  Upon request by any Law enforcement or governmental agency having jurisdiction; 
2.  Upon request of any Person for Emergency Ambulance Service when an Ambulance is not immediately available in the Permit area from which the request originates; 
3.  Upon request of a Permittee in an adjoining service area/zone, when such Permittee does not have an Ambulance immediately available in the Permit area from which a request originates, and when Ambulance Service is immediately required; 
4.  To provide Ambulance Service to any Person who is a Resident within Permittee's Ambulance Service area/zone when such Person is a member of a plan operated by a Permittee who provides Ambulance Service to plan members for a fixed period, without cost or at reduced cost, upon payment of a subscription Fee, in compliance with California Welfare and Institution Code, Chapter 2.2, Article 1; 
5.  To provide Ambulance Service to a Person who originally Used Permittee's service for Ambulance transportation to a destination outside of Permittee's service area; or 
6.  To provide medically required specialized transportation services not immediately available for a Patient in another Permit area/zone. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.160 - Communications requirements. 
Each Permittee Shall establish and maintain radio contact with a central point Designated by the City and its Local base of operation where technically feasible. Radio procedures prescribed in the City Communications Manual Shall be utilized. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.170 - Standards for dispatch. 
Each Ambulance Service receiving an Emergency Ambulance request from a private Person in its service area Shall dispatch an Ambulance in compliance with the procedures identified in Title 13, California Code of Regulations. If an Ambulance is not available for immediate dispatch, the procedures identified in Title 13, California Code of Regulations, Shall be complied with. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.180 - Safety and Emergency equipment requirements. 
Ambulances Shall be maintained at all times in good mechanical repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
A.  Minimum Requirement. All Ambulances Shall be equipped with all safety and Emergency equipment required for Ambulances by the California Vehicle Code, the California Code of Regulations, the Local EMS Agency and administrative rules of the Fire Chief as the same are now Written or hereafter amended. 
B.  ALS and LALS Ambulance Equipment. In addition to the regular Ambulance equipment and supplies, the ALS and LALS Ambulances Shall also be equipped as required by administrative rules of the Fire Chief and the Local EMS Agency. 
C.  Maintenance of Emergency Equipment and Supplies. Dressings, bandaging, instruments, and other medical supplies Used for care and treatment of Patients Shall be protected so they are sterile when ready for Use. Provisions Shall be made to assure autoclaving or resterilization of Emergency equipment when required. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.190 - Personnel. 
A.  Every Person who operates an Ambulance within the City Shall comply with the requirements in the California Code of Regulations for Ambulance Drivers. The Driver of an Ambulance Shall be trained and competent in the proper Use of the Ambulance. The Driver Shall also hold a certificate as an Emergency Medical Technician I, II or P, unless the Ambulance Service Operator has been specifically exempted from this requirement by the City Council. 
B.  Ambulance Attendant. An Ambulance Attendant Shall be trained and competent in the proper Use of all Emergency equipment required by this chapter and Shall hold the required certification as an EMT-I. If the Vehicle is being Used as an ALS or LALS Ambulance, at least one Attendant Shall hold a certificate as an EMT-Paramedic for ALS Ambulances or a certificate as an EMT-II for LALS Ambulances. 
C.  Attendant Required. Each Ambulance being operated within the City Shall be staffed by both a Driver and Attendant, unless the Ambulance Service Operator has been exempted. The Attendant of an Ambulance Shall occupy the Patient compartment while transporting any Person in apparent need of medical attention. 
An Ambulance Driver or Ambulance Attendant who is a California-licensed physician or a mobile intensive care nurse Shall be exempt from the Emergency medical training requirement of this section. 
This section Shall not apply during any "State of Emergency," or "Local Emergency" as defined in the Government Code of the State. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.200 - Records. 
Each Permittee Shall maintain complete and accurate records of all services provided and a log containing all dispatch and arrival times, locations, nature of service provided, names of recipients of services, total amounts charged, and such other information as May be specified in Fire Department Rules and Regulations. All records Shall be made under penalty of perjury and Shall be available for inspection and Copying by the Fire Chief at all times. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.210 - Rates. 
No Ambulance Shall charge more than the Following rates for Ambulance Service. 
A.  One Patient. The schedule of maximum rates that May be charged for Ambulance Service for one Patient Shall be as set by Resolution adopted by the City Council. The rate schedule is incorporated in this chapter by reference and is on file in the Office of the clerk of the City Council as provided in subsection H of this section. 
B.  Two or More Patients. 
1.  Each additional stretcher or gurney Patient carried at the same time May be charged the full base rate for response to the call and half the mileage rate. 
2.  Each additional sit-up Patient Shall be charged half the base rate for response to the call and half the mileage rate. 
C.  For group loads from the same origin to the same destination, Permittee Shall divide the total mileage rate equally among all the Patients, and if all the Patients are sit-up Patients, he Shall also divide the total base rate equally among the Patients. 
D.  No charge Shall be made for uninjured or well Persons who accompany a Patient. 
E.  Special Events. The maximum rate for Ambulance standby at a Special Event Shall be as set by Resolution adopted by the City Council. 
F.  All rates are to be computed from the time the Ambulance arrives for hire until the Ambulance is Discharged by the Patient or his Representative, attending physician, or Emergency receiving Facility. 
G.  A schedule of rates, including rates for special services, Shall be posted in a conspicuous place within each Ambulance. 
H.  The schedule of maximum rates for Ambulance Service Shall be subject to amendment by Resolution of the City Council. The clerk of the Council Shall mail a Copy of any such Resolution adopted by the Council to each Permittee, and the new schedule of maximum rates Shall be effective thirty Days after the adoption of the Resolution by the City Council. Three copies of the maximum rates as established by Resolution Shall be on file in the Office of the Clerk of the City Council. 
I.  Proposed rates for special services or proposed changes in such rates Shall be submitted to the Fire Chief for review. Such rates Shall be Approved by that officer before becoming a Part of any Permit and before being charged by any Permittee. The Fire Chief Shall approve proposed rates for special services, or proposed changes in such rates, if he finds that such rates are reasonable in relationship to the cost of providing the special services. The Decision of the Fire Chief to approve or disapprove special rates May be Appealed to the City Council in the same manner as provided in Section 5.49.130. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.220 - Continuation of call. 
An Ambulance based and properly Permitted outside the City Shall be authorized to transport a Patient to or through the City, but Shall not be authorized to transport Patients originating in the City, except under the conditions of Section 5.49.150(B). In order to maintain proper medical support, communications will be maintained with the Ambulance dispatch center for the area. ALS Ambulances will establish and maintain communications with and medical control from a base station in conformance with the rules of the Fire Chief. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.230 - Temporary Permit. 
The Fire Chief May authorize a temporary operating Permit to an Ambulance Service based and properly Permitted by the California Highway Patrol outside the City up to thirty Days for special activities. Such temporary operation Permit Shall conform to the requirements of Section 5.49.080 and Shall contain such additional conditions and restrictions that the Fire Chief deems appropriate for the operation. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.240 - Emergency and disaster operations. 
During any "State of War Emergency," "State of Emergency" or "Local Emergency" as defined in the California Emergency Services Act (Chapter 7 of Division 1 of Title 2 of the Government Code), as amended, each Ambulance Service Operator Shall provide equipment, facilities and personnel as required by the Fire Chief. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.250 - Mutual aid requirements. 
Whenever the Fire Chief or his Designate determines that Ambulance resources within the City are inadequate to respond to a City Emergency/disaster, a request for Emergency Ambulance mutual aid May be made to any Fire Chief or his Designate within the Local EMS Agency region, as required. Whenever the Fire Chief or his Designate receives a request involving Emergency Ambulance mutual aid from any Fire Chief or his Designate within the Local EMS Agency region, such resources Shall be provided as are available. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.260 - User complaint procedures. 
Any User of or Subscriber to an Ambulance Service contending that he has been required to pay an excessive charge for service or that he has received unsatisfactory services May file a Written complaint with the Fire Department setting forth such allegations. The Fire Department Shall notify the Ambulance Service of such complaint and Shall investigate the Matter to determine the validity of the complaint. If the complaint is determined to be valid, the Fire Department Shall take reasonable and proper actions to secure compliance with the conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.270 - Permits nonexclusive. 
The City Shall issue as many or as few Permits under this chapter as May be necessary or desirable for the benefit of the City. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.280 - Enforcement responsibilities. 
A.  The Fire Department Shall make all necessary and reasonable rules and regulations, subject to the Approval of the Council, covering Ambulance Service operations, Ambulance equipment, maintenance, Ambulance personnel, and for the effective and reasonable administration of this chapter. 
B.  The Fire Department Shall inspect the records, facilities, Vehicles, equipment and methods of operation whenever such inspections are deemed necessary. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.290 - Enforcement by Fire Department. 
All provisions of this chapter Shall be enforced by the Fire Department unless otherwise provided. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.49.300 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any Person violating any of the provisions of this chapter Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof Shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than one Year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter Shall constitute a Nuisance and May be abated by the City. 
(Ord. 0-28-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 5.50 - REGULATION OF PRIVATE PATROL OPERATORS 
 
5.50.010 - Legislative purpose. 
The City Council finds and declares that the regulation of Private Security Guards is necessary to protect the public peace and safety by assuring that Private Security Guards are properly trained, by requiring employers of Private Security Guards to identify their Employees and Vehicles in a manner that is distinctive but not similar to the Colton Police Officers and Vehicles, and by requiring Private Security Guards to notify the Police Department of their activities within the City. 
(Ord. 0-24-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.50.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions contained in this section Shall govern the meanings of the Following terms, words, phrases and their derivations: 
"Bureau" means the Bureau of Security and Investigative Services of the Department of Consumer Affairs of the State of California. 
"Chief" means the Chief of Police of the City of Colton. 
"City" means the City of Colton, California. 
"City Council" means the City Council of the City of Colton. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Colton. 
"Department" means the Colton Police Department. 
"Employee" means any Private Security Guard licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
"Firearm Permit" means any Permit or qualification required by the Bureau as a prerequisite to carry a firearm. 
"Insignia" means the distinctive patch affixed to a cap or Uniform worn by a security guard licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
"Private Security Guard" means a Person who furnishes, or agrees to furnish, himself, herself or another Person to act as a guard or watchman for the purpose of protecting other Persons or Property through keeping and maintaining peace and order, provided that except as provided herein this definition Shall not apply to those Persons exempted by subsections (b) through (o) of Section 7522 or by subsections (b) through (p) of Section 7582.2 of the Business and Professions Code. 
"State License" or "State Registration" means a license or registration issued to a Person by the Bureau of Security and Investigative Services pursuant to Chapter 11.5 of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code which authorizes the Person to act as a private patrol Operator. 
"Uniform" means the distinctive clothing worn by each Private Security Guard while on duty. 
"Vehicle Decal" means the emblems affixed to a Vehicle Used by a Private Security Guard. 
(Ord. 0-24-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.50.030 - License—Required. 
No Person Shall act as a Private Security Guard within the City without a license issued pursuant to this chapter. Any Person who acts as a Private Security Guard within the City without a license issued pursuant to this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor except that any Employee of a government entity who acts as a guard, patrolman or watchman Shall not be required to obtain a license under this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-24-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.50.040 - License—Application. 
A.  Every Person who acts, or intends to act, as a Private Security Guard within the City Shall apply for a license to continue or commence said Business with the Department. Such Application Shall be submitted on the form provided by the Department. Such Application Shall require the Following information from each Applicant: 
1.  The Applicant's current name and any former name Used within the prior ten Years; 
2.  The name under which the Applicant intends to work or do Business; 
3.  If the Applicant is an individual, the Applicant's name, date of birth, place of birth, Driver's license number and social security number and residential addresses for the prior ten Years; 
4.  If the Applicant is a corporation, the name, date of birth, place of birth, Driver's license number, social security number and residential addresses for the prior ten Years of each officer and each Person who will manage the Business within the City; 
5.  If the Applicant is a partnership, the name, date of birth, place of birth, Driver's license number, social security number and residential addresses for the prior ten Years of each general partner and each Person who will manage the Business within the City; 
6.  The Applicant's experience as a Private Security Guard including the identity and location of any such Private Security Guard Business currently or previously managed, operated or owned; 
7.  The address of each location for which the Applicant seeks a Permit to act as a Private Security Guard and the identity of the Owner of said Premises; 
8.  The Applicant's complete history of any Acts or crimes described in Section 480 of the Business and Professions Code, if any, and the Violation of any licensing statutes or Ordinances for any Business previously conducted by the Applicant; 
9.  A photograph of the Applicant, taken within sixty Days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the Application, which Shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of each Applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
10.  A certificate of licensure to act as a private patrol Operator issued by the Chief of the Bureau, if the Applicant holds such a certificate; 
11.  The Applicant's proposed Insignia, Uniforms and Vehicle Decals; 
12.  Any other information reasonably necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter and to evaluate the qualifications, credibility and moral character of the Applicant to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The Applicant Shall verify the accuracy, completeness and truthfulness of the information submitted on the Application under penalty of perjury. 
C.  The information provided hereunder Shall be, and remain, confidential except for the names of the individuals identified in the Application, their Business names and Business addresses. 
D.  Upon the filing of an initial Application, the Applicant Shall pay the Fee to investigate and process the Application as May be set by the City Council by Resolution. Upon the filing of an Application for a license renewal, the Applicant Shall pay the Fee to investigate and process the Application as May be set by the City Council by Resolution. 
(Ord. 0-24-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.50.050 - License—Issuance. 
A.  Upon receipt of a completed Application for a private patrol Operator license, the Chief, or the Chief's Designee, Shall initiate an investigation of each Applicant and complete said investigation no later than sixty Days from the filing of the Application. The Chief, or the Chief's Designee, Shall investigate the Following: 
1.  The accuracy, completeness and truthfulness of the information contained in the Application; 
2.  The Applicant's history, if any, of Violations of criminal or regulatory Violations; 
3.  The Applicant's prior Business experience as it relates to the management or operation of any Private Security Guard Business or similar Business; 
4.  The Applicant's compliance with other applicable Laws, Ordinances and regulations; 
5.  The Applicant's moral character to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  If the Chief finds that the Applicant possesses good moral character to act as a Private Security Guard and to comply with the requirements of this chapter, and that the Applicant and the Applicant's Employees possess all required State Licenses and registrations, the Chief Shall grant a Private Security Guard license to such Person. If granted, the license Shall be in the form prescribed by the Chief and Shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter and the conditions imposed by the Chief. If denied, the Chief Shall state the basis of the denial in writing. 
C.  A Private Security Guard license Shall be valid for an initial period of one Year which Shall automatically expire unless the licensee applies for a renewal of the license. A license renewal May be made upon the original Application or upon another renewal form as prescribed by the Chief. After an investigation of the renewal Application, the Chief May renew or deny the license upon the same grounds as an original license for an additional period of two Years. If denied, the Chief Shall state the basis of the denial in writing. 
D.  Any such license Shall not be transferable by the Person to whom it is issued. Any such transfer Shall automatically void the license. 
(Ord. 0-24-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.50.060 - License—Conditions. 
A.  If the Chief grants a Private Security Guard license, the Chief May impose any condition on the license that reasonably furthers the purposes and requirements of this chapter or other applicable Laws and Ordinances including but not limited to the Following conditions: 
1.  The Insignia, Uniforms and Vehicle Decals which a licensee May Use within the City; 
2.  The removal of any Person from the licensee's employment; 
3.  Any reasonable condition for the operation of the licensee's Business within the City; 
4.  The provisions of this chapter and all applicable Ordinances of the City. 
B.  The Chief of Police Shall retain jurisdiction to review the licensee's compliance with this chapter and the conditions imposed on each Private Security Guard license including but not limited to the right to add, delete or modify any condition of the license based upon the circumstances in existence at the time of such proposed review. Each Private Security Guard license granted pursuant to this chapter is conditioned by these review provisions. No action Shall be taken hereunder unless the Chief of Police finds that such action is necessary to protect the public morals, health, peace, safety or welfare, or that such action is necessary to Permit reasonable operation under the Private Security Guard license previously granted. 
C.  The Chief of Police May institute a review hearing of any license; provided, that a Written statement containing the factual basis of the review and any proposed condition has been prepared and delivered to the licensee together with Notice of the time, date, and place of the review hearing at least twenty Days prior to the review hearing. 
(Ord. 0-24-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.50.070 - Operating requirements. 
Each Private Security Guard licensee is subject to the Following requirements: 
A.  No licensee Shall duplicate, Use, or employ any device which implies the authorization to Use, the name or seal of the City or the Police Department. 
B.  No licensee Shall Use, or Permit the Use of, any arm patch, badge, Insignia, Uniform or Vehicle Decal which resemble, in any way, those of the Police Department. 
C.  Unless a different Uniform is authorized or required by the Chief of Police, each licensee or Employee thereof Shall wear gray pants and a gray shirt at all times while acting as a Private Security Guard or otherwise on duty. The shirt or any article of clothing worn over the shirt Shall bear in a visible location the words "security guard," and neither the shirt, pants, any jacket, Vehicle, or other item of clothing or equipment Shall bear the words "police" or "officer." Each licensee or Employee thereof Shall carry an identification card at all times while acting as a Private Security Guard or otherwise on duty, which card Shall identify the bearer as a Private Security Guard or Shall identify the name of the bearer's employer. 
D.  Each licensee engaging in work or activities requiring a private patrol Operator license from the Bureau or registration with the Bureau Shall be and remain so licensed or registered. 
E.  Each of a licensee's security guards, patrol Persons or other Employees required to be registered by the Bureau Shall be qualified and remain registered as required by the Bureau. 
F.  Each security guard who in the course of his or her employment carries a deadly weapon Shall be and remain registered to carry firearms by the Bureau of Consumer Affairs. 
G.  Each licensee Shall maintain a current roster of each Employee containing their names, addresses, telephone numbers and State License numbers and Shall make the roster available to the Department upon the request of the Chief. 
H.  Each licensee Shall enter into a Written contract with each of its clients who employ or engage the services of the licensee which are to be rendered within the City. Such licensee Shall notify the Department of all of its assignments within the City within seventy-two hours after being employed or engaged to conduct such services but no later than twenty-four hours prior to the commencement of such services within the City. Such licensee Shall coordinate its assignments with the Department. Upon request of the Chief, the licensee Shall submit a Copy of any of its contracts for service to the Department. 
I.  Each licensee Shall notify the Department of the discovery that a deadly weapon, which has been recorded as being in the licensee's possession, has been lost or stolen, or missing or misplaced for more than seven Days. Said discovery Shall be reported immediately to the Department and then to the Chief in writing within twenty-four hours after the discovery. The report Shall identify the firearm and the circumstances of the weapon's disappearance, loss or theft. 
J.  Each licensee Shall report the Discharge of any firearm by a licensee or any officer, partner or Employee of a licensee while acting within the course and scope of his or her employment within the City. Any such Discharge Shall be reported immediately to the Department and then to the Chief in writing within twenty-four hours after the Discharge. The report Shall contain the circumstances regarding the firearm Discharge and any other information requested by the Chief. 
K.  Each licensee Shall immediately report those physical altercations involving members of the public and a licensee or any officer, partner, or Employee of a licensee while acting within the course and scope of his or her employment within the City. Any physical altercation Shall be reported immediately to the Department and then to the Chief in writing within twenty-four hours after the physical altercation. The report Shall contain the circumstances regarding the physical altercation and any other information requested by the Chief. 
L.  Each licensee Shall notify immediately the Department of any criminal activity within the City which May constitute a Federal Bureau of Investigation Part 1 offense observed by a licensee or any officer, partner or Employee of a licensee while acting within the course and scope of his or her employment within the City. 
M.  Each licensee Shall furnish the Department with the telephone number utilized by the licensee's employer or by the licensee in the operation of the licensee's Business. 
N.  Each licensee Shall at all times be legally responsible for the good conduct in the operation of the Business of his or her Employees or agents. 
O.  Each licensee, except those described in Section 7582.2(a) of the Business and Professions Code, Shall comply with Chapter 11.5 of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code and all regulations adopted thereunder. 
(Ord. 0-24-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.50.080 - Investigations. 
A.  Upon any Written complaint or any adverse information regarding a licensee, the Chief May initiate an investigation of any licensee or any officer, partner or Employee of a licensee or any incident involving a licensee or any officer, partner or Employee of a licensee, the Chief May initiate an appropriate investigation. 
B.  The Chief May utilize the information derived from the investigation to impose any reasonable condition on a licensee, suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, file charges with the Bureau against a licensee or initiate criminal proceedings. 
C.  The Chief is authorized to file charges, pursuant to Section 7515(f) of the Business and Professions Code, alleging that a registered security guard, patrolperson or other Employee of a non-exempt licensee fails to meet any State standard for registration. 
(Ord. 0-24-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.50.090 - License—Suspension and revocation. 
A.  In the event that a licensee appears to have violated or failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, any condition of the license or applicable State Law, the Chief of Police May suspend or revoke the license. The Chief Shall submit a Notice of suspension or revocation or a Notice of intent to suspend or revoke the license, the basis of that Notice and the evidence supporting the proposed suspension or revocation of the license. 
B.  The Chief Shall Notice a hearing within five Days of mailing or delivery of the Notice. At the hearing, the licensee May appear and produce any evidence on the subject. Likewise, any interested Party May appear and introduce evidence on the subject. 
C.  If the Chief finds that the licensee has violated, or failed to comply with, any provision of this chapter, any condition of the license or any applicable State Law, the Chief May suspend or revoke the license. Within five Days Following the conclusion of the hearing, the Chief Shall render a Decision on the proposed suspension or revocation. The Decision Shall contain the evidence and the findings supporting the action on the license. 
(Ord. 0-24-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.50.100 - Appeal to City Manager. 
A.  Any Decision of the Chief of Police to deny, grant, modify, suspend or revoke a license of a Private Security Guard May be Appealed to the City Manager. The Appeal Shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk within ten Days of any Decision by the Chief of Police. Unless an Appeal is filed within such period, any action or Decision of the Chief of Police Shall be final and the City Manager Shall lack jurisdiction to act on such Appeal. No Appeal Shall be valid unless accompanied by the appropriate Fee as determined by a Resolution of the City Council to reimburse the City for the cost to process the Appeal. 
B.  The statement of Appeal Shall identify the specific action of the Chief from which the Appeal is taken, specify the grounds for the Appeal, and identify the relief requested from the City Manager. 
C.  Upon receipt of a statement of Appeal, the City Manager Shall set the Matter for a hearing within twenty Days. The City Manager May either hear the Appeal or Designate another Person or panel to hear the Appeal, provided that no member of the Department, including the Chief, May hear the Appeal. If the City Manager wishes to have a Hearing Officer who is not a City Employee, officer, or elected official, or a hearing panel which is not composed entirely of City Employees, officers, or elected officials, such Hearing Officer or hearing panel Must be Designated by a neutral body Designated by the City Manager. The City Manager, or the City Manager's Designee, May deny the Appeal or May grant the Appeal, in whole or in Part. Within ten Days Following the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager, or the City Manager's Designee, Shall render a Decision on the Appeal which Shall address each Matter raised by the Appeal. The Decision of the City Manager, or the City Manager's Designee, Shall be final. 
(Ord. 0-24-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 5.52 UNATTENDED DONATION/COLLECTION BOXES 
 
5.52.010 - Purpose. 
To ensure the prevention of blight and to further public health and safety, it is in the interest of the City to prevent the proliferation of unattended donation and collection bins (UDCB) and their placement in required parking spaces, required landscaped areas, and residential zoning districts of the City. The proliferation of these UDCBs contribute to visual clutter; and in areas throughout the State, UDCBs have contributed to blight due to graffiti and poor maintenance, and the accumulation of debris and excess items outside of the UDCBs. They can also interfere with the proper collection of data concerning the diversion of waste within the City from landfills. The purpose of these regulations is to promote the health, safety, and/or welfare of the public, and protect the property rights of the owners of the parcels on which the UDCBs are located, by providing minimum blight-related performance standards for the operation of UDCBs, including establishing criteria to ensure that (1) material is not allowed to accumulate outside of the UDCBs, (2) UDCBs remain free of graffiti and blight, (3) UDCBs are maintained in sanitary conditions, (4) the UDCBs are not placed without the approval of property owners, (5) contact information is readily available so that the operators can be contacted if there are any blight-related questions or concerns, and (6) that operators properly report information concerning the diversion of materials from landfills. This section regulates the size, number, placement, installation and maintenance of UDCBs, as is necessary to accomplish the foregoing purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.020 - Conflicting provisions. 
Where a conflict exists between the regulations or requirements in this chapter and applicable regulations or requirements contained in other chapters of the Colton Municipal Code, the applicable regulations or requirements of this chapter shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.030 - Violation. 
Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be prima facie evidence of an existing violation, a continuing blight and a declared public nuisance and shall be abated by the Director in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any person in violation will be subject to administrative penalties, citations, civil action and/or other legal remedies. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.040 - Responsibility. 
The parcel owner and the UDCB operator (operator) have joint and several liability for blight-related conditions and/or compliance with this chapter, including fees, administrative citations, civil actions, and/or legal remedies relating to a UDCB. The parcel owner remains liable for any violation of duties imposed by this chapter even if the parcel owner has, by agreement, imposed on the operator the duty of complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.050 - Definitions. 
"Accessory activity" means an activity that is incidental to, and customarily associated with, a specified principal activity. 
"Agent" means a person who is authorized by the parcel owner to act on their behalf to be the applicant for a UDCB permit. To be considered an agent, a person must be given express written authorization from the parcel owner on a form provided by the City to apply specifically for a UDCB permit. For the purpose of this chapter, a person who is only given general authorization to act on the behalf of a parcel owner for various activities and transactions in regards to a property is not considered an agent. 
"Blight" or "nuisance" means the conditions as set forth in Section 8.04.030 of the Colton Municipal Code. 
"Director" means the Development Services Director and his or her successor in title and his or her designees. 
"Donated/collected material" means salvageable personal property, such as clothing and books and household items that is collected for periodic transport off-site for processing or redistribution or both. 
"Parcel owner" or "property owner" means the owner of real property on which a UDCB is or is proposed to be placed. 
"Principal activity" means an activity that fulfills a primary function of an establishment, institution, household, or other entity. 
"Principal building" means a main building that is occupied a principal activity. 
"UDCB operator" or "operator" means a person or entity who utilizes or maintains a UDCB to solicit donations/collections of salvageable personal property. 
"UDCB permit" means the City of Colton's annually renewable permit required to place, operate, maintain, or allow a UDCB within the Colton City limits. 
"Unattended donation/collection bins" or "UDCBs" means unstaffed drop-off bins, boxes, containers, receptacles, or similar facility that accept textiles, shoes, books and/or other salvageable personal property items to be used by the operator for distribution, resale, or recycling. 
"Unpermitted UDCB" means a UDCB established either without a UDCB permit or with a UDCB permit that was issued in error or on the basis of incorrect or incomplete information supplied, or in violation of any law, ordinance, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.060 - Permit required for UDCBs. 
A.  With the exception of UDCBs described in Subsection B, below, it is unlawful to place, operate, maintain or allow a UDCB on any real property unless the parcel owner/agent and/or operator first obtain a UDCB permit from the City. A separate UDCB permit is required for each UDCB. 
B.  UDCBs that are either enclosed within a principal building or are accessory to a principal activity on a property owned or leased by the bin operator shall not require a UDCB permit. However, UDCBs that are accessory to a principal activity on a property owned or leased by the bin operator shall meet all other requirements of this chapter except the requirements contained in Subsection 5.52.110 (A), (B) and/or (C). 
C.  The UDCB permit applicant shall be the UDCB operator and the permit may not be transferred, conveyed or otherwise assigned to another person or entity. 
D.  Decisions regarding UDCB permit applications shall be made by the Director and the Director shall be considered the investigating official acting on behalf of the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.070 - Application requirements. 
The UDCB permit application shall be made on a form provided by the Development Services Department. All applications shall be filed with the Development Services Department and shall include: 
A.  A signed agreement stating that the parcel owner/agent and operator will abide by all the processes and requirements described in this chapter and an expedited code enforcement process; 
B.  A non-refundable Administrative Review application fee in an amount set by the master fee schedule; 
C.  For permit applications for existing UDCBs, a signed affidavit, under penalty of perjury, stating that the UDCB existed at the proposed location prior to the adoption of this Ordinance. 
D.  A signed authorization from the parcel owner/agent to allow placement of the UDCB; 
E.  A signed acknowledgement of responsibility from the parcel owner/agent and the operator for joint and several liability for violations of conditions or regulations, and/or blight relating to the UDCB; 
F.  Proof of general liability insurance of at least one million dollars covering the applicant's UDCB and naming the City of Colton as an additional insured; 
G.  For nonprofit operators, evidence that the nonprofit has been registered as a non-profit organization with the City of Colton, is recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as such, and complies with California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 148 et seq. as it may be amended; 
H.  For for-profit operators, proof of an active business tax certificate with the City of Colton; 
I.  The name, address, email, website (if available) and telephone number of the UDCB operator and parcel owner, including twenty-four-hour contact information; 
J.  (1) all properties located within one thousand feet of the subject lot of the proposed UCDB; (2) a radius line drawn one thousand feet from the proposed UCDB location; and (3) all existing UDCBs within one thousand feet of the proposed UDCB location; 
K.  Photographs of the location; 
L.  A site plan containing: 
1.  Location and dimensions of parcel boundaries (provide all parcel boundaries for sites made up of multiple parcels); 
2.  Location of all buildings; 
3.  Proposed UDCB location and footprint dimensions; 
4.  Distance between the proposed UDCB and parcel lines and buildings; and 
5.  Location and dimension of all existing and proposed driveways, garages, carports, parking spaces, maneuvering aisles, pavement and striping/marking; 
M.  Elevations showing the appearance, materials, and dimensions of the UDCB, including the information required in this chapter to be placed on the UDCB and notice sign; 
N.  A description and/or diagram of the proposed locking mechanism of the UDCB; 
O.  A maintenance plan (including graffiti removal, pick-up schedule, and litter and trash removal on and around the UDCB) that is sufficient to prevent/eliminate blight-related conditions; and 
P.  Any other reasonable information regarding time, place, and manner of UDB operation, placement, and/or maintenance that the Director requires to evaluate the proposal consistent with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.080 - Requirements for the approval of a UDCB permit. 
The Director shall not issue a UDCB permit unless each of the following is true: 
A.  The applicant has submitted a complete and accurate application accompanied by the applicable fee; 
B.  There are no open citations, unpaid fines or unresolved violations or complaints related to any UDCB managed by the proposed operator; 
C.  All existing unpermitted UDCBs that are managed by the proposed operator have been removed; 
D.  Any verified blight on the subject property has been abated and any case of a complaint to the City regarding blighted conditions on the subject property has been closed; and 
E.  The proposal is consistent with all the requirements of this chapter, including the location requirements in Section 5.52.110. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.090 - Time limit for final decision. 
The Director shall provide a written decision regarding the placement of a UDCB within sixty days of the submission of a complete application for a UDCB permit. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.100 - Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation. 
A.  Any Person aggrieved by the action of the Development Services Director in the denial of a Permit or license as provided by this Chapter shall have the right of Appeal to the Code Compliance and Housing Appeals Board ("CCHAB"). Such Appeal Shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk, within fourteen calendar Days after Notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such Person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the Appeal. The Code Compliance and Housing Appeals Board Shall set a time and place for a hearing on such Appeal and Notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided by this section for Notice of hearing or revocation. The Decision and order of the CCHAB on such Appeal Shall be final and conclusive. 
B.  If any Person holding a Permit, as provided in this Chapter, is found to conduct or carry on such business contrary to the provisions of this Chapter or any other law relating to or regulating such business, it shall be subject to suspension, revocation, and any other penalty permitted under this Code. No Permit shall be suspended or revoked until after a hearing has been conducted before the CCHAB relating to such suspension or revocation. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and shall be served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon, which notice shall state the grounds of complaint against the holder of such Permit, or against the business carried on by her or him and shall also state the time when and the place where such hearing will be held. Such notice shall be served upon the holder of such Permit by delivering the same to such Person, his manager or agent, or to any Person in charge of, or employed in the place of business of such licensee or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of such Person with some Person of suitable age and discretion. In the event the holder of such license cannot be found, and a service of such Notice cannot be made upon him or her in the manner herein provided, then a copy of such notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to such holder or such licensee at his place of business or residence at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. The Decision and order of the CCHAB on such Appeal Shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.110 - Location. 
A.  No UDCB shall be located within one thousand feet, as measured from its footprint, from any other UDCB, except those described in Subsection 5.52.060(B). 
B.  With the exception of areas described in Subsection (C), below, UDCBs are only allowed on properties located in commercial, industrial, and mixed use zones, which are designated in the zoning maps described in Chapter 18 of the Colton Municipal Code, or other properties with legally established non-residential uses. 
C.  No UDCBs are permitted on properties improved wholly or partly improved with residential housing, regardless of zoning. 
D.  A UDCB is only permitted on properties that also contains a principal building that contains at least one operating business, or non-profit organization including churches. 
E.  UDCBs are prohibited within any of the following locations: 
1.  Fifteen feet from lot lines of properties within an underlying residential zone as designated in the City's zoning maps; 
2.  The public right-of-way and twenty feet of the public street right-of-way; 
3.  Five feet from any property line; or 
4.  Landscaping. 
F.  UDCBs cannot block or impede access to: 
1.  Required parking or driveways; 
2.  Pedestrian routes; 
3.  Emergency vehicle routes; 
4.  Building ingress and egress; 
5.  Required handicapped accessibility routes; 
6.  Required easements; or 
7.  Trash enclosure areas or access to trash bins/trash enclosures. 
G.  UDCBs cannot impede the functioning of exhaust, ventilation, or fire extinguishing systems. 
H.  No more than one UDCB is permitted per parcel unless documented evidence is submitted to the Director that a second bin is required due to the volume of items delivered to the site. A UDCB must be operating at a site for at least ninety days in order to establish that a second bin is required. Both UDCBs shall have the same operator. 
I.  The donation/collection area must be visible from the principal building in an area provided illumination at least one foot candle. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.120 - Physical attributes. 
A.  UDCBs shall: 
1.  Be fabricated of metal; 
2.  Be placed on ground that is paved with durable cement; 
3.  Have a collection opening that has a tamper-resistant locking mechanism; 
4.  Be no more than eighty-four inches high, sixty inches wide and fifty inches deep; bins over seventy-two inches high shall obtain a building permit from the Development Services Department; 
5.  Not be electrically or hydraulically powered or otherwise mechanized; 
6.  Not be a fixture of the site or considered an improvement to real property; and 
7.  Have the following information conspicuously displayed on at least two-inch type visible from the front on the UDCB: 
i.  The name, address, twenty-four-hour telephone number, and, if available, the Internet Web address, and email address of the owner and operator of the UDCB and the parcel owner/owner agent; 
ii.  Address and parcel number of the site; 
iii.  Instructions on the process to register a complaint regarding the UDCB to the City Code Compliance Division; 
iv.  The type of material that may be deposited; 
v.  A notice stating that no material shall be left outside the UDCB; 
vi.  The pickup schedule for the UDCB; 
vii.  A City approved identification system that identifies the box as being properly permitted by the City; 
viii.  If the UDCB is owned by a nonprofit organization: 
a.  A statement describing the charitable cause that will benefit from the donations; 
b.  The Federal Tax identification number of the nonprofit organization operating the UDCB; and 
c.  The statement "This collection box is owned and operated by a nonprofit organization." 
ix.  If the UDCB is owned by a for-profit entity: 
a.  "This donation is not tax deductible." and 
b.  "This collection bin is owned and operated by a for-profit organization." 
B.  The parcel containing the UDCB shall display a sign with text in at least two-inch typeface stating that no material shall be left outside the UDCB. This sign shall be installed at a visually conspicuous location on the UDCB, or within a radius of twenty feet from the UDCB. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.130 - Maintenance. 
A.  No blight shall be within twenty feet of the UDCB including, but not limited to donation/collection overflow, litter, debris, and dumped material. 
B.  UDCBs shall be maintained and in good working order. Items to be repaired, removed, and/or abated include, but are not limited to graffiti, removed or damaged signs and notifications, peeling paint, rust, and broken collection operating mechanisms. 
C.  UDCBs shall be serviced not less than once weekly, and such service shall occur between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. on weekdays and ten a.m. and six p.m. on weekends. This servicing includes the removal of donated/collected material and abatement of the blight described this section. 
D.  The operator shall maintain an active email address and a twenty-four-hour telephone service with recording capability for the public to register complaints. 
E.  UDCBs cannot be used for the collection of solid waste and/or any hazardous materials. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.140 - Liability. 
Applicants and/or owner/owners agent shall maintain a minimum general liability insurance of one million dollars for the duration of the operation of a UDCB at each site, to cover any claims or losses due to the placement, operation, or maintenance of the UDCB and naming the City of Coltonas additional insured. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.150 - AB 939 Reporting. 
Permitted UDCB operators shall be required to report annually the tonnage collected from their UDCBs within the City, including a breakdown by material type, whether the materials were reused or recycled, and any other information needed by the City to comply with AB 939. This information must be available to the City within sixty days of the end of the calendar year. Failure to report will be grounds for revocation of the UDCB permit. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.160 - Compliance process. 
A.  Whenever the Chief of Police determines that a UDCB with a valid permit does not conform to any requirement in this chapter he/she shall promptly notify the parcel owner/agent and UDCB operator of the violation. The violation must be abated and proof of such submitted to the City within seventy-two hours after receipt of such notification. 
B.  If an unpermitted UDCB is not within a permissible geographic area according to Section 5.52.110, then both the UDCB and any blight within twenty feet of the UDCB shall be removed within seventy-two hours after the parcel owner/agent and UDCB operator is notified of the violation. 
C.  If an unpermitted UDCB is within a permissible geographic area according to Section 5.52.110 then any blight within twenty feet of the site shall be removed and the parcel owner/agent and/or operator shall either: 1) apply for all UDCB permits required by this chapter; or 2) remove the UDCB. This requirement shall be met within seventy-two hours after the parcel owner/agent and/or UDCB operator are notified of the violation. 
D.  Each day that a violation of a requirement of this chapter is not abated constitutes a new and separate offense. 
E.  The operation or maintenance of an unpermitted UDCB may be abated or summarily abated by the City in any manner by this Code or otherwise by law for the abatement of public nuisances. Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773, all expenses incurred by the City in connection with any action to abate a public nuisance will be chargeable to the persons creating, causing, committing, or maintaining the public nuisance. 
F.  The City shall assess administration citations pursuant to Chapter 8.12 of the Colton Municipal Code against a parcel owner and/or operator who fails to timely resolve a violation or verified compliance is not sent to the City showing the resolution of the violation relating to a UDCB after notice. 
G.  The daily administrative citations described in Subsection F shall continue until either the violation is abated or the UDCB is removed. Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773, removal of the UDCB shall be at the expense of the parcel owner and/or operator. Any UDCBs removed shall also have any of its UDCB permits revoked. 
H.  The property owner and operator are jointly and severally liable and responsible for all fees, administrative citations, and compliance with the regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
5.52.170 - Notice required for removal. 
A.  Any UDCB scheduled to be removed by either the City or the operator shall clearly display a notice on the UDCB with at least four-inch type visible from the front on the UDCB that states the following text in capital letters: "THIS BOX WILL BE REMOVED BY" followed by the date the UDCB is scheduled for removal. The operator and property owners are jointly and severally responsible for the placement of the notice. 
B.  For UDCBs required to be removed by the City of Colton due to an abatement order, the notice shall be posted immediately after the City notifies the operator and/or parcel owner that the facility is required to be removed. 
C.  Notice that a UDCB will be removed by the owner or operator shall be posted at least fourteen calendar days prior to the removal of the facility. 
(Ord. No. O-21-16, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
Title 6 - HEALTH AND SAFETY  
Chapter 6.04 - ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH CODE (EHC) 
 
6.04.010 - Purpose. 
Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Sections 480 et seq., 500 et seq., 1155.5, Title 17 of the California Administrative Code, and other relevant State Law, for the protection of the environmental public health, the issuance of Permits and collection of Fees, and providing penalties and remedies for the Violation of such regulations, there is adopted by the City as its environmental health code (EHC), that certain code known as the Uniform Environmental Health Code, being Chapters 1—11, Division 3, Title III of the San Bernardino County Code, except as provided in Section 6.04.020 of this chapter. The City Designates the San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) as the enforcement agency for the purpose of this environmental health code and all State Law pertaining to environmental health. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.6, a Copy of said code is on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-20-87 § 3 (part), 1987)  
6.04.020 - Exceptions to adopted code. 
The environmental health code is amended, changed or deleted as follows: 
A.  Chapter 8: Article 1 — Refuse and Storage, and Article 2 — Refuse Collection, are deleted. 
B.  Chapter 8: Article 4 — Sewage Holding Tanks, Article 6 — Designated Maintenance Areas, and Article 7 — Operation of Multiple ownership Septic Systems, are deleted. 
(Ord. 0-20-87 § 3 (part), 1987)  
6.04.030 - Remedies—Penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any Person or entity to deny Access, interfere with, prevent, restrict, obstruct, or hinder the Department of Environmental Health Services' (DEHS) Employees or agents acting within the scope of their duty or agency. 
B.  Offering physical resistance or bodily attack upon authorized Representatives of DEHS acting within the scope of their duty or agency is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the County Jail for not less than ten Days, without the alternative of a fine. 
C.  In addition to criminal prosecution, civil action and every other remedy or penalty provided by Law, Public Nuisance May be abated or enjoined in an action brought by DEHS, or under circumstances immediately dangerous to public health or safety May be summarily abated by DEHS Enforcement Officers as provided in this chapter or otherwise in the manner provided by Law for the summary abatement of Public Nuisances. 
D.  Except where punishable as a misdemeanor or felony under State Law or in this chapter, any Person or entity who violates any provision of this environmental health code (EHC) Shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof Shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars but not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first Violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second conviction within one Year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for the third conviction within one Year, the fourth and additional convictions within one Year Shall be punishable as misdemeanors and Shall be punished by a fine not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not exceeding six Months, or both, and such convicted Person or entity May in the discretion of the Court be adjudged in addition to the above penalties, to be liable to DEHS for all necessary costs incurred in investigation, discovery, analysis, inspection, clean-up and other actual costs incurred by DEHS or its agents pertaining to the Violation. 
E.  Each Day or portion thereof in Violation Shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. The Owner, manager and operation of every activity or Facility subject to the jurisdiction of this EHC Shall be responsible for any Violation by any Employee of any of its provisions. Payment of any penalty or serving any term of imprisonment herein provided in this chapter Shall not relieve any Person or entity from the responsibility of correcting the condition constituting the Violation. 
(Ord. 0-20-87 § 3 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 6.06 - INSPECTION GRADING OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
6.06.010 - Adoption of County Inspection Grading of Food Establishments Code. 
The City adopts by reference and makes Part of this chapter by reference the Following portions of the San Bernardino County Code: 
A.  Chapter 14 of Division 3 of Title 3; 
B.  Subsection 16.0213B(b)(17) of Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1. 
The aforementioned County Codes are adopted as the Inspection Grading of Food Establishments Code of the City of Colton. 
(Ord. 01-01-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
6.06.020 - Violation — Penalty. 
In accordance with Section 33.1406(c) of the County Code: 
[T]he Letter Grade Card Shall not be defaced, marred, camouflaged, hidden or removed. It Shall be unlawful to operate a food Establishment unless the Letter Grade is posted. Removal of the Letter Grade Card is a Violation of this Chapter and May result in the suspension or revocation of the public health Permit and Shall be punishable as specified in section 33.0112 of this Code. 
In addition, Violations of this chapter May be punishable in accordance with Chapters 8.02 and 8.12 of the Colton Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 01-01-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 6.16 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE 
 
6.16.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever Used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section: 
"Authorized Recycler" means any person or business entity which lawfully collects, accepts, transports or otherwise processes Recyclable Materials from Generators for a fee or profit through a proper permit, business license or other regulatory structure or authorization issued by the City. 
"Business" means any commercial entity, including, but not limited to: proprietorship, firm partnership, person in representative or fiduciary capacity, capacity, association, venture, trust, corporation which is organized for financial gain or for profit; or non-profit corporation or entity, or industrial or manufacturing, restaurant, retail facility, markets, office buildings, hotels, motels, shopping centers, and theaters. 
"City" means City of Colton. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Colton or any person designated by the City Manager. 
"Code Enforcement Officer" means the Employee charged by the City with the responsibility for the enforcement of health and sanitary Ordinances and regulations. 
"Collect or Collection" means to take physical possession of and remove Solid Waste or Recyclable Materials at the place of generation. 
"Combustible Waste Matter" includes and means magazines, books, hats, trimmings from lawns, trees and flower gardens, pasteboard boxes, rags, paper, straw, sawdust, packing Material, shavings, boxes and all such Material that will incinerate through contact with flames of ordinary temperature. 
"Commercial Facility (ies)" means any facility (ties) that is not a residential facility and includes any commercial facility, including but not limited to, a commercial facility, restaurant, retail facility, office, manufacturing or industrial facility, markets, office buildings, hotels, motels, shopping centers, theaters, and Multi-family Dwelling units, located within the boundary of the City. 
"Compost" is defined in a state law (Public Resources Code Section 40116) as the product resulting from the controlled biological decomposition of organic wastes that are source separated from the municipal waste stream, or which are separated at a centralized facility. Compost may also include the product of anaerobic digestion or other conversion technologies. 
"Compostable Material" or "Compostables" mean green waste and other material that can be broken down into, or otherwise become part of, usable Compost in a safe and timely manner, such as for use as soil-conditioning material. Compostable material includes also waste such as food scraps, soiled paper, and plant trimmings. Compostable Material (California Public Resources Code Section 40116) includes vegetable, yard and wood wastes which are not hazardous waste. Compostable materials may also include disposable plastic food service ware and bags if labeled "Compostable," in accordance with the Department of the environment regulations for easy identification, meeting the ASTM Standard Specification (D6400) for compostable plastics. 
"Customer" means a Generator that contracts for Solid Waste removal services and enter into a service agreement with a Franchised Hauler or Authorized Recycler for Recycling services. In the event a Business, non-residential property or Commercial Facility shares Solid Waste or Recycling containers and/or service, Customer refers only to the entity that arranges for service. 
"Director" means Director of Public Works or the Director's designee. 
"Disposal" means the final disposition of Solid Waste at a permitted Landfill or other permitted solid waste disposal facility, as defined in California Public Resources Code 40192. 
"Diversion" or "Divert" means the final reduction or elimination of Solid Waste from solid waste disposal in accordance with California Public Resources Code 40192. 
"Food Vendor" means any and all sales outlets, stores, shops, vehicles or other places of business located or operating within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City that operate primarily to sell or convey foods or beverages to consumers. 
"Franchise" means commercial solid waste collection franchise contracted for or issued by the City to a Hauler. 
"Franchised Hauler" means a Hauler holding a franchise, contract, license or permit issued by the City which authorizes the exclusive or non-exclusive right to provide solid waste handling servicers within all or part of the jurisdictional boundaries of City. 
"Garbage" includes and means Kitchen and Refuse leavings and offal, swill, and any accumulation of animal and vegetable and other Matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay or dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds and vegetables. 
"Generator" means an owner or Responsible Party for a Commercial Facility (ies) or Business, including non-residential property which generates Recyclable or Compostable Materials as a result of its Business, Commercial Facility (ies) or property activity. Generator may also include tenants, property managers for facilities with leased space, employees and contractors of Generator, as well as a Responsible Party for Special Events. Generator also includes the City, its facilities, its non-residential properties and Special Events, its sponsors or cosponsors. 
"Hauler" means any person or commercial entity which lawfully Collects, hauls, or transports Solid Waste for a fee by use of any means, including but not limited to a dumpster truck, roll-off truck, side-load, front-load, rear-load garbage truck or trailer. 
"Landfill" means a permitted disposal site which accepts Solid Waste. 
"Multi-family Dwelling Units" means a residential structure having multiple residences which may be classified as residential (with individual billings for each residence) or commercial (with a single billing for each complex). 
"Noncombustible Waste Matter" includes and means crockery, bottles, glass, tin cans, metal vessels, ashes and all such Material that will not incinerate through contact with flames of ordinary temperature. 
"Occupant" includes and means every Owner, Tenant, Occupant or Person having the care or control of any Premises within the City. 
"Recycle or Recycling" means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become Solid Waste and returning them for use or reuse in the form of raw materials for new, used or reconstituted products which meet the quality standard necessary to be used in the market place as defined in Public Resources Code 40180. Recycling does not include burning, incinerating, or thermally destroying solid waste, as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40201. 
"Recycling Facility" means a Recycling, material recovery or re-use facility that is fully licensed, certified and eligible under federal, state, and local laws and regulations and includes those material recovery or reuse facilities or operations that receive, process, and transfer to market Recyclable and/or Compostable Materials that have been Source Separated from the Solid Waste stream. The Recycling Facility may be located a Landfill. Recycling Facility also means a facility that produces compost. 
"Recyclable Materials" means materials that have been separated from the solid waste stream prior to disposal and returning them for use or reuse in the form of raw materials for new, used or reconstituted products which meet the quality standard necessary to be used in the market place and that are not landfilled. Recyclable Materials include any materials identified by City Manager for which a market exists, including, but not limited to: plastic bottles and jars, paper, cardboard, glass, newspaper, metal containers, cans, as well as compostable materials such as green waste, yard waste or food waste. 
"Refuse" includes both Garbage and Rubbish as defined herein; but it does not include construction Materials, broken concrete, dirt from grading, rocks over two-inch diameter. 
"Responsible Party" means the individual or entity responsible for the Generator's management of Solid Waste and/or Recycling at the Generator's Commercial Facility, Business, non-residential property, or Special Event. 
"Rubbish" means non-putrescible Solid Waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard waste, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, plastics, rubber-by-products and litter. 
"Scavenging or Scavenger" means the uncontrolled and unauthorized removal of Recyclable Materials at any point in the solid waste management system. 
"Self-Haul" or "Self Hauling" means a Generator or Responsible Party who transports his or her own Recyclable or Compostable Materials to a Recycling Facility by using a vehicle owned by that Generator or Generators employees or the Responsible Party rather than using the hauling services of a Franchise Hauler or Authorized Recycler. 
"Solid Waste" means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, Trash, refuse, paper, Rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid semi-solid wastes. Solid Waste does not include hazardous waste or low-level radioactive waste defined in Health and Safety Code Section 25117 and 25141. 
"Source Separated" or "Source Separation" means the process of removing Recyclable Materials from Solid Waste and the place of discard generation, prior to collection, into separate containers that are separately designated for Recyclables, Compostables or Trash for the purposes of Recycling. 
"Special Event" means a community, public, commercial, recreational or social event which may serve food or drink and which may require a permit from the City. Special event may include the temporary or periodic use of a public street, publicly owned site or facility, or Public Park and which is expected to have 1,000 or more persons in attendance. 
"Trash" means material that is designated for Landfill Disposal by the collector and does not include either Recyclable Materials or Compostables. The term Trash does not include hazardous waste, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Sections 25117 and 25141. 
(Ord. 1009 § 1, 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.020 - Policy declaration. 
The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of Refuse Must be controlled by the City for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and to contribute toward diminution of the presence of air Pollutants in the City. The Council finds that, to give practical effect to this policy, a comprehensive system for the periodic collection, removal and disposal of Refuse from all Premises in the City is essential and benefits all Occupants of Premises in the City, and therefore all such Occupants are made liable for the Refuse charges authorized under this chapter. 
(Ord. 1009 § 2, 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.025 - Award of approval for solid waste services. 
The City Council may provide for the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste within the City by means of exclusive or nonexclusive franchise, contract, license, permit, or otherwise. The City shall award such franchise, contract, license, permit, or otherwise pursuant to the procedures applicable to professional services under section 3.08.070. The authority to provide solid waste handling services may be granted under terms and conditions prescribed by the City Council by resolution or ordinance. 
(Ord. O-15-96 § 1, 1996) 
(Ord. No. O-06-15, § 3, 4-21-2015; Ord. No. O-10-15, § 3, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.030 - Depositing and burying prohibited—Exception. 
No Person Shall dump, deposit, place or bury in or upon any Lot, land or Public Place, or in any water or waterway, any Refuse, or any deleterious or offensive substance, or any substance condemned by the Code Enforcement Officer; provided, however, this section Shall not apply to any land Used by the City for a disposal or reclamation site. 
(Ord. 1009 § 3, 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.040 - Refuse accumulation prohibited—Exception. 
Every Occupant shall keep Premises in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall not cause or Permit any Garbage to accumulate on Premises for a period in excess of one calendar week, or cause or Permit any Rubbish to accumulate on Premises for a period in excess of two calendar Months; provided, however, that this provision Shall not be construed to interfere with any Occupant keeping Building Materials upon Premises during the construction, reconstruction or repair of a Building or Structure thereon under a current valid Building Permit, nor with the keeping of wood neatly stacked upon such Premises for household Use. 
(Ord. 1009 § 4, 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.050 - Burning—Garbage—Prohibited. 
No Garbage Shall be burned under any circumstances. 
(Ord. 1009 § 5(a), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.060 - Burning—Rubbish—Permit required—Exception. 
No Rubbish Shall be burned, by incinerator or otherwise, except under Permit issued by the Fire Department, save and excepting that which May be necessary in the operation of barbecue grills. 
(Ord. 1009 § 5(b), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.070 - Receptacles—Garbage—Recycling-Required—Construction—Capacity. 
Every Owner, Tenant, Employee, or Occupant of any Premises where Garbage is created Shall provide upon such Premises in a suitable place one or more Garbage receptacles, and Recycling receptacles, together with tight-fitting covers, constructed of galvanized metal, rubber, plastic, or other Material Approved by the Public Works Director, for receiving and holding all Garbage and Recyclable Materials created upon such Premises between the time of collection and removal. Each such receptacle Shall have the capacity of not less than three nor more than sixteen gallons, and Shall be watertight. 
(Ord. O-15-96 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. 1009 § 6(a), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.080 - Receptacles—Rubbish—Required. 
Every Owner, Tenant, Employee or Occupant of any Premises where Rubbish is created Shall, where necessary, in addition to the Garbage receptacle, provide upon such Premises one or more receptacles acceptable to the Public Works Director to contain all Rubbish which May accumulate upon such Premises between removals. 
(Ord. O-15-96 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. 1009 § 6(b), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.090 - Receptacles—Combined Refuse—Requirements. 
If receptacles for combined Refuse are Used, they Shall meet the requirements stated in Section 6.16.070 for Garbage receptacles, except they Shall not be more than eighteen inches in diameter and thirty-six inches in height. 
(Ord. 1009 § 6(c), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.100 - Receptacles—Placement. 
A.  Excepting as stated herein, Garbage, Recycling and Refuse receptacles Shall not be placed within the limits of any Street or Alley, unless authorized by the Public Works Director, nor Shall they be placed anywhere so as to constitute a Nuisance. 
B.  Not earlier than six p.m. of the Day before each Day set for collection, receptacles to be collected Shall be placed as follows: 
1.  Where there is an Alley in the rear of the Premises, the receptacles Shall be placed in such Alley and next to the rear Property line of such Premises. 
2.  In all other cases the receptacles Shall be placed on the Curb in front of the Premises. 
(Ord. O-15-96 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. 1009 § 6(d), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.110 - Receptacles—Removal. 
All receptacles placed for collection of Garbage, Refuse, or Recycling Shall be removed from the Street or Alley within twelve hours after the contents thereof have been collected. 
(Ord. 1009 § 6(e), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.120 - Receptacles—Interference with prohibited. 
No Person other than the Owner thereof or any officer, Employee or licensee of the City, Shall move, remove or interfere with any Garbage, Recycling or Rubbish receptacle, or the contents thereof. 
(Ord. 1009 § 6(f), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.130 - Receptacles—Must be kept clean. 
All Garbage, Recycling and Rubbish receptacles Shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition by the Owner or Person using the same. 
(Ord. 1009 § 7(a), 1959). 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.140 - Receptacles—Garbage—Recycling-To be kept covered. 
Garbage and Recycling receptacles Shall be kept tightly covered at all times, except when Garbage is being deposited therein or removed therefrom, and Shall at all times be proof against Access by flies to the contents thereof. 
(Ord. 1009 § 7(b), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.150 - Receptacles—Weight. 
No Garbage, Recycling or Rubbish receptacle may exceed fifty pounds in weight, including the contents thereof. 
(Ord. 1009 § 7(c), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.160 - Refuse—Placement in proper receptacles required-Source Separation. 
A.  All Refuse Shall be placed for collection in receptacles as defined and specified herein. 
B.  Each Generator shall be responsible for ensuring and demonstrating its compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Each Generator shall: 
1.  Source Separate Recyclable Materials from Solid Waste; and 
2.  Subscribe to a basic level of Recycling service that includes at a minimum, the collection of Recyclable Materials; and 
3.  Enter into a written service agreement with a Franchised Hauler or Authorized Recycler; or 
4.  Complete and retain on-site a Self-Hauling form certifying that all Self Hauling activities will be completed in accordance with this ordinance or any other applicable law or regulation. A copy of such form shall be available to the City Manager, upon request. 
C.  Each Generator must also undertake the following: 
1.  Use containers to collect and store Recyclable Materials; 
2.  Designate areas to collect and/or store Recyclable Materials; 
3.  Prominently post and maintain one or more signs in maintenance or work areas or common areas where Recyclable Materials are collected and/or store Recyclable Materials; 
4.  Notify and instruct employees in writing of applicable Source Separated requirements, including outreach and training on what materials are required to be Source Separated and how to Source Separate such material. A copy of such instruction or training materials shall be provided to the City Manager upon request; 
5.  Place all Recyclable Materials for collection in covered collection containers conforming to the following requirements: 
a.  No container shall be loaded beyond its capacity; 
b.  Containers used for the storage and collection of Recyclable Material generated on the premises must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition; 
c.  No material or containers shall be kept or handled in such a manner as to become a nuisance; 
d.  No putrescible materials shall be commingled with Recyclables; 
e.  No Recyclable Material shall be allowed to become odoriferous or a producer of vermin. 
f.  Lids on containers shall remain closed at all times while stored or placed for Collection. 
6.  Ensure that Recyclable Materials generated at the Generator's site will be taken only a Recycling or Composting Facility or make other arrangements to ensure that the materials are Recycled or Composted and not delivered to a Landfill for Disposal. Generator shall not dispose of, or arrange for Disposal of Recyclable Materials by placement in a Landfill. 
D.  The Recycling Service Agreement and other Recycling documents required by subdivision B shall be available for inspection by the City Manager, at the principal location of the Generator's Business, Commercial Facility, Special Event or non-residential property during normal business hours. 
E.  No Franchised Hauler or Authorized Recycler shall be held liable for the failure of its Customers to comply with such regulations, unless specified in the Franchise, contract or permit issued by the City. 
F.  The Director is specifically authorized to promulgate rules and regulations regarding any and all Recyclable Material containers including as related to the Recyclable Materials to be placed therein, the placement and maximum weight of high-density materials for Collection and the proper use of containers. 
(Ord. 1009 § 8(a), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.161 - Special Event Recycling. 
A.  The Responsible Party for a Special Event must ensure that the following requirements are met in addition to any other conditions imposed on the Special event: 
1.  Provide Recycling receptacles throughout the event location to make Source Separation of Recyclables, Compostables, or Trash convenient for employees, volunteers, contractors, and customers of the food vendors and attendees of the event; and 
2.  Ensure that the Recyclable Materials deposited into the Recycling receptacles are delivered to a Recycling Facility. Proof of delivery required to be submitted to the City. The Recycling Facility may be located at a Landfill, but Recyclable Materials shall not be delivered to a Landfill for Disposal. 
3.  Ensure that the minimum number of Recycling receptacles equals or exceeds the number of Solid Waste receptacles. 
4.  Ensure that the Solid Waste and Recycling receptacles are placed as close together as possible throughout the event location in order to provide equally convenient access to users. 
5.  Ensure that all receptacles have appropriate signage and are color coded to identify the type of refuse to be deposited (green or white for Recyclables, Brown for Compostables and black for trash) and meet any additional design criteria established by the City by regulation; 
6.  Ensure that food vendors have at least one separate container each for Recyclables, Compostables and Trash for use by customers and visitors. Multiple food vendors that provide disposable food service ware and share a common eating area may share an appropriate number, size, and placement of containers for Recyclables, Compostables and Trash for convenient use by customers or visitors or have common access to such a container which shall be located within a reasonable proximity of the vendors; and 
7.  Ensure that the type of Recyclable Materials suitable for deposit into each receptacle includes at a minimum; plastic bottles and jars, paper, cardboard, glass, newspaper, metal containers, and cans. Each Recycling receptacle shall be clearly identified as a Recycling receptacle and shall display a list of types of Recyclable Materials which may be deposited into the Recyclable receptacle. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.170 - Infected articles—Deposit in Refuse receptacle prohibited. 
The Owner or Occupant of any Premises where an infectious or contagious disease is in existence or has prevailed Shall immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer thereof. Under no circumstances Shall wearing apparel, bedding or other articles or Material from any home or place where any infectious or contagious disease has prevailed be deposited in a Refuse receptacle, but all such items Shall be disposed of only as directed by the Code Enforcement Officer. 
(Ord. 1009 § 8(b), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.175 - Receptacles—Standards and regulations to conform to Permits, Franchise agreements or contract specifications. 
A.  The provisions of Sections 6.16.070 through 6.16.170 establish minimum standards for receptacles to be used in the City and placement of Refuse within such receptacles. Additional or different requirements and standards May be established by the Director subject to the Approval of the City Council for receptacles and receptacle Use for Refuse, recyclables and green waste collected within the City by any authorized Refuse collection provider pursuant to a Permit, Franchise agreement or contract with the City. 
B.  No person shall provide services as a Hauler of Recyclables within the boundaries of the City without either being: (1) a Franchised Hauler with the City, or (2) an Authorized Recycler. 
C.  Franchised Haulers and Authorized Recyclers must comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Offer collection service and automatic lift containers, bins or roll-off bins for Recyclable Materials sufficient to accommodate the quantity and types of Recyclable Materials to all of its Customers and shall provide Recycling Services as described in section 6.16.160; 
2.  Identify automatic lift containers, bins or roll off bins for Recyclable Materials with its name, recognizable corporate or company logo, and phone number of the Franchised Hauler or Authorized Recycler that is legible from a distance of fifty (50) feet; 
3.  Equip and provide automatic left containers, bins and roll-off bins for Recyclable Materials, with locks and/or other suitable features, where feasible, to prevent Scavenging. 
4.  Conduct all activities in accordance with applicable laws, City codes and regulations and the best management practices. Vehicles and equipment and containers shall be kept in a clean and well-maintained condition. 
5.  Not take a Customer's Recyclable Materials to a Landfill or other site for Disposal. Such materials shall be taken to a Recycling Facility or Franchised Haulers and Authorized Recyclers shall make other arrangements for recycling the materials instead of Disposal. The Franchised Haulers and Authorized Recyclers shall maintain a copy of a service agreement and/or receipts documenting that the Generators Recyclable Materials have been properly delivered, as well as any documentation evidencing an event of force majeure which prevented the proper delivery of Recyclable Materials. Such documents shall be available for inspection by the City Manager at the place of business during normal business hours and maintained for not less than 3 (three) years. 
D.  The Recycling Services provided by Franchised Haulers and Authorized Recyclers shall include, at a minimum, all of the following: 
1.  Collection of Recyclable Materials at a minimum of two (2) times per month, or more as specified by contract, license or permit; 
2.  Collection of Recyclable Materials as identified by City Manager; 
3.  Utilization of Recycling receptacles which comply with City standards; 
4.  Appropriate signage on all Recycling receptacles, containers, chutes, and/or enclosures which allows users to clearly and easily identify which containers to use for Recyclables. Compostables or Trash and be color coded; 
5.  Occupant Education for Multi-Family facilities, the Responsible Party shall provide information about Recycling Services as follows: 
a.  Types of Recyclable Materials accepted, the location of Recycling containers, and the occupant's responsibility to Recycle pursuant to this Chapter. This information shall be disturbed to all occupants annually; 
b.  All new occupants shall be given information and instructions upon occupancy; and; 
c.  All occupants shall be given new information and instructions upon any change in Recycling Service. 
(Ord. O-15-96 § 3, 1996) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.180 - Tree trimmings—Procedure for collection. 
Except as required by any authorized Refuse collection provider pursuant to any Permit, Franchise agreement or contract with the City, tree trimmings, tree limbs, tree trunks and tree stumps if not placed in receptacles, Shall be tied in bundles not exceeding fifty pounds in weight; however, bundles will not be collected if they exceed fifteen inches in diameter or four feet in length. 
(Ord. O-15-96 § 4, 1996: Ord. 1009 § 8(c), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.190 - Collection—Who May collect. 
The collection, removal and disposal of all Refuse Shall be performed exclusively by the City, its agents, Franchisees, or independent contractors under the supervision of the Public Works Director, under such terms, conditions and limitations imposed upon such authorized Refuse collection providers by the City Council in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the City. 
(Ord. O-15-96 § 5, 1996: Ord. 1009 § 9(a), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.200 - Collection—Permit and Fees. 
Every agent, Franchisee, or independent contractor authorized by the City Council to collect, remove and dispose of Refuse, Shall comply fully with all requirements imposed by any Permit, Franchise agreement or contract between the City and such agent, Franchisee or independent contractor, including without limitation, payment of Fees, posting of bonds, obtaining of necessary licenses and Permits as May be required by Local, State or Federal Law, including without limitation Section 5.02.650 of the Colton Municipal Code and any other requirements as May be imposed by action of the City Council. Nothing contained in this section Shall be construed to modify or impair the terms and conditions of any Permit, Franchise agreement or contract existing as of the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this section. 
(Ord. O-15-96 § 6, 1996: Ord. O-20-91 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1640 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1408 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1972; Ord. 1009 § 9(b), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.210 - Collection—Gardeners exempt. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, every Person, firm or corporation engaging in the Business of gardening is authorized to collect, remove and dispose of garden trimmings as an incident to such Business, under their regular Business Licenses. 
(Ord. 1009 § 9(c), 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.220 - Collection—Frequency. 
The frequency of collection Shall be determined as established in any authorizing Permit, Franchise agreement or contract with the City. 
(Ord. O-15-96 § 7, 1996: Ord. O-20-91 § 2, 1991: Ord. 1640 § 2, 1983; Ord. 1009 § 10, 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.230 - Collection—Regulation authority. 
The Director with the Approval of the City Council May make regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as May be necessary to effect the expedient, economical and efficient collections, removal and disposal of Refuse. 
(Ord. O-20-91 § 3, 1991: Ord. 1009 § 11, 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.240 - Monthly charges—Civil debt established. 
Monthly charges Shall be established by Resolution of the City Council in an amount not to exceed the amount charged the City by any authorized Refuse collection provider as established by any Permit, Franchise agreement or contract with the City and Shall be a civil debt owing to the City by the Owner and any Occupant or User of the Premises receiving service. 
(Ord. O-15-96 § 8, 1996: Ord. O-20-91 § 4, 1991: Ord. O-11-90 § 1, 1990: Ord. O-12-89 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1009 § 12, 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.250 - Solid waste collection rates and charges. 
Rates and charges for solid waste collection Shall be no less than any Fees paid by the City to a Refuse collection provider pursuant to any Permit, Franchise agreement or contract entered into between the City and any such authorized Refuse collection provider. To the extent that any rates and charges set forth in any such Permit, Franchise agreement or contract entered into by the City and an authorized Refuse collection provider cannot exceed specified rates and charges established by Exhibits A and B of Ordinance O-18-91 as adopted by the City Council on December 3, 1991 (the rate Exhibits) and on file in the office of the City Clerk, those rates Shall remain in effect and be unchanged by this section and the rates established by the rate Exhibits Shall be deemed incorporated in this chapter by reference for the sole purpose of establishing such maximum charges. 
(Ord. O-15-96 § 9, 1996: Ord. O-18-91 § 1, 1991: Ord. O-11-90 § 2, 1990: Ord. O-12-89 § 2, 1989: Ord. 1009 § 13, 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.260 - Collection charges—Nonpayment—Action by City. 
All charges provided in this chapter Shall constitute a debt due to the City, and in the event suit is brought to recover delinquent charges and judgment is obtained in favor of the City, a reasonable Attorney's Fee for legal services rendered therein Shall be awarded to the City in such action in addition to the amount due and owing. 
(Ord. 1009 § 14, 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.270 - Dead animal body removal. 
A.  No Person Shall place the body of any dead animal in any Refuse receptacle. The bodies of any dead animals Shall be promptly removed as directed by the Code Enforcement Officer and the Owner thereof Shall pay the costs to the City for removal of such animal. 
B.  Notwithstanding the prohibitions contained in subsection A of this section, birds not exceeding three pounds in weight May be placed in Refuse receptacles for disposal provided they are first placed in a plastic bag or container with the openings Secured. This subsection Shall be effective for twelve Months from the date of its adoption. Thereafter it Shall be of no further force or effect. 
(Ord. O-27-04 § 2, 2004: Ord. 1009 § 15, 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.280 - Premises inspection. 
The Code Enforcement Officer and the Fire Chief when necessary May visit Premises within the City at reasonable times to examine the conditions of the Premises to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1009 § 16, 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.290 - Commercial organic waste recycling program. 
A.  Purpose. In October of 2014 Governor Brown signed AB 1826 Chesboro (Chapter 727, Statutes of 2014), which requires businesses to recycle their organic waste on and after April 1, 2016, depending on the amount of waste they generate per week. Organic waste means food waste, green waste, landscape and pruning waste, nonhazardous wood waste, and food-soiled paper waste that is mixed in with food waste. This law phases in the mandatory recycling of commercial organics over time, with the minimum threshold of organic waste generation by businesses decreasing over time. This chapter establishes the City of Colton Commercial Organic Waste Recycling Program. 
B.  Application. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all businesses as defined in the mandatory organics recycling law, which defines a business as a commercial or public entity (such as a school or hospital) including multifamily residential dwellings (five units or more), that generates a specified amount of organic waste within the city limits (multifamily dwellings are not required to have a food waste diversion program). A business that meets the waste generation threshold shall engage in one of the following organic recycling activities: 
1.  Source separate organic waste from other waste and participate in a waste recycling service provided through the City's waste hauler that includes collection and recycling of organic waste. 
2.  Recycle its organic waste on site, or self-haul its organic waste off site for recycling. 
3.  Subscribe to an organic waste recycling service that may include mixed waste processing that specifically recycles organic waste. 
Businesses may be required to show proof of compliance. 
C.  Implementation Schedule. The implementation schedule is as follows: 
1.  Businesses that generate four cubic yards of organic waste per week shall arrange for organic waste recycling services. 
2.  January 1, 2019: Businesses that generate four cubic yards or more of commercial solid waste per week shall arrange for organic waste recycling services. 
3.  Summer/Fall 2021: If CalRecycle determines that the statewide disposal of organic waste in 2020 has not been reduced by fifty percent of the level of disposal during 2014, the organic recycling requirements on businesses will expand to cover businesses that generate two cubic yards or more of commercial solid waste per week. Additionally certain exemptions may no longer be available if this target is not met. 
D.  Exemptions. On a case-by-case basis, individual businesses may be exempt from the organic waste recycling requirements. Exemptions may include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Lack of sufficient space in multifamily complexes or businesses to provide additional organic material recycling bins. 
2.  The current implementation by a business of actions that result in the recycling of a significant portion of its organic waste. 
3.  Limited-term exemptions for extraordinary and unforeseen events. 
E.  Enforcement. It will be the responsibility of the waste hauler to implement and enforce this program as provided in the current agreement between the City and the waste hauler. At the time this chapter was adopted Republic Services, Inc. (Contractor) was the waste hauler. Under the current agreement, it is stated that: 
"Contractor shall provide Commercial Organic Waste Collection services for Commercial Customers in the City generating eight cubic yards or more of Organic Waste per week. Contractor shall provide appropriate containers to Commercial Customers and provide weekly collection for such Commercial Organic Waste containers. Contractor will deliver the Collected Organic Waste to a Composting or Processing Facility approved by the City for composting, anaerobic digestion, use as animal feedstock or other means of diversion accepted by CalRecycle, depending on the reasonable availability of a Composting or Processing Facility and as permitted by Applicable Law." 
Collection of all associated fees shall be subject to all provisions under the current franchise agreement with the waste hauler, and as outlined in the most recently adopted Waste Hauler Fee schedule. 
F.  Incompatible provisions. To the extent any provision of this chapter is incompatible with or at variance with any prior adopted ordinance or resolution, the provisions of this chapter shall take precedence, and all prior ordinances and resolutions shall be interpreted to harmonize with and not change the provisions of this chapter. 
G.  Severability. If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter, or the application of same to any person or set of circumstances is held to be unconstitutional, void, or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter which shall remain in full force and effect, and all provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. O-06-16, § 1, 4-5-2016) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
6.16.300 - Penalty for Violations—Implementation and Enforcement. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director and Code Enforcement Officer are authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter. To the extent permitted by law, the Director and Code Enforcement Officer may inspect any collection container, collection vehicle load, or receiving facility for collected Trash, or Recyclables. 
B.  Notwithstanding subdivision A, if a Franchise Hauler or Authorized Recycler finds incorrect materials in a Collection container, they shall take the following actions: 
1.  For the first violation, notify the Generator by written notice attached to the Recycling container and shall provide a copy of the notice to the City Manager. 
2.  For the second violation in a one-year period, notify the Generator by a written "Second Notice" attached to the Recycling container and shall provide a copy of this Second Notice to the City Manager for possible follow up and enforcement. 
3.  After a Franchised Hauler or Authorized Recycler has already left two or more tags for that Customer and that type of container in accordance with subdivision B, the Franchise Hauler or Authorized Recycler may refuse to empty the container if contamination occurs another time, subject to California Code of Regulations Title 14, Section 17331, or as determined by the City Manager. If the container is not emptied by the Customer, the Franchised Hauler or Authorized Recycler must leave a tag and send a written notice to the Customer, identifying the incorrect materials describing what action must be taken for the materials to be collected; provided, however, that a Franchise Hauler or Authorized Recycler may not refuse on this basis to empty containers from Multi-family or Commercial properties with multiple tenants and joint account collection service due to excessive contamination, but may manage contaminated loads as solid waste and charge the Generators accordingly. 
4.  The Franchise Hauler or Authorized Recycler shall, in addition to the above, upon request, provide to the City Manager a list of the names and addresses of those Customers, Generators, or Responsible Parties who have received tags or notices or whose containers have not been emptied due to non-compliance with this Chapter, or copies of the tags or notices. The Franchised Hauler or Authorized Recycler shall also provide to the City Manager, upon request, a list of names, addresses, and service levels of the Customers and any additional information required by the City Manager. 
C.  For the third subsequent violations, or any time the Director elects to pursue administrative, civil, or criminal enforcement actions for violations of this Chapter, the Director may take any one or more of the following actions: 
1.  Institute public nuisance proceedings 
2.  Institute other administrative code enforcement proceedings under the City's Code 
3.  Impose administrative penalties approved by resolution of the City Council, as modified from time to time; 
4.  Undertake any other enforcement action authorized by federal, state, or local law, including but not limited to the actions set forth in Chapter 8.02. 
D.  Any Person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon a conviction thereof Shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars per day, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six Months or by both. 
(Ord. O-20-91 § 5, 1991: Ord. 1009 § 17, 1959) 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 3-20-2018)  
Chapter 6.18 - REGULATION OF SHOPPING CARTS AND LAUNDRY CARTS 
 
6.18.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The unauthorized Use, accumulation, and storage of Abandoned Shopping Carts or laundry Carts, or Parts thereof, on public and Private Property is found to create a condition tending to reduce Property values, to promote blight and deterioration, to constitute an unattractive Nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of Minors, to be aesthetically detrimental to the community, and to be injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare. The purpose of this chapter is to prevent the unauthorized Use, accumulation, and storage of Abandoned Shopping Carts and Laundry Carts, or Parts thereof, on public and Private Property, by restricting the removal of Carts from Parking Facilities, requiring identification on Carts, and abating Abandoned Carts in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-6-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
6.18.020 - Public Nuisance—Declaration. 
The City Council finds and determines that the unauthorized Use, accumulation, and storage of Abandoned Shopping Carts and Laundry Carts on any Parcel of land within the City constitutes a Public Nuisance as it is injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare by having a tendency to degrade the appearance of the community and thereby decrease Property values, and it obstructs free Access to public and private Sidewalks, Streets, Parking Lots, and other ways. 
(Ord. 0-6-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
6.18.030 - Construction. 
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases not expressly defined in Section 6.18.040 Shall be given their customary and usual meanings and Shall be interpreted and construed accordingly. 
(Ord. 0-6-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
6.18.040 - Definitions—Generally. 
Whenever the Following terms are Used in this chapter, they Shall mean the Following: 
"Abandoned Cart" means a Shopping Cart or Laundry Cart located outside the Premises or Parking Facility of the Business Establishment which furnishes such Cart for Use. 
"Cart" means a Shopping Cart or Laundry Cart as defined in this section. 
"Director" means the Director of Public Works of the City or his or her Designee. 
"Laundry Cart" means a plastic or metal basket or container mounted on wheels or a similar device, including Parts thereof, intended for transporting clothing or other fabrics and cleaning supplies within a laundry or cleaning Establishment or Designated Parking Facility. 
"Owner of the Cart" means the Owner of the Shopping Cart or Laundry Cart, his or her agent, or the Business Establishment which furnishes the Cart for Use. 
"Parking Facility" means an area intended for the parking of Vehicles by customers, clients, or patrons of a Business Establishment. The Parking Facility of a Business Establishment located in a multistore complex or shopping center Shall include the entire parking area Used by the complex or center. 
"Private Property" means any Property not owned or maintained by the City. 
"Public Property" means Property owned or maintained by the City. 
"Shopping Cart" means a plastic or metal basket or container mounted on wheels or a similar device, including Parts thereof, intended for transporting Goods of any kind within a Business Establishment or Designated Parking Facility. 
(Ord. 0-6-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
6.18.050 - Unauthorized removal or possession—Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any Person to do any of the Following Acts: 
A.  To remove or cause to be removed any Cart from a Parking Facility without the prior Written consent of the Owner of such Cart. 
B.  To possess any Cart that has been removed from a Parking Facility without the prior Written consent of the Owner of such Cart, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the Owner of possession. 
C.  To alter, convert, or tamper with any Cart, or remove any Part or portion thereof, or to remove, obliterate, or alter temporarily or permanently deprive the Owner or retailer of possession of the Cart. 
(Ord. 0-6-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
6.18.060 - Identification—Required. 
Each Cart Shall have a Sign permanently affixed to it with the Following information: 
A.  Identification of the Owner of the Cart or the Business furnishing the Cart for Use, or both. 
B.  The procedure required for authorized removal of the Cart from the Parking Facility. 
C.  Notification that the unauthorized removal of the Cart from the Parking Facility, or unauthorized possession of the Cart, is a Violation of Law. 
D.  A valid telephone number or address for returning the Cart removed from the Parking Facility to the Owner of the Cart. 
(Ord. 0-6-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
6.18.070 - Removal from Parking Facilities—Posting of Notice. 
All Business Establishments furnishing a Cart Shall post a Sign not less than eighteen inches in width and twenty-four inches in height with Block lettering not less than a one-half inch in width and two inches in height in a conspicuous place within ten feet of all customer entrances and exits stating, in substantial form, the Following: 
REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS (or Laundry Carts, if applicable) FROM THE PARKING FACILITIES WITHOUT THE WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE MANAGER IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. Colton Municipal Code Section 6.18.050. 
(Ord. 0-6-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
6.18.080 - Administration and enforcement. 
For purposes of enforcing this chapter, the Director May enter public or Private Property with the consent of the Property Owner, or by warrant, to examine a Cart or to cause the removal of such Cart if authorized pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-6-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
6.18.090 - Abandoned—Abatement and storage. 
Except as provided in Section 6.18.100, the Director Shall have the authority to remove any Abandoned Cart on public or Private Property under the Following conditions: 
A.  If the Abandoned Cart is affixed with the identification required under Section 6.18.060, removal May occur three Business Days after the Director gives the Owner of the Cart actual Notice of the Cart's discovery and location. An Owner is deemed to have actual Notice three Days after the deposit of Written Notice in the United States mail, posted first-class to the address indicated on the Cart or the Owner's last known address. If actual Notice is provided by telephone, the Director Shall maintain a record of the time, date, and name of the Person notified. 
B.  If the Abandoned Cart is not affixed with the identification required under Section 6.18.060, removal May occur pursuant to the procedures set forth in Sections 6.18.100 and 6.18.110. The Director Shall maintain a record of the time, date, and name of the Person notified or attempted to be notified. 
C.  Any Abandoned Cart removed from public or Private Property by the Director Shall be stored for thirty Days at the Department of Public Works in the City, or at a location Designated by the Director which is reasonably convenient to the Owner of the Cart and open for Business at least six hours of each Business Day. 
D.  Any Abandoned Cart removed from public or Private Property and stored pursuant to this section Shall be released to the lawful Owner of the Cart if claimed within thirty Days after such removal and upon payment of reasonable redemption Fees. 
E.  Redemption Fees for the removal and storage of any Abandoned Cart under this section Shall be established by City Council Resolution and Shall cover all costs of removal, storage, and related administrative procedures. 
(Ord. 0-08-05 § 1, 2005)  
6.18.100 - Abandoned—Immediate impoundment. 
Notwithstanding Section 6.18.090(A), a City May impound an Abandoned Cart that otherwise meets the criteria set forth in Section 6.18.090(A) without complying with the three Business Day advance Notice requirement provided that: 
A.  The Owner of the Abandoned Cart is provided actual Notice within twenty-four hours Following the impound and that Notice informs the Owner as to the location where the Cart May be claimed. 
B.  Any Cart so Impounded Shall be held at a location in compliance with Section 6.18.090(C). 
C.  Any Cart reclaimed by the Owner within three Business Days Following the date of actual Notice as provided pursuant to this section, Shall be released and surrendered to the Owner at no charge whatsoever, including the waiver of any redemption Fees that would otherwise be applicable pursuant to Section 6.18.090(D). 
D.  Any Cart not reclaimed by the Owner within three Business Days Following the date of actual Notice as provided pursuant to this section, Shall be subject to any applicable Fee or fine imposed pursuant to Section 6.18.090(D) commencing on the fourth Business Day Following the date of Notice. 
E.  Any Cart not reclaimed by the Owner within thirty Days of receipt Following the date of actual Notice as provided pursuant to this section, May be sold or disposed of in accordance with Section 6.18.120. 
(Ord. 0-08-05 §§ 4, 5, 2005; Ord. 0-6-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
6.18.110 - Notice of Violation—Unidentified Cart. 
A.  Within ten Days of the removal of an Abandoned Cart pursuant to this chapter, the Director Shall provide Notice to any known Owner of the Cart by first-class mail at the address indicated on the Cart or the Owner's last known address. The Notice Shall include the Following information: (1) date and location of removal of the Cart from public or Private Property; (2) procedure for recovering such Cart; and (3) last possible date such Cart May be recovered. 
B.  If the Owner of the Cart is unknown and not clearly identified on the Cart, the Cart Shall be Designated "unidentified." Immediately Following such Designation, the Director Shall file a record with the City Clerk for each unidentified Cart containing the information above and a brief description of the Cart. 
(Ord. 0-08-05 § 6, 2005)  
6.18.120 - Unclaimed Carts—Disposal. 
Thirty Days after Notice is given to the Owner of the Cart, or after the Cart is Designated "unidentified," pursuant to Section 6.18.110, any Abandoned Cart not claimed May be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of. Any proceeds derived from such auction or disposal Shall be Used to pay the costs of removal, storage, and related administrative procedures. Surplus proceeds derived from such auction or disposal Shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City. 
(Ord. 0-08-05 § 7, 2005; Ord. 0-6-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
6.18.130 - Infraction. 
Any Person violating Section 6.18.050, 6.18.060 or 6.18.070 Shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 0-6-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
6.18.140 - Fine for each occurrence. 
Pursuant to California Business and Profession Code Section 22435.7, Subdivision (f), the City May fine the Owner of a Shopping Cart in an amount not to exceed fifty dollars for each occurrence in excess of three during a specified six-Month period for failure to retrieve Shopping or Laundry Carts in accordance with this chapter. An occurrence includes all Shopping or Laundry Carts Impounded in accordance with this chapter during a one-Day period. 
(Ord. 0-08-05 § 8, 2005)  
Chapter 6.24 - LIQUEFIED GASES 
 
6.24.010 - Defined. 
For purposes of this chapter, "Liquefied Gases" are defined as all Gases derived from petroleum or natural Gas that are in the Gaseous state at normal atmospheric temperature and pressure, and which are or which May be maintained in the liquid state at normal atmospheric temperature by various pressures. 
(Ord. 682 § 1, 1945)  
6.24.020 - Storage—Permit required. 
No Person, firm or corporation Shall place, keep, store, Permit or allow to be placed, kept or stored on any Premises or place under their ownership, care or control any Liquefied Gases, as defined in Section 6.24.010, at any place whatsoever within the City without having first obtained a Permit to do so from the Chief of the Fire Department of the City; and in no case Shall such a Permit be issued or such placing, keeping or storing be Permitted where same May create a dangerous condition or a serious fire hazard. 
(Ord. 682 § 2, 1945)  
6.24.030 - Transporting—Exemption from chapter provisions when. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the provisions of this chapter Shall not apply to any Person, firm or corporation while they are lawfully transporting the Liquefied Gases through the City, provided and only provided, said Person, firm or corporation Shall comply with all safety Laws of every nature whatsoever while so transporting the Liquefied Gases. 
(Ord. 682 § 3, 1945)  
6.24.040 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person or Persons violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, Shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail not exceeding six Months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 682 § 4, 1945)  
6.24.050 - Liability for damages. 
In addition to liability by reason of any penal provision herein, any Person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is liable to the City for any and all damage that May occur by reason of any negligence or wilful Act on their Part in failing to comply with the terms hereof. 
(Ord. 682 § 5, 1945)  
Chapter 6.25 - REGULATION OF BUTANE RESALE 
 
6.25.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter the following definitions apply: 
"Butane" means iso-butane, n-butane, and butane refined five times or greater. 
"Customer" means any person who purchases or acquires the products described in this Chapter, excluding Retailers. 
"Person" means a corporation, co-partnership, or association as well as a natural person. 
"Retailer" means any retail business, company, corporation, person, employee, associate, or wholesaler, who furnishes, distributes, sells, or gives away products described in this Chapter. 
"Sell" means to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, surrender, distribute or supply, whether for monetary gain or other consideration. 
"Transaction" means to purchase, sale, trade, loan, pledge, investment, gift, transfer, transmission, delivery, deposit, withdrawal, payment, exchange of currency, extension of credit, purchase or sale of any monetary instrument, or an electric, magnetic or manual transfer between accounts or any other acquisition or disposition of property by whatever means affected. 
"Wholesaler" means a person whose business is the selling of goods in gross to retail stores for purposes of resale. 
(Ord. No. O-19-16, § 1, 10-18-2016)  
6.25.020 - Unlawful sale, purchase and handling butane. 
A.  It is unlawful for any Retailer or Person to Sell to a Customer more than six hundred milliliters (twenty-one ounces) of Butane during any single transaction. 
B.  It is unlawful for any Person that is not a Retailer or Wholesaler to have in its possession, custody or control more than six hundred milliliters (twenty-one ounces) of Butane at any one time. 
C.  It is unlawful for any Customer to purchase or acquire more than six hundred milliliters (twenty-one ounces) of Butane in any month. 
(Ord. No. O-19-16, § 1, 10-18-2016)  
6.25.030 - Tracking of butane sale. 
A.  For every sale of Butane, Retailer shall prepare a bill of sale that identifies the date of sale, quantity of Butane purchased, and the purchaser's identification. Purchaser's identification as used herein shall mean a person's first and last name as verified from a valid driver's license or other official and state-issued identification that contains a photograph of the purchaser and a residential mailing address. Retailer shall retain a copy of the bill of sale in readable form for a period of two years. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any retailer to sell butane to any customer without complying with this Section of this Code. 
C.  Any Reseller shall provide the City, upon written request, copies of the records described in this section. 
(Ord. No. O-19-16, § 1, 10-18-2016)  
6.25.040 - Penalties, strict liability, and nuisance. 
A.  A violation of this Chapter is a misdemeanor and subject to a one thousand dollars penalty per violation (Government Code, Section 36901). A separate violation shall exist for every single three hundred milliliter canister of Butane sold, purchased, or possessed in violation of this Chapter. 
B.  This Chapter is a regulatory provision necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare and safety. In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this Chapter, it is not necessary to prove knowledge or criminal intent. 
C.  A violation of any provision of this Chapter constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. O-19-16, § 1, 10-18-2016)  
6.25.050 - Reserved for future use.  
6.25.060 - Cumulative remedy. 
Nothing herein is intended to limit the City of Colton from pursuing any other remedy available at law or in equity against any person or entity maintaining, committing, or causing a public nuisance or any other violation of the Code or State or Federal law. 
(Ord. No. O-19-16, § 1, 10-18-2016)  
Chapter 6.28 - GASOLINE STATIONS  
I. - PARKED VEHICLES OBSTRUCTING ACCESS 
 
6.28.010 - Prohibited. 
No Vehicle of any kind Shall be parked or left unattended and no other obstacles or Obstructions Shall be placed upon the Premises of any so-called gasoline dispensing stations or any Premises where gasoline or other highly inflammable liquids or Materials are located, placed, stored or dispensed so as to create any Obstruction that would interfere with the free and easy Access by firefighting equipment to the tanks, pumps or other places on said Premises where gasoline or other highly inflammable liquids or Materials are located, stored or dispensed. 
(Ord. 662 § 1(part), 1944)  
6.28.020 - Vehicles under supervision Permitted. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, Section 6.28.010 Shall not apply to any Vehicle or Obstruction placed upon any of the aforesaid Premises while the Obstructions and Vehicles are under the direct control and supervision of the f or lawful custodian thereof; provided, however, that they are located and attended, that the same could be moved immediately from any area of the Premises threatened by fire by the Owner, lawful custodian or such other authorized Person present for such purpose. 
(Ord. 662 § 1(part), 1944)  
6.28.030 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person who violates any of the provisions of Section 6.28.010 and 6.28.020 is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed three Months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 662 § 1(part), 1944)  
II. - SELF-SERVICE AUTOMOBILE FILLING STATIONS 
 
6.28.040 - Regulations conformance. 
All self-service automobile filling stations within the City limits Must conform to the rules, regulations and requirements as set out in Sections 6.28.050 through 6.28.230. 
(Ord. 759 § 1 (part), 1948)  
6.28.050 - Safety nozzles. 
All Gas lines are to be equipped with automatic safety nozzles. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(1), 1948)  
6.28.060 - Signs required. 
"NO SMOKING" and "STOP YOUR MOTOR" Signs, red letters on white background, are to be placed at each pump island and so located that they can be seen from both sides of the island. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(2), 1948)  
6.28.070 - Pump—Shut-off switch required. 
Each pump is to be equipped with manually operated shut-off switch or lever. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(3), 1948)  
6.28.080 - CO2 extinguishers—Substitute. 
One CO 2 extinguisher of at least five-pound size is to be placed on each island. Two CO 2 extinguishers of at least fifteen-pound size are to be located as required by the Fire Department. DU-GAS extinguishers May be substituted for all CO 2 extinguishers. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(4), 1948)  
6.28.090 - Water lines required—Use. 
Not less than two water lines of at least one-inch size, properly equipped with adequate fixed fog nozzles are to be provided and so located that complete coverage of all Gas islands can be made. Such hose lines and nozzles are to be Used for first aid fire equipment only. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(5), 1948)  
6.28.100 - Electrical fixtures—Requirements—Approval. 
All electrical fixtures, installed by the Owner or Operator, within ten feet of any pump or vent pipe are to be vapor- or explosion-proof, and/or Approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters or other recognized testing laboratory. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(6), 1948)  
6.28.110 - Telephone facilities. 
Telephone facilities, if available, are to be provided on Premises. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(7), 1948)  
6.28.120 - Building location. 
No Buildings are to be located within twenty-five feet of any pump unless such Building is of noncombustible Material. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(8), 1948)  
6.28.130 - Control Room—Requirements—Defined. 
The Control Room is to be centrally located and elevated at least one foot, and have an inside area of not less than twenty-five square feet and be so arranged that the Operator will have a clear and unobstructed view of all islands. 
"Control Room" means a room where electric switches controlling all gasoline pumps are located. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(10), 1948)  
6.28.140 - Control Room—Door location. 
The door to a Control Room Shall not be placed on side facing pump. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(9), 1948)  
6.28.150 - Attendants—Instruction. 
All Attendants are to be thoroughly instructed in the Use of extinguishers and water in case of fire. Also they are to be instructed in prohibiting and preventing patrons from Smoking around the pumps. Service is to be refused and pump shut off when Persons do not follow instructions. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 1 (part), 2000; Ord. 759 § 1(11), (12), 1948)  
6.28.160 - Open-flame device prohibited when. 
No open-flame device is to be located or Permitted within twenty-five feet from any pump. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(13), 1948)  
6.28.170 - Inflammable Material prohibited when. 
No inflammable Material having a low flash point is to be stored or on display within twenty-five feet of any pump. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(14), 1948)  
6.28.180 - Underground storage tank—Filling requirements. 
There Shall be no filling of automobile gasoline tanks, or the operation of any gasoline dispensing pumps while the underground storage tanks are being filled, unless an Approved type of vapor-proof connection is provided between underground tank and filling truck. Nor will there be Permitted any Smoking, or any flame, or any spark-producing device or apparatus within twenty-five feet of any tank truck unloading into the underground tanks. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(19), 1948)  
6.28.190 - Coin-operated gasoline dispensers prohibited. 
No coin-operated gasoline dispensing machine is to be Permitted on Premises. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(15), 1948)  
6.28.200 - Spillage clean-up. 
All gasoline or oils spilled on the ground Shall be cleaned up immediately. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(20), 1948)  
6.28.210 - Mops and rags storage. 
Mops or rags Used for cleaning purposes are to be stored or maintained at least twenty-five feet from every pump. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(16), 1948)  
6.28.220 - Waste Material—Container required. 
All waste Material and Rubbish is to be placed and kept in an all-metal or metal-lined container, such container to be equipped with self-closing top. All such waste Material and Rubbish is to be kept in such container until it is disposed of or removed from the Premises. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(17), 1948)  
6.28.230 - Skates prohibited—Exception. 
The Use of skates or other artificial means of locomotion Shall be prohibited, unless same be equipped with nonferrous wheels. 
(Ord. 759 § 1(18), 1948)  
6.28.240 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person violating any of the provisions of Sections 6.28.040 through 6.28.230 is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six Months or by both such fine and imprisonment; and each such Person, his principal, agent, or otherwise is guilty of a separate offense for each Day during any portion of which the Violation of, failure, neglect or refusal to comply with any of the provisions of Sections 6.28.040 through 6.28.230 is committed, continued or Permitted such Person. 
(Ord. 759 § 2, 1948)  
Chapter 6.32 - FIREWORKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, March 17, 2015, amended Ch. 6.32 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 6.32, §§ 6.32.010—6.32.170, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 1493, O-5-88; Ord. O-10-92; Ord. O-19-94; Ord. 0-8-96 § 1 (part), 1996; Ord. 0-10-05 § 1, 2005; and Ord. 0-09-06 § 1, 2006. 
 
6.32.010 - Sale and Discharge of Safe and Sane Fireworks Permitted when—Other fireworks prohibited—Liability of Property Owners. 
A.  "Safe and Sane" Fireworks, as defined by Section 12529 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, May be sold and Discharged within the City during the period beginning at 12:00 noon on the twenty-eighth day of June and ending at 12:00 midnight on the fifth day of July of each year, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and not otherwise. 
B.  All fireworks that are not "Safe and Sane" Fireworks, as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 12529, are prohibited to be sold, used, Discharged or possessed in any location within the City and at all times. 
C.  Any property owner or Person in control of property who allows a Person to sell, use, Discharge or possess fireworks that are not "Safe and Sane" Fireworks on the property owned by such Person or under such Person's control Shall be in violation of this section, irrespective of such Person's intent, knowledge or negligence, said violation hereby being expressly declared a strict liability offense. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Based in Colton" means primarily operating within the City limits of Colton and comprised of and for the benefit of the residents of the City. 
"Church" means a State-certified tax exempt religious organization. 
"Civic Organization" means a State-certified nonprofit organization organized primarily for charitable purposes. 
"Fire Chief" means to include his/her Authorized Representatives. 
"New" group or organization is a Church, Civic or Youth Organization that has not been issued a fireworks license the previous two years pursuant to a City Council Resolution. 
"State certified" means an organization recognized as exempt from Federal income tax under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
"Youth Organization" means a State certified private organization organized for the purpose of participating in organized sports or civic activities consisting of at least twenty individual members whose maximum age does not exceed eighteen years of age. In addition, seventy-five percent or more of the members Shall be residents of the City of Colton. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.030 - Sale—License—Required. 
Except as provided herein, no Person Shall offer for sale or sell at retail any fireworks of any kind in the City without having first applied for and received a license therefor. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.040 - Sale—License—Application requirements. 
Applications for a license to sell fireworks Shall: 
A.  Be made in writing accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred dollars. The fee will be used to defray the administrative costs of the fireworks program; 
B.  Be made between the third and tenth day of May each year, except when the last day falls on a Friday, Saturday or Sunday, the following business day Shall be determined to be the last day; 
C.  Set forth the proposed location of the fireworks stand applied for. The stands must be on private property located in a commercial or industrial zone and the written permission of the owner of record or lessee must accompany the application; 
D.  Be accompanied by an assurance that, if the license is issued to applicant, applicant Shall, at the time of receipt of the license, deliver to the Fire Department of the City, three hundred thousand dollars public liability and fifty thousand dollars property damage insurance certificates designating the City as an additional insured thereunder, and a copy of the requisite license from the State Fire Marshal; 
E.  Make written application to the City's Fire Department, Fire Safety Division at least ten days prior to booth opening for a permit as required by Section 12643 of the Health and Safety Code, Regulations from the California Administrative Code, Title 19, Public Safety. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.050 - Sale—License—Prerequisites to Issuance—Restrictions. 
The Following qualifications must be met by each applicant for a license issued under this chapter: 
A.  No license Shall be issued to any Person, firm or corporation except State-certified Churches, Civic and Youth Organizations. 
B.  Each such organization must have its principal and permanent meeting place in the corporate limits of the City; must maintain a bona fide membership of at least twenty members; and must have been organized and established in the City's corporate limits for a minimum of two years continuously preceding the filing of the application for the license. 
C.  An organization applying for a license Shall represent the undivided entirety or base group and Shall not be permitted to separate into an aggregation of subgroups or clubs affiliated with the parent organization. The entire individual group, club or organization associated with an Institution or organization Shall be considered as one single applicant. The intent and purpose for treating all organizations as a single entity is to ensure that the selection process is equitable and that no one organization with multiple subgroups will have an unfair advantage over other single purpose organizations. 
D.  Where such organization's principal purpose is the advancement of youth's interests such as sports organizations, only bona fide, currently registered youth members of such organization Shall be counted as "members" for the purposes of subsection B of this section. 
E.  No less than ninety percent of the proceeds derived from the sale of fireworks in the City by the organization Shall be utilized for the direct advancement of charitable, religious, youth or civic purposes of such organization. 
F.  No organization May receive more than one license for fireworks sale during any one calendar year. 
G.  One license May be issued to two or more qualifying applicants as a joint venture. 
H.  Bylaws of organizations and verification of current 501(c)(3) Tax Exempt status must be provided with any application submitted under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.060 - Allocation of licenses by category of organization. 
Each calendar year, a maximum total of fifteen licenses May be issued by the City. Those licenses Shall be distributed to qualified Church, youth or Civic Organizations as determined by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.070 - Allocation of licenses. 
All applications received Shall be reviewed for compliance with this chapter by a committee consisting of one representative from the Fire Department, one representative from the Community Services Department and one representative from the City Manager's Office. 
All newly approved applications Shall be forwarded to the City Council for consideration and appointment by resolution. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.080 - Sale—License—Notice of grant or denial. 
Applicants for any such license Shall be notified by the Fire Department of the City by May 31 st of the acceptance or rejection of such application for license.  
6.32.090 - Temporary Sales Tax Permit required. 
Organizations licensed for the selling of fireworks are required to obtain a Temporary Sales Tax Permit from the regional office of the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.100 - Display of license and Sales Tax Permit. 
License to sell fireworks and Temporary Sales Tax Permit Shall be displayed in a prominent place in the fireworks stand. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.110 - Sale—Operation regulations. 
A.  No Person other than the licensee organization Shall operate the stand for which the license is issued or share or otherwise participate in the profits of the operation of such stand. 
EXCEPTION: Except as allowed by Section 6.32.050G. 
B.  No Person other than the individuals who are members of the licensee organization, or the wives or husbands or children sixteen years of age or older of such members, Shall sell fireworks at such stand. 
EXCEPTION: Except as allowed by Section 6.32.050G. 
C.  No Person Shall be paid any consideration for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of fireworks at such stand. 
D.  Licensee Shall sell only at the stand described in its application. A licensee Shall not operate more than one stand. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.120 - Temporary stand—Requirements. 
All retail sales of "Safe and Sane" fireworks Shall be permitted only for within a temporary fireworks stand and sales from any other building or structure is prohibited. Temporary stands Shall be subject to the following provisions: 
A.  The temporary stand's site location Shall be approved the Fire Department. 
B.  Temporary fireworks stands Shall be constructed entirely out of metal or synthetic materials or demonstrated low flammability and Shall have metal flooring attached. Temporary fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions of the City Building Code; provided, however, that all stands Shall be erected under the supervision of the Building Official and Shall be constructed in a manner that will reasonably ensure the safety of attendants and patrons. 
C.  No fireworks stand Shall be located within twenty-five feet of any other building or within one hundred feet of any fuel dispensing operations. 
D.  No stand Shall have a floor area in excess of four hundred square feet. 
E.  Each stand in excess of twenty-four feet in length must have at least two exits; and each stand in excess of forty feet in length must have at least three exits spaced approximately equidistantly apart; provided, however, that in no case Shall the distance between exits exceed twenty-four feet. 
F.  Each stand Shall be provided with a minimum of two, two and one-half gallon pressurized water type portable fire extinguishers or two ABC dry chemical type portable fire extinguishers with a minimum rating of 2A10BC. 
G.  There Shall be no other structures or containers for the storage of surplus fireworks allowed at the site. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.130 - Sale—General requirements—Deposit or bond required. 
A.  All weeds and combustible material Shall be cleared from the location of the stand including a distance of at least twenty-five feet surrounding the stand. 
B.  "No Smoking" signs Shall be prominently displayed on the fireworks stand. 
C.  Each stand must have an adult in attendance and in charge thereof while fireworks are stored therein. Sleeping or remaining in stand after close of business each day is forbidden. 
D.  The sale of fireworks Shall not begin before noon on the twenty-eighth day of June and Shall not continue after midnight on the fifth day of July. 
E.  All unsold stock and accompanying litter Shall be removed from the location by five p.m. on the sixth day of July. 
F.  The fireworks stands Shall be removed from the temporary location by noon on the fourteenth day of July and all accompanying litter Shall be cleared from the location by said time and date. 
G.  Prior to the issuance of a license, each applicant Shall file with the Fire Department a cash deposit, certificate of deposit or a surety bond made payable to the City in the amount of one hundred dollars to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such deposit or certificate Shall be refundable upon compliance with the provisions and requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to the removal of the stand and the cleaning of the site. In the event the licensee does not so comply or remove the stand or clean the site, in a matter required by Fire Chief, the City May do so, or cause the same to be done by other Persons, and the reasonable cost thereof Shall be a charge against the licensee and his surety and the deposit, certificate or bond. 
H.  Portable generators when used for temporary electrical service Shall be located a minimum of twenty-five feet from the fireworks booth when in operation. 
I.  A clear space of twenty-five feet Shall be maintained around all portions of the fireworks booth by the use of barrier tape, signs or other suitable means as approved by the Fire Chief. 
J.  The Fire Department issued permit Shall be prominently displayed in each fireworks stand. 
K.  All accumulated litter and trash Shall be removed from the booth daily. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.140 - Discharge—Prohibitions. 
It is unlawful for any Person to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use, any fireworks, or permit the ignition, explosion or projection thereof, upon or over or onto the property of another without his consent, or to ignite, explode, project or otherwise fire or make use of, any fireworks within ten feet of any residence, dwelling or other structure used as a place of habitation by human beings. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.150 - Discharge—Permitted where. 
A.  The use of "Safe and Sane" Fireworks, as defined by the Health and Safety Code, Section 12529, in the City Shall be limited to private property except as otherwise provided herein. No fireworks Shall be Discharged on public, semipublic or private open areas such as parking lots, vacant properties or in a public street or right-of-way, except in public parks and those areas approved by the Chief of the Fire Department. 
B.  It is unlawful for any Person to allow or permit a fire nuisance as defined by Section 12510 of the Health and Safety Code. No fireworks Shall be Discharged in any high fire hazard areas within the City as determined by the Fire Chief. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.160 - Provisions of chapter additional to State Law—Applicability of Chapter 15.16. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter are in addition to applicable State Law, including the California Administrative Code, Title 19, Article 5, Section 993, which requires a license from the State Fire Marshal. Each package of fireworks Shall be marked as "Safe and Sane" fireworks and Shall bear the State Fire Marshal's classification label. 
B.  All criminal and administrative penalties that apply to violations of this chapter Shall also apply to any violation of Chapter 15.16 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
6.32.170 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Persons violating this chapter Shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, Shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the City or County Jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Further, the license Shall be revoked. 
B.  In addition to any other remedy available at law, any Person in violation of section 6.32.010, subsection B, is subject to an administrative fine of one thousand five hundred dollars for the first violation and three thousand dollars for a second violation in a twenty-four month period subsequent to the first violation. 
C.  The provisions and procedures concerning administrative fines and penalties set forth in Chapter 8.12 of the Colton Municipal Code shall apply to administrative fines issued for violations of this chapter. To the extent there are any conflicts between the provisions of the two chapters, the provisions of this chapter shall supersede and control administrative fines issued for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-05-15, § 1, 3-17-2015; Ord. No. O-04-18, § 2, 3-6-2018)  
Chapter 6.40 - UNDERGROUND STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES 
 
6.40.010 - County provisions adopted by reference. 
The herein Designated Division 8 to Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code which adds provisions pertaining to Underground Storage of Hazardous Substances is adopted by reference and made a Part hereof. Three copies of said code have been certified as true copies and filed in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Colton. Division 8 to Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code so adopted by reference is made a Part of this chapter as though set forth at length herein. 
(Ord. 1659 § 1, 1983)  
6.40.020 - Implementing agency. 
The Department of Environmental Health Services of the County of San Bernardino is named as the implementing agency of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1659 § 2, 1983)  
Chapter 6.44 - HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN 
 
6.44.010 - County provisions adopted by reference. 
The City Council of the City adopts the County Hazardous Waste management plan by reference and further, the City Council finds the Project to merit a negative declaration. 
(Ord. 0-19-90, 1990)  
Title 7 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, adopted June 7, 2016, repealed the former title 7, chapter 7.08, §§ 7.08.010—7.08.180, chapter 7.10, §§ 7.10.010—7.10.140, and enacted a new title 7 as set out herein. The former title 7 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Chapter 7.02 - ANIMAL CONTROL ADMINISTRATION 
 
7.02.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein, unless a more specific definition is provided in a chapter: 
"Abused animal" shall mean any animal which is mistreated, beaten, tormented or teased, or is deprived of water or food or shelter; or is kept under unsanitary conditions; or is abandoned; or is trained for fighting other animals; 
"Administrative hearing authority" or "hearing authority" or "hearing officer" shall have the same meaning provided in Colton Municipal Code section 18.58.101. 
"Adequate feed" means the provision at suitable intervals, depending upon the age of the animal, at least once every twenty-four hours of a quantity of wholesome foodstuff suitable for the species' physical condition and age, sufficient to maintain an adequate level of nutrition in the animal, which is served in a clean receptacle, dish or container. 
"Adequate water" means the access to a constant source of clean, fresh, potable water suitable for the species' physical condition and age of the animal. 
"Animal Control Department" or "Department" means the City of Colton Animal Control Department, or whatever entity performs any of the animal control functions for the City of Colton, whether internally or pursuant to contract with the City. 
"Animal Control Director" means the person duly appointed by the City Manager to administer the Animal Control Department and/or the animal control contract of the City; 
"Animal Control Officer" means those duly appointed and acting deputies of the Animal Control Director assigned to provide animal control field services within the corporate limits of the City and enforce the provisions of this title. 
"Animal" means any vertebrate creature, domestic or wild. "Animal" specifically includes, but is not limited to the following categories of animals: 
A.  Dog: Any Canis familiaris, over four months of age. 
B.  Puppy: Any Canis familiaris, under four months of age. 
C.  Cat: Any Felis catus, over four months of age. 
D.  Kitten: Any Felis catus, under four months of age. 
E.  Livestock: Horses, ponies, stallions, colts, geldings, mares, sheep, rams, lambs, bulls, bullocks, steers, heifers, cows, calves, mules, jacks, jennets, burros, goats, kids, swine, and confined and domesticated hares and rabbits. 
F.  Wild/exotic animals: Animals normally found in the wild state which are being kept for exhibition purposes or as private pets. 
"Animal hoarding" means a situation where an individual is housing more animals than he or she can adequately care for. It is a complex issue that encompasses mental health, animal welfare and public safety concerns. Animal hoarding is further defined by an inability to provide even minimal standards of nutrition, sanitation, shelter and veterinary care often resulting in animal starvation, illness and/or death. 
"Barking dog" means a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls, or makes any noise audible beyond the boundaries of the property on which the dog is situated for an extended period of time to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night, regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property. Such extended period of time shall consist of incessant barking, baying, crying, howling, or making of any noise for thirty minutes or more in any twenty-four-hour period, or intermittent barking, baying, crying, howling, or making any noise for sixty minutes or more during a twenty-four-hour period. A dog shall not be deemed a "barking dog" for purposes of this title, if at anytime the dog is barking, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the dog is situated, or when the dog is being teased or provoked. 
"Bite" means a puncture or tear of the skin inflicted by teeth of an animal. 
"Breeder" means any person who, for pay or other compensation, causes the breeding of a male or female dog or cat or makes a dog or cat available for breeding purposes, or any person who sells or offers for sale any dog or cat. All breeders must obtain a City business license. For purposes of this definition a hobby breeder who causes the breeding of male or females cats and/or dogs without pay or other compensation shall not be considered a breeder and does not require a license. 
"Cat" means any male or female cat (felis catus). An adult cat is any cat older than four months of age. 
"City" means the City of Colton. 
"City animal shelter" or "City contracted animal shelter" means the County of Riverside animal shelter and/or the contracted animal shelter providing services to the City of Colton. The term "City pound" as may be used in this title or this code shall mean the "City contracted animal shelter." 
"Community cat" means a feral or free-roaming cat that is without visibly-discernible identification of any kind and has been sterilized, vaccinated, and ear-tipped. Community cats are exempt from licensing, feeding bans, and registration requirements. A community cat is not to be classified as a public nuisance animal merely for being repeatedly found at large. 
"Community cat caregiver" means a person who in accordance with trap-neuter-return program (TNR), provides care, including food, shelter or medical care to a community cat. A community cat caregiver shall not be considered the owner, harborer, controller or keeper of a community cat. 
"Confined" means a condition whereby an animal is restricted to the property of the owner by an enclosure or enclosed lot, secure enough so that the animal cannot bite, harm, or injure anyone by the animal overreaching the top of the fence or other enclosure. 
"County" means San Bernardino County. 
"Department" means and include the administrative apparatus and those individuals that report to the Animal Control Director; 
"Dog" means any male or female dog (canis familiaris). An adult dog is any dog older than four months of age. 
"Ear tipped" and "tipped ear" refer to the process by which the tip of a cat's ear is cut to indicate that the cat has been sterilized and vaccinated against rabies. 
"Enclosed lot" means a parcel of land or portion thereof around the perimeter of which is a fence or wall adequate to contain any animal kept therein. 
"Enclosure" means a fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, which is suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper of the dog. The enclosure shall be designed in order to prevent the animal from escaping. The animal shall be housed pursuant to section 597(t) of the Penal Code. 
"Feral cat" means a cat that: 
A.  Has no apparent owner or identification; and 
B.  Appears to be unsocialized, unmanageable or demonstrates characteristics normally associated with wild or undomesticated animals. 
"Feral cat colony" or "colony" means a group of cats that congregates, more or less, together as a unit, whether or not every cat in the colony is a feral cat. 
"Feral cat colony caretaker" or "colony caretaker" means any person who provides food, water, shelter and medical care to and traps, sterilizes, and vaccinates a feral cat or cats and who is approved by a sponsor to care for a feral cat colony. 
"Nuisance" means, with respect to a stray animal or feral cat, behavior that: 
A.  Disturbs the peace through habitual or continual howling or fighting; or 
B.  Consists of habitual and significant destruction, desecration or soiling of property against the wishes of the owner of the property. 
"Official police dog" means any canine trained for law enforcement purposes and used by the Police Department for such purpose, and so designated by the Police Chief by the issuance of distinguishing tags; 
"Official police horse" means any equine used by a police officer for law enforcement purposes; 
"Owner" means any person, firm or corporation having title to any animal, or a person who has, harbors, or keeps, or who causes or permits to be harbored or kept, an animal in his or her care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his or her premises for a period of seven consecutive days; 
"Pet shop for animal rescue" or "animal rescue shop" means an establishment that offers dogs and/or cats for a nonprofit adoption fee, and such dogs and/or cats are made available to the establishment by nonprofit humane societies, animal shelters, bona fide animal rescue organizations. 
"Quarantine" means the strict isolation of an animal in an approved location under proper care and observation as approved by the Animal Control Officer. Animal quarantines must prevent contact by the quarantined animal with any person or animal that has not already been in contact with said animal, or any person who is responsible for the care of such animal while under quarantine either in an approved quarantine location or an enclosure at the owner's home. The person charged with overseeing the animal's quarantine must provide for its daily care, maintenance and protection from inclement weather as deemed appropriate for the animal quarantined. 
"Stray animal" means any animal at large. 
"Substantial injury" means a substantial impairment of the physical condition of a person or animal which requires professional medical treatment, including, but not limited to, loss of consciousness; concussion; bone fracture; protracted loss or impairment of function of any bodily member or organ; muscle tears, disfiguring lacerations, punctures, or a wound requiring multiple sutures; or any injury requiring corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
"TNR program" means a "trap, neuter and return" program in which feral and stray cats are humanely trapped, sterilized, vaccinated against rabies, ear tipped, and then returned to the location that is their "territory." 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.02.020 - Enforcement of title—Powers of animal control director and animal control officers. 
The Animal Control Director and the Animal Control Officers shall be primarily responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this title. The Animal Control Director and the Animal Control Officers shall have and are vested with the authority to issue a notice to appear as prescribed by chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.6) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the California Penal Code in the manner provided by Section 836.5 of the California Penal Code to any person who violates the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.02.030 - Interference with officers. 
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with or oppose or resist the Chief of Police or any of the officers of the Colton Police Department, the Animal Control Director or any of the deputies of the Animal Control Director while said officers are engaged in the performance of the duties pertaining to the enforcement of this title. All of the aforementioned officers, deputies or employees are empowered to enforce all of the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.02.040 - Right of entry of certain officials. 
The Animal Control Director, any Animal Control Officer, and any Police Officer of the City are empowered to enter upon any private property for the purpose of ascertaining whether any dog kept or harbored therein is afflicted with rabies or hydrophobia or whether or not a license tag has been secured for such dog; provided, however, that no such animal control director, animal control officer, or police officer shall have the right to enter an inhabited dwelling or a locked yard without first having obtained a warrant therefor. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.02.050 - Disposition of money—Payment of expenses. 
All money collected for licenses, tags or other fees shall be paid into the City treasury for the general fund. All expenses incurred in carrying out or enforcing the provisions of this title shall be paid out of the general fund. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.02.060 - Prohibition on retail sale of dogs and cats. 
A.  No commercial establishment shall display, sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction, give away, or otherwise transfer or dispose of dogs or cats in the City on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. 
B.  A pet shop that displayed, sold, delivered, offered for sale, offered for adoption, bartered, auctioned, gave away, or otherwise transferred or disposed of dogs or cats in the City as of the effective date of this section, and whose operations complied with all applicable provisions of the this Code, may continue to display, offer for sale, offer for adoption, barter, auction, give away, or otherwise transfer or dispose of dogs and cats until the one-year anniversary of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. 
C.  This section shall not apply to: 
1.  A commercial animal rescue shop that offers dogs or cats for an adoption fee; 
2.  A publicly operated animal control facility or animal shelter; 
3.  A private, charitable, nonprofit humane society or animal rescue organization; or 
4.  A publicly operated animal control agency, nonprofit humane society, or nonprofit animal rescue organization that operates out of or in connection with a pet shop. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall prevent a pet shop or its owner, operator or employees from providing space and appropriate care for animals owned by a publicly operated animal control agency, nonprofit humane society, or nonprofit animal rescue agency and maintained at the pet shop for the purpose of adopting those animals to the public. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
Chapter 7.04 - DOG LICENSING REQUIREMENTS 
 
7.04.010 - Dog license and fee. 
Every person, firm or corporation owning or harboring a dog within the City for a period longer than thirty days shall pay to the City a license fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the City Council. No license to own or harbor a dog as provided in this chapter shall be issued except on application in writing to the Finance Director of the City as provided in Section 7.04.020. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.04.020 - Dog license; application contents. 
No license to own or harbor a dog or similar type animal shall be issued except upon application in writing to the City, setting forth the name and address of the owner or possessor of the dog, or similar type animal and a brief description of the dog, together with a certificate of vaccination from a licensed veterinarian, showing that the dog has been vaccinated with canine rabies vaccine within a period of twelve months preceding date of application for license or that such a vaccination might be fatal to the animal due to its physical condition. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.04.030 - Dog license exemptions. 
The license provisions of Sections 7.04.010 through 7.04.130 shall not be deemed to apply to dogs under the age of four months and which are kept within an enclosure and not permitted to run at large and to any dogs that are recovering as rescue dogs or being fostered. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.04.040 - Rabies vaccination required for license issuance. 
In order to protect the public health and safety all dogs, cats, or similar type animals within the City must be vaccinated with canine or feline rabies vaccine, as appropriate for the species of the animal being vaccinated. It is unlawful for any person to own, have an interest in, harbor and feed, or have the care, charge, custody or possession of a dog or cat over the age of four months unless such dog or cat has been vaccinated with the appropriate rabies vaccine by injection or other approved method by a duly qualified and licensed veterinarian, or unless such veterinarian has issued a written certificate that such a vaccination might be fatal to the animal due to its physical condition, and such certificate has been filed with the City, and, for dogs, a license issued by the City for the animal. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.04.050 - License application; tag issuance; duplicate license fee. 
The Finance Director upon receipt of such application and the license fee as set out in Section 7.04.020 shall issue and deliver to such owner or possessor of a license, a receipt certifying the payment of the license fee and setting forth the name and address of the applicant and a brief description of the dog, together with the fact that it has been vaccinated as provided in this chapter and stating the number allotted to such dog, and he shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the applicant a metallic tag which shall set forth the license number allotted to the dog, which tag shall at all times be affixed to the collar, covering, harness or other article worn by such dog. 
The Finance Director shall make a charge in an amount to be determined by resolution of the City Council for each duplicate license issued to replace any license issued under the provisions of Sections 7.04.010 through 7.04.130 which has been lost or destroyed. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.04.060 - Dogs license fee waiver. 
The Finance Director may, at his or her discretion, waive payment of the required license fee to an owner, custodian or trainer of a dog, if such dog is, or is in training to be, a guide dog for the blind, signal dog for the deaf, or service dog to the disabled. The owner, custodian or trainer of such a dog may be requested to submit proof that the dog has been successfully trained as a guide, signal or service dog, or is currently involved in such training. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.04.070 - Unlicensed stray dogs; impoundment and disposal. 
Every stray dog found within the City for which a license has not been issued as provided in this chapter, and which does not bear a tag or microchip, shall be impounded by the Animal Control Officer after a reasonable attempt to ascertain ownership is made. Release of such animal shall be in accordance with the City contracted animal shelter policies. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.04.080 - Dogs; control; owner's duty. 
Every person owning, harboring, or having charge, custody, control or possession of any dog, cat, or similar type animal shall not permit such animal to run loose or unrestrained in, along, or upon any public street, sidewalk or place. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.04.090 - Dogs; running at large; impoundment and disposal. 
Every dog, cat or similar type animal, regardless of whether or not it has a license, which is found running at large, loose or unrestrained in, along, or upon any public street, sidewalk or place, shall be impounded by the Animal Control Officer after a reasonable attempt to ascertain ownership is made. Release of such animal shall be in accordance with the City contracted animal shelter policies. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.04.100 - Dogs claimed by owner; fee paid to city. 
If any animal picked up by the Animal Control Officer or other public safety personnel, pursuant to this chapter, is claimed by any owner, the owner shall be liable for and shall pay to the City an apprehension fee in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council, together with any additional charges or fees levied by the City for the purpose of defraying expenses incurred by the City related to the apprehension of the animal. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.04.110 - Harming police dogs; unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously torture, tease, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the Police Department of the City in the performance of the functions or duties of the Police Department or to unwarrantably interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being used by the Police Department or any Officer or member thereof in the performance of any of the functions or duties of the Police Department or of such Officer or member. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.04.120 - Harming police dogs; penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of Section 7.04.110 is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars or imprisoned in the City or County Jail for a period not exceeding three months or by being both so fined and imprisoned. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.04.130 - Number of dogs and cats allowed in dwelling units. 
A.  The number of dogs and cats that may be kept in any one dwelling unit or on any parcel of land used as a single family dwelling unit is limited as follows: 
1.  It is unlawful to keep more than ten dogs, or more than ten cats, or a combination of dogs and cats that total more than ten. 
B.  This section shall not apply to premises where the Planning Commission has issued a conditional use permit pursuant to Colton Municipal Code Title 18 (Zoning) and by such conditional use permit the premises are authorized for use as and for animal boarding, animal grooming, animal health care, or animal keeping (heavy or light). 
C.  Notwithstanding the penalty provisions in this code available to enforce this section, only administrative fines may be issued for violations of this section. Upon determining that a violation of this section exists, a person shall be given a minimum of thirty days to comply with this section before accruing penalties. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
Chapter 7.06 - VICIOUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG DETERMINATIONS 
 
7.06.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein: 
"Animal Control Department" or "Department" shall have the same meaning as the definition contained in section 7.02.010 of this title. 
"Chief of Police" means the Chief of the Colton Police Department, or designee. 
"Enclosure" shall have the same meaning as the definition contained in section 7.02.010 of this title. 
"Hearing Authority" means the Code Enforcement Housing Advisory Appeals Board, or such other person or entity designated by the City Manager of the City to administer hearings pursuant to this chapter. 
"Impounded" means taken into the custody of the animal shelter or Animal Control Department. 
"Potentially Dangerous Dog" means any of the following: 
1.  Any dog that, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior twelve month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the dog are off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog; 
2.  Any dog that, when unprovoked, bites a person causing less than severe injury; 
3.  Any dog that, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior thirty-six month period, has seriously bitten, inflicted injury or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal off the Property of the owner or keeper of the dog; 
4.  Any dog that in a threatening or annoying manner barks, snarls or menaces a person or persons within the City. 
"Severe Injury" means any physical injury that results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
"Vicious animal" or "dangerous animal" means an animal which: 
1.  Has attacked or behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof knows or should reasonably know that the animal has tendencies to attack or bite human beings; or 
2.  Has twice within a twelve-month period bitten, attacked, or shown the disposition, tendency, or propensity to attack, bite, or otherwise cause injury or attempt to cause injury to a person engaged in lawful activity; or 
3.  Has once attacked or bitten a person engaged in lawful activity, causing death or substantial injury; or 
4.  Has been determined by a doctor of veterinary medicine, after observation thereof, as posing a danger to humans or domestic animals if not enclosed or muzzled; or 
5.  Has attacked or behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof knows or should reasonably know that the animal has tendencies to attack domestic animals without provocation; or 
6.  Has been trained for fighting or as an attack animal, except such animals which are employed by a government agency, including the Police Department of the City or County; or 
7.  Has been classified as dangerous, potentially dangerous or vicious by any other local, county, or state animal control agency; or 
8.  When unprovoked has, on two separate occasions within the prior twelve-month period, engaged in any behavior that required a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury to himself or herself or another person, during which the person who was attacked and the attacking animal were off the property of the owner or keeper of the animal; or 
9.  Has been outfitted with a training device for fighting or attack, such as a weighted collar around the neck of the animal, or found to be allowed to hang suspended from an object by biting into and holding onto the object with its jaws, shall be presumed to be an animal trained as a fighting or attack animal; or 
10.  Is a member of a species, breed, or kind (excluding dogs and cats), which in its wild or untamed condition is capable of and, if aroused, is likely to cause death or serious injury to a human being or which would cause serious fear or alarm to the average person if seen wandering at large in an inhabited community; or 
11.  Meets the definition of "vicious animal" or "dangerous animal" contained in California Food and Agriculture Code section 31626. 
"Vicious animal" shall not include animals owned and used by a government entity, including, but not limited to, public entities' police dogs, guard dogs or sentry dogs. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.06.020 - Nonapplication of chapter. 
A.  This chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  Licensed kennels, humane society shelters, animal control facilities or veterinarians; or 
2.  Dogs while utilized by any police department or any law enforcement officer in the performance of police work. 
B.  In addition, no dog may be declared potentially dangerous or vicious if: 
1.  Any injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time the injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass with the intent to commit a crime or other tort (other than a mere trespass) upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime; or 
2.  The dog was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault; or 
3.  An injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal which, at the time the injury or damage was sustained, was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog; or 
4.  The injury or damage to a domestic animal was sustained while the dog was working as a hunting dog, herding dog or predator control dog on the property of, or under the control of, its owner or keeper, and the damage or injury was to a species or type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.06.030 - Seizure and impoundment pending hearing. 
A.  If upon investigation it is determined by the Animal Control Officer or law enforcement officer that probable cause exists to believe the dog in question poses an immediate threat to public safety, then the Animal Control Officer or law enforcement officer may seize and impound the dog pending the hearings to be held pursuant to this chapter. In such event, the Animal Control Department or Chief of Police shall, not later than ten working days following the seizure and impoundment, petition the Hearing Authority for a determination of the dog as potentially dangerous or vicious at the next available regularly scheduled meeting of the Hearing Authority. The owner or keeper of the dog shall be liable to the Animal Control Department where the dog is impounded for the costs and expenses of keeping the dog, if the dog is later adjudicated potentially dangerous or vicious. 
B.  When a dog has been impounded pursuant to subsection (A) of this section and it is not contrary to public safety, the Animal Control Department shall permit the animal to be confined at the owner or keeper's expense in a Department approved kennel or veterinary facility. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.06.040 - Hearing on declaration of dog as potentially dangerous or vicious. 
If an Animal Control Officer or law enforcement officer has investigated and determined that there exists probable cause to believe that a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, an Animal Control Officer of the Animal Control Department or the Chief of Police may petition the Hearing Authority for the purpose of determining whether or not the dog in question should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. Whenever possible, any complaint received from a member of the public, which serves as the evidentiary basis for the Animal Control Officer or law enforcement officer to find probable cause, shall be sworn to and verified by the complainant and shall be attached to the petition. The Animal Control Department or the Chief of Police shall notify the owner or keeper of the dog that a hearing will be held by the Hearing Authority, at which time he or she may present evidence as to why the dog should not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. The owner or keeper of the dog shall be served with notice of the hearing and a copy of the petition, either personally or by first-class mail with return receipt requested. The hearing shall be held no fewer than five working days after service of notice upon the owner or keeper of the dog. 
For purposes of this section, service shall be deemed complete upon personal service on the owner or keeper or, if service is effectuated by mail, the service shall be deemed complete five days after deposit in the mail if the owner or keeper's address is within the State of California, ten days if the owner or keeper's address is outside the State of California but within the United States, and twenty days if the owner or keeper's address is outside the United States. The hearing shall be open to the public. The Hearing Authority may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, including incident reports and the affidavits of witnesses, limit the scope of discovery, subpoena witnesses and documents and shorten the time to produce records or witnesses. The Hearing Authority may find, upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious and make other orders authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.06.050 - Failure of owner or keeper to appear; Decision. 
The Hearing Authority of original jurisdiction may decide all issues for or against the owner or keeper of the dog even if the owner or keeper fails to appear at the hearing. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.06.060 - Determination and orders; notice; compliance; appeal. 
A.  After the hearing conducted pursuant to Section 7.06.040 of this chapter, the owner or keeper of the dog shall be notified in writing of the determination and Orders issued, either personally or by first-class mail postage prepaid by Hearing Authority. If a determination is made that the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, the owner or keeper shall comply with Sections 7.06.080 to 7.06.130 of this chapter, and any other reasonable requirements designed to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public or other animals, ordered by the Hearing Authority in accordance with a time schedule established by the Animal Control Department or the Chief of Police, but in no case more than thirty days after the date of the determination or thirty-five days if Notice of the determination is mailed to the owner or keeper of the dog. If the petitioner or the owner or keeper of the dog contests the determination, he or she may, within five days of the receipt of the Notice of determination, appeal the decision of the Hearing Authority to the Superior Court of the County. The contesting petitioner or the owner or keeper of the dog shall serve personally or by first-class mail, postage prepaid, Notice of the Appeal upon the other Party. 
B.  The Court hearing the Appeal shall conduct a hearing de novo, without a jury, and make its own determination as to potential danger and viciousness and make other orders authorized by this chapter, based upon the evidence presented. The hearing shall be conducted in the same manner and within the time periods set forth in Section 7.06.040 of this chapter and subsection (A) of this section. The Court may admit all relevant evidence, including incident reports and the affidavits of witnesses, limit the scope of discovery, subpoena witnesses and documents and may shorten the time to produce records or witnesses. The issue shall be decided upon the preponderance of the evidence. If the Court rules the dog to be potentially dangerous or vicious, the Court may establish a time schedule to ensure compliance with this chapter, but in no case more than thirty days subsequent to the date of the Court's determination or thirty-five days if the service of the judgment is by first-class mail. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.06.070 - Finality of determination. 
The determination of the Hearing Authority or, if contested pursuant to this chapter, shall be final and conclusive upon all parties. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.06.080 - Licensing and vaccination; designation maintained in registration records; additional Fee. 
All Vicious Dogs and Potentially Dangerous Dogs shall be properly licensed and vaccinated. The licensing authority shall include the Vicious Dog Designation and potentially dangerous designation in the registration records of the dog, either after the owner or keeper of the dog has agreed to the designation or the Court or Hearing Authority has determined the designation applies to the dog. The Animal Control Department may charge a Vicious Dog Fee or Potentially Dangerous Dog Fee, to be established and amended by the City Council by resolution, in addition to the regular licensing fee to provide for the increased costs of maintaining the records of the dog. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.06.090 - Keeping and controlling vicious and potentially dangerous dogs. 
A vicious or Potentially Dangerous Dog, while on the owner or keeper's Property, shall, at all times, be kept indoors, or in a securely fenced yard from which the dog cannot escape, and into which children cannot trespass. A vicious or potentially dangerous animal may be off the owner or keeper's premises only if it is restrained by a substantial leash, of appropriate length, and if it is under the control of a responsible adult. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.06.100 - Death, sale, transfer or permanent removal; notice. 
If the dog in question dies, or is sold, transferred or permanently removed from the City, the owner or keeper of a vicious or Potentially Dangerous Dog shall notify the Animal Control Department of the changed condition and new location of the dog in writing within two working days. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.06.110 - Removal from list of potentially dangerous dogs. 
If there are no additional instances of the behavior described in Section 7.06.010 of this chapter within a thirty-six month period from the date of designation as a Potentially Dangerous Dog, the dog shall be removed from the list of Potentially Dangerous Dogs. The dog may, but is not required to be, removed from the list of Potentially Dangerous Dogs prior to the expiration of the thirty-six month period if the owner or keeper of the dog demonstrates to the Animal Control Department that changes in circumstances or measures taken by the owner or keeper, such as training of the dog, have mitigated the risk to the public safety. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.06.120 - Destruction and nondestruction, conditions; enclosures. 
A.  At the conclusion of any appeals, a dog determined to be a vicious dog may be humanely euthanized by the Animal Control Department when it is found, after proceedings conducted under Section 7.06.040 of this chapter, that the release of the dog would create a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare. 
B.  If it is determined that a dog is not vicious, it shall not be euthanized. The Hearing Authority or, if appealed, the Court, may impose conditions upon the ownership and keeping of the dog that protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
C.  Any enclosure that is required pursuant to subsection B. shall meet the requirements of Section 7.06.010 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.06.130 - Prohibition of owning, possessing, controlling or having custody. 
The owner or keeper of a dog determined to be a Vicious Dog may be prohibited by the Hearing Authority, or if contested, the Court, from owning, possessing, controlling or having custody of any dog for a period of up to three years, when it is found, after proceedings conducted under Section 7.06.040 of this chapter, that ownership or possession of a dog by that person would create a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.06.140 - Penalty and fines. 
The failure of an owner or keeper to comply with an Order issued by the Hearing Authority shall be and is hereby declared a Public Nuisance. Such Public Nuisance may be punished as a misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, remedied by way of a civil action prosecuted by the City Attorney, or abated by the Animal Control Department. All fines paid pursuant to this section shall be paid to the City for the purpose of defraying the cost of the implementation of this chapter. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as limiting the authority of the City to pursue any other remedy or remedies provided at law or in equity relating to vicious or Potentially Dangerous Dogs, including, without limitation, a criminal action pursuant to Chapter 8.02 of this Code, the issuance of Administrative Citations pursuant to Chapter 8.02 of this Code, or a civil action. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
Chapter 7.08 - PROPER CARE OF ANIMALS 
 
7.08.010 - General standards of care. 
These standards are promulgated with the understanding that animals are sentient beings—With consciousness, sentience, or in some contexts life itself. Sentient beings are composed of the five aggregates—Matter, sensation, perception, mental formations and consciousness. The City of Colton recognizes that animals are sentient and can experience both positive and negative emotions, including pain and distress. As a result, all animals deserve to be cared for in ways that are respectful of these sentiments. Every person owning or occupying any property or premises where any animal or bird is kept shall keep such premises clean and sanitary. Any feces, uneaten food, or other matter that emits an offensive odor or encourages the breeding of flies or other insects shall be collected daily and not allowed to accumulate. This provision shall not prohibit the owner or occupant of any premises from storing such feces, uneaten food, or other matter in a closed container prior to disposal. In addition, every person owning and animal shall also comply with the following: 
A.  An animal's owner shall keep the animal in a clean, sanitary, and healthy condition. 
B.  An animal's owner or handler shall provide for the animal: 
1.  Regular and adequate amounts of nutritious food that is appropriate for the species and that maintains the animal in good health; 
2.  A constant and adequate supply of clean, fresh, potable water that keeps the animal hydrated for environmental conditions; and 
3.  Care and medical treatment for injuries, parasites, and diseases that is sufficient to maintain the animal in good health and minimize suffering. 
C.  An animal's owner shall provide the animal with shelter that: 
1.  Is large enough for the animal to enter, stand, turn around, and lie down in a natural manner; 
2.  Keeps the animal dry; 
3.  Provides the animal with natural or artificial shade from direct sunlight; 
4.  Protects the animal from excessive heat and cold and other adverse weather conditions; and 
5.  Is adequately ventilated. 
D.  An animal's owner may not confine the animal to the extent that it is forced to stand, sit, or lie in its own excrement. 
E.  An animal's owner shall regularly maintain the animal and its shelter to prevent odor or a health or sanitation problem. 
F.  An animal's owner shall provide the animal with exercise space that is large enough to prevent injury and keep the animal in good condition. 
G.  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the animal's treatment was as directed by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.08.020 - Tethering standards. 
It shall be unlawful to tether a dog, except as follows. 
A.  A dog may be restrained to an overhead running line, pulley, or trolley system under the following conditions: 
1.  The tether is attached to the dog by means of a suitable, properly-fitted collar or harness not exceeding two inches in width. Choke or prong collars are not permitted. The tether must have a swivel on both ends. 
2.  The tether provides access to adequate space for the dog to move about freely and cannot become entangled in such a way that would prevent the dog's mobility or cause strangulation. 
3.  At minimum, the tether should be four times the length of the dog from the tip of the nose to the tip of the tail and the tether must allow the dog to lie down with its head flat on the ground and provides an additional twelve inches of slack. 
4.  The tether is made of a durable, lightweight material that will not cause unnecessary stress on the dog. The tether shall not weigh more than three percent of the dog's total body weight. Thick chains and other heavy lines are prohibited. 
5.  The tether allows the dog to move at least 30 feet. Otherwise, the dog must be removed from the tether at least twice a day for exercise and/or socialization for a minimum of sixty minutes each day. 
6.  The tether does not inhibit the animal's access to shelter shade, food, and water; and 
7.  Intact dogs may not be tethered under any circumstances. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.08.030 - Animals trespassing on private property. 
Every animal found running at large or trespassing upon any private property within the City may be captured by the party owning, controlling or having possession of such property, or by his representative, provided, however, that the only trap used in such capture shall be of a type of trap approved by the Animal Control Officer. Such person(s) may make reasonable attempts to ascertain ownership of the animal for up to seven days. Thereafter, the party having possession of the animal may avail themselves of California Civil Code, section 2080 or the animal may be committed to the Animal Control Officer. This section shall not apply to community cats, as defined in this title. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.08.040 - Duty to restrain dog on property. 
It shall be the duty of any person owning or having charge, custody or control of any dog to ensure that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the dog leaving, while not on leash, the real property upon which it is kept and that either (1) it is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition, which enclosure is securely locked or fastened at any time the dog is left unattended; or (2) it is securely and humanely restrained by a chain with swivel, cable or trolley or other tether of sufficient strength to prevent escape, provided that the dog while so chained or tethered cannot go beyond the boundaries of the real property upon which it is maintained or upon the public right of way; or (3) it is on leash and under the control of a competent person. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.08.050 - Leash laws. 
No person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of any dog shall, either intentionally or unintentionally, cause, permit or allow the same to be or run at large upon any street or other public place, or upon any unenclosed lot or place in the City or upon the private property of another without permission of the person owning or in possession of such property unless such dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is in control of a competent person; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any official police dog while such animal is on duty. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.08.060 - Female dog in season. 
It is unlawful for any person to permit any female dog which is owned, harbored, or controlled by him or her, to run at large in the City at any time during the period when the dog is in season or breeding condition. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.08.070 - Wild animals and reptiles. 
No person shall have, keep or maintain, or have in his or her possession or under his or her control on any residentially-zoned property any lion, tiger, bear, chimpanzee, gorilla, cougar, mountain lion, badger, wolf, coyote, fox, lynx, or any poisonous reptile, or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile; provided, however, such animals may be permitted on such residentially-zoned lots on the condition that a permit is obtained from the Development Services Director or his or her duly authorized representative. 
Such permit shall only be granted upon a showing by the applicant that adequate safeguards have been established and will be maintained which will effectively control the dangerous or vicious propensities of such animal or reptile, eliminating any danger to individuals or property, and provided that the keeping or maintaining of such animal or reptile will in no way constitute a nuisance to the occupants of any surrounding property. The denial of the permit shall be in writing and shall specify the grounds for such denial. The applicant shall have ten days from the date the permit was denied in order to appeal such denial to the City Council. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.08.080 - Prohibited conduct towards official police dogs and horses. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously annoy, tease, taunt, torment, strike, threaten to strike, startle, attempt to startle or throw any object at any official police dog or any official police horse. The conduct prohibited hereby shall include, but not be limited to, the use of any part of the body, including the voice, or the use of any object, including liquids, or a vehicle with the intent to accomplish one or more of the above acts. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, other than an authorized employee or agent of the Police Department or a person authorized by the police officer in possession of said animal, to feed or touch, or attempt to touch an official police dog or official police horse or the equipment attached to or housing said animal while on duty. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.08.090 - Interference with official police dog or horse. 
It is unlawful for any person, other than the police officer in lawful possession of such animal, to give commands or attempt to give commands to any official police dog or official police horse or otherwise interfere with such animal while it is on duty. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.08.100 - Reserved.  
7.08.110 - Disposal of dead animals by owner. 
The owner of any dead animal shall dispose of the carcass of such animal in a sanitary manner as prescribed by the Animal Control Director or his or her designee within twenty-four hours after said owner has knowledge of the animal's death. No person shall bury any dead animal in the City unless approved by the Animal Control Director or his or her designee . It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Director or his or her designee to take custody of all dead animals from the owner when requested. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.08.120 - Disposal of dead animals; owner unknown. 
The Animal Control Director or his or her designee shall be responsible for the disposal of all dead animals whose ownership cannot be established. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.08.130 - Same—Notification of owner. 
Whenever deceased animals picked up by the Animal Control Officer carry identification of any kind, the owner shall be notified and a notice posted at the shelter giving such information in an easily visible location. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.08.140 - Abandonment. 
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly abandon any animal within the City. Any person violating this section shall bear full costs and expenses incurred by said City in the care of said abandoned animal and said person shall reimburse to the City all costs therefor as determined by the Animal Control Officer and may be subject the provisions of California Penal Code, section 597. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.08.150 - Animals in unattended vehicle. 
A.  No person shall leave or confine an animal in any unattended motor vehicle under conditions that endanger the health or well-being of an animal due to heat, cold, lack of adequate ventilation, or lack food or water, or other circumstances that could reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability or death to the animal. Nor shall any person leave or confine an animal in any unattended motor vehicle in such a manner as to endanger persons lawfully passing by the vehicle. 
B.  The Animal Control Director or his or her designee are authorized to remove and impound any animal found in violation of subsection A above if the animal's safety appears to be in immediate danger from heat, cold, lack of adequate ventilation, lack of food or water, or other circumstances that could reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability, or death to the animal, or that present an immediate threat to public safety. Animals impounded pursuant to this section shall be taken to the City's animal shelter or, if deemed necessary, to a licensed veterinarian for examination and/or treatment. 
C.  The Animal Control Director or his or her designee are authorized to take all steps that are reasonably necessary for the removal of an animal from a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, breaking into the motor vehicle, after a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person responsible is made. Any person authorized to enforce this section who removes an animal from a motor vehicle shall, in a secure and conspicuous location on or within the motor vehicle, leave a written notice bearing his or her name and office, and the address of the location where the animal can be claimed. The animal may be claimed by the owner only after payment of all charges that have accrued for the maintenance, care, medical treatment, or impoundment of the animal. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall preclude prosecution under both this section and Section 597 of the California Penal Code or any other provision of law, including any applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance. 
E.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the transportation of horses, cattle, pigs, sheep, poultry or other agricultural animals in motor vehicles designed to transport such animals for agricultural purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.08.160 - Reserved.  
7.08.170 - Animal sales in public places prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to offer for sale, exchange, or give away puppies or kittens in public places such as in front of stores, at swap meets, or auctions. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
Chapter 7.10 - SPAY, NEUTER AND MICROCHIP 
 
7.10.010 - Spay and neuter. 
A.  1.  Requirement. No person may own, keep, or harbor an unaltered and unspayed dog or cat over the age of seven months in violation of this section. An owner or custodian of an unaltered dog must have the dog spayed or neutered, or provide a certificate of sterility, or obtain an unaltered dog license in accordance with this chapter. An owner or custodian of an unaltered cat must have the animal spayed or neutered, or provide a certificate of sterility. 
2.  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to any of the following: 
a.  A dog with a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death if spayed or neutered, due to age or infirmity. The owner or custodian must obtain written confirmation of this fact from a California Licensed Veterinarian. If the dog is able to be safely spayed or neutered at a later date, that date must be stated in the written confirmation; should this date be later than thirty days, the owner or custodian must apply for an unaltered dog license. 
b.  A cat with a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death if spayed or neutered, due to age or infirmity. The owner or custodian must obtain written confirmation of this fact from a California Licensed Veterinarian. If the cat is able to be safely spayed or neutered at a later date, that date must be stated in the written confirmation. 
c.  Animals owned by recognized dog or cat breeders, as defined by City policy. 
B.  Denial or revocation of unaltered dog license and reapplication. 
1.  The Animal Control Director or his/her designee may deny or revoke an unaltered dog license for one or more of the following reasons: 
a.  The owner, custodian, applicant or licensee is not in compliance with all of the requirements of this section; 
b.  The Department has received at least three complaints, verified by the Department, that the owner, custodian, applicant, or licensee has allowed a dog to be stray or run at large or has otherwise been found to be neglectful of his or her or other animals; 
c.  The owner, custodian, applicant, or licensee has been previously cited for violating a State law, city code or other municipal provision relating to the care and control of animals; 
d.  The unaltered dog has been adjudicated by a court or an agency of appropriate jurisdiction to be potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious, or to be nuisance within the meaning of the Colton Municipal Code or under state law; 
e.  Any unaltered dog license held by the applicant has been revoked; 
f.  The license application is discovered to contain a material misrepresentation or omission of fact. 
2.  Re-application for unaltered dog license: 
a.  When an unaltered dog license is denied, the applicant may re-apply for a license upon changed circumstances and a showing that the requirements of this chapter have been met. The department shall refund one-half of the license fee when the application is denied. The applicant shall pay the full fee upon re-application. 
b.  When an unaltered dog license is revoked, the owner or custodian of the dog may apply for a new license after a thirty day waiting period upon showing that the requirements of this chapter have been met. No part of an unaltered dog license fee is refundable when a license is revoked and the applicant shall pay the full fee upon re-application. 
C.  Appeal of denial or revocation of unaltered dog license. 
1.  Request for hearing. 
a.  Notice of intent to deny or revoke. The Department shall mail to the owner, custodian, licensee, or applicant a written notice of its intent to deny or revoke the license for an unaltered dog which includes the reason(s) for the denial or revocation. The owner, custodian, licensee or applicant may request a hearing to appeal the denial or revocation by filing such request with the Police Chief and/or his/her designee. The request must be made in writing within fifteen days after the notice of intent to deny or revoke is mailed. Failure to submit a timely written hearing request shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal the license denial or revocation. 
b.  Administrative Hearing Authority. shall be the same as described in section 7.06.040 with the qualifications and authority outlined in code section 7.020.010. 
c.  Notice and conduct of hearing. The Animal Control Director or his/her designee shall mail a written notice of the date, time, and place for the hearing not less than ten days before the hearing date. The hearing date shall be no more than forty-five days after the Department's receipt of the request for a hearing. The hearing will be informal and the rules of evidence will not be strictly observed. The Administrative Hearing Authority shall prepare and mail a written decision to the owner or custodian after the hearing. The decision of the Administrative Hearing Authority shall be the final administrative decision. 
d.  Judicial Review of Administrative Decision. Any person aggrieved by the order of the Administrative Hearing Authority may obtain judicial review of that order by filing a petition for review with the Superior Court of San Bernardino County in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
2.  Change in location of dog. If the dog is moved after the department has issued a letter of intent to deny or revoke, but has not yet denied or revoked the license, the owner, custodian, licensee, or applicant must provide the department with information as to the dog's whereabouts, including the current owner or custodian's name, address, and telephone number. 
D.  Transfer, sale, and breeding of unaltered dog or cat. 
1.  Offer for sale or transfer of unaltered dog. An owner or custodian who offers any unaltered dog over the age of four months of age for sale, trade, or adoption must include a valid unaltered dog license number with the offer of sale, trade or adoption, or otherwise state and establish compliance with this section. An owner or custodian of an unaltered dog must notify the department of the name and address of the transferee within ten days after the transfer. The unaltered license and microchip numbers must appear on a document transferring the animal to the new owner. 
2.  Offer for sale or transfer of unaltered cat. An owner or custodian of an unaltered cat must notify the department of the name and address of the transferee within ten days after the transfer. The microchip numbers must appear on a document transferring the animal to the new owner. 
E.  Impoundment of unaltered dog or cat. 
1.  When an unaltered dog or cat is impounded pursuant to this title, in addition to satisfying applicable requirements for the release of the animal, including but not limited to payment of impound fees pursuant to this chapter, the owner or custodian shall also do one of the following: 
a.  Provide written proof of the dog or cat's prior sterilization, if conditions cannot or do not make this assessment obvious to Department personnel. 
b.  Have the dog or cat spayed or neutered by a Department veterinarian at the expense of the owner or custodian. Such expense may include additional fees due to extraordinary care required. 
c.  Have the dog or cat spayed or neutered by another California licensed veterinarian. The owner or custodian may arrange for another California licensed veterinarian to spay or neuter the animal, and shall pay to the Department the cost to deliver said animal to the chosen veterinarian. The cost to deliver the animal shall be based on the Department's hourly rate established by the auditor-controller. The veterinarian shall complete and return to the Department within ten days, a statement confirming that the dog or cat has been spayed or neutered or is, in fact, incapable of breeding and shall release the dog or cat to the owner or custodian only after the spay or neuter procedure is complete. 
d.  At the discretion of the Animal Control Director, the dog or cat may be released to the owner or custodian if he or she signs a statement under penalty of perjury, representing that the dog or cat will be spayed or neutered and that he or she will submit a statement within ten days of the release, signed by a California licensed veterinarian, confirming that the dog or cat has been spayed or neutered or is incapable of breeding. 
2.  Costs of impoundment. 
a.  The owner or custodian of the unaltered dog or cat shall be responsible for the costs of impoundment, which shall include daily board costs, vaccination/medication, and any other diagnostic or therapeutic applications as provided in this chapter. 
b.  The costs of impoundment shall be a lien on the dog or cat, and the unaltered animal shall not be returned to its owner or custodian until the costs are paid or other arrangements are made including, but not limited to, a payment plan. If the owner or custodian of an impounded unaltered animal does not pay the lien against it in full within fourteen days, the animal shall be deemed abandoned and become the property of the Department. 
F.  Application of fees and fines collected. All costs and fines collected under this part and the fees collected under this section shall be paid to the City of Colton for the purpose of defraying the cost of the implementation and enforcement of this program. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.10.020 - Penalties for failure to spay or neuter. 
Penalties issued for failure to spay or neuter a dog or cat shall be enforced as set forth below: 
A.  An administrative citation, infraction, or other such authorized penalty may be issued to an owner or custodian of an unaltered dog or cat for a violation of this section only when the owner or custodian is concurrently cited for another violation under State or local law pertaining to the obligations of a person owning or possessing a dog or cat. Examples of such State law or local ordinance violations include, but are not limited to, failure to possess a current canine rabies vaccination of the subject dog; dog or cat at large; failure to license a dog; leash law violations; kennel or cattery permit violations; tethering violations; unhealthy or unsanitary conditions; failure to provide adequate care for the subject dog or cat in violation of the Penal Code; rabies quarantine violations for the subject dog; operating a business without a license and/or lack of State Tax ID Number; fighting dog activity in violation of Penal Code section 597.5; animals left unattended in motor vehicles; potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animals; and noisy animals. 
B.  Should the owner or custodian of an unaltered dog or cat be found in violation of a State or local law, as stated above, in subsection (1), the owner or custodian shall be required to spay or neuter the unaltered animal in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.10.030 - Microchipping of dogs and cats. 
A.  All dogs and cats over the age of four months must be implanted with an identifying microchip. The owner or custodian is required to provide the microchip number to the Department, and shall notify the Department of any change of ownership of the dog or cat, or any change of address or telephone number. Nothing in this section supersedes, eliminates, or alters any other licensing requirements of this Title. 
An administrative citation, infraction, or other such authorized penalty may be issued to an owner or custodian of an unmicrochipped dog for a violation of this section only when the owner or custodian is concurrently cited for another violation under state or local law pertaining to the obligations of a person owning or possessing a dog or cat. Examples of such State law or local ordinance violations include, but are not limited to, failure to possess a current canine rabies vaccination of the subject dog; dog or cat at large; failure to license a dog; leash law violations; kennel or cattery permit violations; tethering violations; unhealthy or unsanitary conditions; failure to provide adequate care for the subject dog or cat in violation of the Penal Code; rabies quarantine violations for the subject dog; operating a business without a license and/or lack of State Tax ID Number; fighting dog activity in violation of Penal Code section 597.5; animals left unattended in motor vehicles; potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animals; and noisy animals. 
B.  Exemptions. The microchipping requirements shall not apply to any of the following: 
1.  A dog or cat with a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily injury, if implanted with the microchip identification, due to the health conditions of the animal. The owner or custodian must obtain written confirmation of that fact from a California licensed veterinarian. If the dog or cat is able to be safely implanted with an identifying microchip at a later date, that date must be stated in the written confirmation. 
2.  A dog or cat that is kenneled or trained in the City of Colton, but is owned by an individual that does not reside in the City of Colton. The owner or custodian must keep and maintain the animal in accordance with the applicable laws and ordinances of the jurisdiction in which the owner or custodian of the animal permanently resides, including but not limited to the applicable licensing and rabies vaccination requirements of that jurisdiction. 
3.  A dog or cat over the age of ten years. 
C.  Transfer, sale of dogs and cats. 
1.  An owner or custodian who offers any dog, over the age of four months, for sale, trade, or adoption must provide the microchip identification number and the valid dog license number with the offer of sale, trade or adoption. The license and microchip numbers must appear on a document transferring the dog to the new owner. The owner or custodian shall also advise the Department of the name and address of the new owner or custodian in accordance with subdivision (a) of this section. An owner or custodian who offers any dog, over the age of four months, for sale, trade, or adoption and fails to provide the Department with the name and address of the new owner, is in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties set forth herein. 
2.  An owner or custodian who offers any cat, over the age of four months, for sale, trade, or adoption must provide the microchip identification number with the offer of sale, trade or adoption. The microchip numbers must appear on a document transferring the cat to the new owner. The owner or custodian shall also advise the Department of the name and address of the new owner or custodian in accordance with Subdivision (A) of this section. An owner or custodian who offers any cat, over the age of four months, for sale, trade, or adoption and fails to provide the Department with the name and address of the new owner, is in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties set forth herein. 
3.  When a puppy or kitten under the age of four months implanted with microchip identification is sold or otherwise transferred to another person, the owner or custodian shall advise the Department of the name and address of the new owner or custodian, and the microchip number of the puppy or kitten within ten days after the transfer. If it is discovered that an owner or custodian has failed to provide the Department with the name and address of the new owner and the microchip number of the puppy or kitten, the owner or custodian shall be subject to the administrative remedies set forth in Chapter 1.17. 
D.  When an impounded dog or cat is without microchip identification, in addition to satisfying applicable requirements for the release of the animal, including but not limited to payment of impound fees pursuant to this chapter, the owner or custodian shall also do one of the following: 
1.  Have the dog or cat implanted with a Department microchip by a Department registered veterinarian technician or veterinarian or designated personnel at the expense of the owner or custodian; 
2.  Have the dog or cat implanted with a department approved microchip by a California licensed veterinarian. The owner or custodian may arrange for another California licensed veterinarian to perform the implant, and shall pay to the department the cost to deliver the dog or cat to the chosen veterinarian. The veterinarian shall complete and return to the Department within ten days, a statement confirming that the microchip has been implanted, provide the Department with the number and shall release the dog or cat to the owner or custodian only after the procedure is complete; or 
3.  At the discretion of the Animal Control Director, the dog or cat may be released to the owner or custodian if he or she signs a statement under penalty of perjury, representing that the dog or cat will be implanted with a microchip and that he or she will submit a statement within ten days of the release, signed by a California licensed veterinarian, confirming that the dog or cat has been so implanted and provide the microchip number to the Department or allow the Department to scan the dog or cat for the microchip to verify. 
E.  Fees for microchip identification device. The fee for an identifying microchip device shall be included in the cost of adoption when adopting a dog or cat from an animal shelter operated by the Department. If an animal has already been implanted with an identifying microchip device by some other facility, there will be no fee to have the identification microchip number entered into the Department's registry as required by subdivision A. of this section. 
F.  Application of fees and fines collected. All costs and fines collected under this part and the fees collected under this section shall be paid to the City of Colton for the purpose of defraying the cost of the implementation and enforcement of this program. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
Chapter 7.12 - NOISY ANIMALS 
 
7.12.010 - Purpose. 
The disturbance caused by excessive, unrelenting or habitual noise of any animal is disruptive of the public's peace and tranquility and represents an unwanted invasion of privacy of the residents of the City. It is declared to be in the public interest to promote the health and welfare of the residents of the City by providing for an administrative proceeding for the abatement of such nuisances, which abatement procedures shall be in addition to all other proceedings authorized by this Code or otherwise by law. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.12.015 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein: 
"Complaining Party" means that person or those persons who contact the Animal Control Director to report a noisy animal or noisy animals. 
"Director" means the Animal Control Director. 
"Noisy animal" means any animal or animals maintained on the same premises or location whose excessive, unrelenting or habitual barking, howling, crying or other noises or sounds annoy or become offensive to a resident or residents in the vicinity thereby disturbing the peace of the neighborhood or causing excessive discomfort to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity hearing such sounds. 
"Responsible party" means that person or those persons in charge of the premises or location where any noisy animal is located and may include any of the following: 
1.  The person or persons who own the property where the noisy animal is located; 
2.  The person or persons in charge of the premises where the noisy animal is located; 
3.  The person or persons occupying the premises where the noisy animal is located; 
4.  The owner of the noisy animal. If any of those persons are minors, the parent or parents or a guardian of such minor shall be the Responsible Party. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.12.020 - Administrative hearing authority. 
A determination whether an animal is violating this chapter shall be made by the Administrative Hearing Authority. The Administrative Hearing Authority shall have the power to hear testimony from witnesses including complainants, peace officers, animal control officers or humane officers or other parties including the owner or person having charge, custody or control of the animal allegedly causing the nuisance, to determine whether the maintenance of the animal is a public nuisance as herein declared by the City Council, and to order the abatement of such nuisance by taking such actions as set forth in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.12.030 - Declaration of noisy animal as a public nuisance. 
A.  The City Council hereby determines and declares that it is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, keeping, harboring or having in his or her care, custody or control any animal, to cause or suffer, or permit to be made or caused by such animal, barking, howling, crying or making of any noises or other sounds, so as to annoy and become offensive to a resident or residents in the vicinity in which the animal is kept thereby disturbing the peace of the neighborhood or causing excessive discomfort to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area, unless such noise or sound is made by an official police dog while on duty. 
B.  If, in violation of the provisions of this declaration of nuisance, any person owns, maintains, harbors, keeps or has any animal who persistently emits any noises or sounds in such a manner as to annoy and become offensive to a resident or residents in the vicinity in which the animal is kept, the maintenance of such animal may be declared a public nuisance by written notice to the owner or person in charge, custody or control of the animal. If after the issuance of such notice, the person owning, keeping, harboring or having in such person's care or custody any animal has not abated the nuisance, such person shall be liable to enforcement of the provisions of this Code. 
C.  It is unlawful for the Responsible Party, after being informed in writing that such person's animal has been declared a noisy animal and that the maintenance of a noisy animal is a public nuisance, to fail, refuse or neglect to take whatever steps or use whatever means are necessary to assure that such animal does not again disturb residents in the vicinity in which the animal is kept. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.12.040 - Noisy animal warning notice. 
A.  When an Animal Control Officer or Police Officer of the City is notified or alerted of a possible noisy animal which may constitute a nuisance and has personally confirmed the existence of a potential nuisance, that Animal Control Officer or Police Officer shall issue a Noisy Animal Warning Notice to the Responsible Party. Such notice shall specify that the continued barking, howling or other noise or sounds of such animal is in violation of this Code and that the noisy animal nuisance must be abated forthwith to avoid further City action. Such notice shall be served upon the Responsible Party or, if such service cannot be safely made, posted at the premises upon which the animal is located. A copy of the Noisy Animal Warning Notice shall be filed with the Animal Control Director. The Director shall, within five days of the issuance of said warning notice, make a reasonable attempt to speak personally or by telephone with the Responsible Party concerning the matter, including what efforts have been made to abate the nuisance. 
B.  If within five days of the issuance of the Noisy Animal Warning Notice the Director determines that the barking, howling or other sound or cry was provoked and that such barking, howling or other sound or cry was not excessive, unrelenting or habitual, the Director of Animal Services shall cause the Noisy Animal Warning Notice to be voided and the person to whom it was issued to be so notified. In the event a Noisy Animal Warning Notice has been voided, such warning notice shall not be considered as having been issued for the purposes of Sections 7.12.050 or 7.12.090 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.12.050 - Declaration of complaint of noisy animal and petition for administrative hearing. 
A.  When the Director receives a subsequent verbal or written complaint concerning a noisy animal at the same location within twelve months after the issuance of a Noisy Animal Warning Notice, the Director shall determine whether the Noisy Animal Warning Notice went unheeded. If the determination is made the nuisance was not abated, a Declaration of Complaint of Noisy Animal and Petition for Administrative Hearing shall be issued by the Director to the Complaining Party. 
B.  The Declaration of Complaint and Petition for Administrative Hearing shall be completed under penalty of perjury by the Complaining Party and returned within ten days to the Director. 
C.  The Director, upon receipt of a timely executed Declaration of Complaint and Petition for Administrative Hearing, shall set the case for hearing before the Administrative Hearing Authority. The Director shall notify the Complaining Party and Responsible Party of the date, time, and place for the hearing. The notice of hearing shall advise that the Complaining Party and Responsible Party that they may present evidence at the hearing through witnesses and documents. The notice of hearing shall be accompanied by a copy of the Declaration of Complaint and Petition for Administrative Hearing form. The notice shall be served on all parties and witnesses. If the notice cannot be safely served by personal service, then it may be posted upon the premises where the animal is kept and sent by first-class mail. The Complaining Party shall be informed that further action may not be warranted if the animal is controlled, but in any case, no further action can be taken until the completed Declaration of Complaint and Petition for Administrative Hearing form is received by the Director. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.12.060 - Hearing. 
The hearing before the Administrative Hearing Authority shall be open to the public. The Administrative Hearing Authority may admit all relevant evidence, including incident reports and affidavits of witnesses. The Administrative Hearing Authority may decide all issues even if the Responsible Party for the animal fails to appear at the hearing. The Administrative Hearing Authority may find, upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the animal is a noisy animal and the maintenance of such noisy animal is a public nuisance. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Authority shall orally announce the decision as to whether a public nuisance has been found to exist on the premises. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.12.070 - Determination and order. 
At the conclusion of the hearing conducted pursuant to Section 7.12.060, the hearing authority shall, notify the Responsible Party of the Administrative Hearing Authority's determination and any orders issued. If the Administrative Hearing Authority determines that the animal is a noisy animal and the maintenance thereof, a public nuisance, the Responsible Party shall comply with the Administrative Hearing Authority's order within five days after the date of mailing of the determination and order. The decision of the Administrative Hearing Authority shall be final. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.12.080 - Administrative abatement measures. 
The Administrative Hearing Authority may, as part of his/her determination that the animal is a noisy animal and a public nuisance, direct the Responsible Party to perform one or more of the following actions: 
A.  Containment of the animal within an enclosed building on the premises of Responsible Party; 
B.  Require that the animal wear a noise suppression device obtained at the expense of the Responsible Party to reduce or eliminate the noise creating the nuisance; 
C.  Require that the animal undertake obedience training designed to abate the nuisance problem when appropriate and under the conditions imposed by the Administrative Hearing Authority and at the expense of the Responsible Party; 
D.  Restrict the time of day, days of the week and duration when the animal may be placed out-of-doors on the premises of the Responsible Party; 
E.  Require the Responsible Party to permanently remove the animal from said property and outside the City limits. 
F.  Any other reasonable means to accomplish the abatement. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.12.090 - Failure to comply with administrative order. 
It is unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with an administrative abatement order of the Administrative Hearing Authority within the time specified in said order. Should any party to the order issued by the Administrative Hearing Authority fail to comply with the order, in whole or in any part thereof, that party or those parties may be subject to administrative remedies to enforce the order as set forth in this Code, including administrative citations and administrative civil penalties, and any other lawful means necessary to gain compliance, including a civil action. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.12.100 - Civil action. 
In the event any person shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with an administrative abatement order of the Administrative Hearing Authority within the time specified in said order and the public nuisance continues to exist, the City Attorney is authorized to commence civil action to obtain the abatement of such public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.12.110 - Not exclusive remedy. 
The provisions of this chapter are to be construed as an added remedy of abatement of the nuisance hereby declared and not in conflict with or derogation of any other actions or proceedings or remedies otherwise provided by this title or other law. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.12.120 - Judicial Review. 
Any Responsible Party aggrieved by an Administrative Determination and Order may obtain judicial review of that order by filing a petition for review with the Superior Court of San Bernardino County in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
Chapter 7.14 - RABIES CONTROL 
 
7.14.010 - Vaccination of dogs. 
Every person keeping, maintaining or having custody or control of a dog over the age of four months in the City shall cause said dog to be vaccinated with a type of canine rabies vaccine approved by the California Department of Health within a period of thirty days from the date such dog was first maintained, kept or had within the City, or within thirty days from the date the dog attains the age of four months. Evidence of such vaccine shall be provided to the City in order to license the dog in accordance with section 7.040.050. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.14.020 - Revaccination. 
Every person keeping, harboring, or having a dog in the City, which dog has been vaccinated shall cause such dog to be revaccinated before the expiration of the period of immunity accepted by the California Department of Health for that type of canine rabies vaccine with which the dog was vaccinated. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.14.030 - Certificate. 
Every person keeping, harboring, or maintaining in the City any dog required by the provisions of this chapter to be vaccinated shall at all times, while such dog is kept, harbored or maintained, have in his or her possession a certificate issued by a duly licensed veterinary surgeon, which certificate shall specify that such dog has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Said certificate shall include the name, address and telephone number of the dog's owner; the name of the dog; a description of the dog, including breed, color, distinctive markings, and sex; date of immunization; the type of rabies vaccine administered; the name of the manufacturer; and the lot number of the vaccine used. Such certificates shall bear the signature of the veterinarian administering the vaccine or a signature authorized by him or her, and in addition such certificate shall be stamped, printed or typed with his name, address and telephone number for legibility. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.14.040 - Restraining of animal bitten by other animal with rabies. 
Whenever any dog or other animal has been bitten by an animal infected with or reasonably suspected of being infected with rabies, the owner of the animal so bitten shall immediately restrain or confine such animal in such a way as to make it impossible for such animal to bite any other animal or person and to forthwith notify the Animal Control Officer. The City health officer or Animal Control Officer shall have the power to quarantine any animal so bitten or suspected of having been bitten by a rabid animal for such period of time as he may determine not to exceed six months. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.14.050 - Quarantine of biting animals—Examination. 
Whenever any dog or other animal has bitten, scratched, or otherwise exposed any person or animal to the possible infection of rabies, the owner shall, upon order of the City health officer, any peace officer, or Animal Control Officer, quarantine such animal and keep it securely confined for a period of not to exceed fifteen days, during which period of time it shall be the duty of the City health officer or Animal Control Officer to make an examination of such animal. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.14.060 - Report of suspected rabid animals. 
Whenever the owner of an animal observes or learns that such animal shows symptoms of rabies or acts in a manner which reasonably indicates that it may be infected with rabies, such owner shall forthwith isolate and restrain such animal and shall immediately notify the Animal Control Officer thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.14.070 - Destruction of rabid animals. 
If it appears to the Animal Control Director or his or her representative upon examination or otherwise of a dog or other animal that such animal has rabies, he or she may forthwith humanely euthanize such dog or other animal in accordance with the policies and procedures established by the City contracted animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.14.080 - Duties of animal control officer as to animals held by him having or suspected of having rabies. 
Upon the receipt by the Animal Control Director of any dog or other animal, if the Animal Control Director would have reason to believe that the same is afflicted with rabies or hydrophobia or has been bitten by any animal afflicted with or suspected of being afflicted with rabies or hydrophobia, the Animal Control Director shall separately confine and keep so confined such animal. If upon an examination, the Animal Control Director determines that such dog or other animal is afflicted with rabies, he shall humanely euthanize such animal at such time. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Director to keep every such animal suspected of having rabies or hydrophobia so confined for such time as he deems necessary and such animal shall not be redeemed or released except upon an order in writing signed by the Animal Control Director. Nothing in this title shall be construed as permitting the redemption of any dog having or suspected of having been infected with rabies or hydrophobia. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.14.090 - Importation of unvaccinated dogs. 
No person shall bring an unvaccinated dog into the City from another city or town or other place in or outside of the County in which rabies exists or has existed within six months previously, nor shall any person take an unvaccinated dog or permit or encourage an unvaccinated dog to go from the City, at a time when rabies exists therein or has existed therein within six months previously, to any other city or town or other place in or outside of the County in which rabies does not exist or has not been known to be present within six months. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.14.100 - Rabies vaccination reporting. 
A.  Any veterinarian who administers a rabies vaccination or supervises the administering of a rabies vaccination shall provide to the City of Colton Police Chief, or his or her designee, the following information: 
1.  The full name and residence address of the owner of all of vaccinated dogs; 
2.  The name, age, sex, species, breed and color of all dogs that have been vaccinated; 
3.  The date the vaccination was administered; 
4.  The type of vaccination used and the vaccine's expiration date; 
5.  The name of the veterinary clinic and veterinary license number of the veterinarian administering or supervising the vaccination; 
6.  Alternatively, a photocopy or other facsimile of the certificate required by Section 7.14.030 may be provided to the City. 
B.  Any such information requested in Section A shall be sent to the City of Colton Police Chief at 650 N La Cadena Drive, Colton, California, 92324, or his/her designee, within thirty days of the administering of the rabies vaccination. The information requested may be transmitted in the form of a paper copy or in an electronic format approved by the City of Colton. 
C.  The information provided to the City of Colton in Section A shall be considered confidential and shall not be used, released or distributed for any purpose except to ensure compliance with existing federal, state, county, or city laws or regulations, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 121690. 
D.  Any veterinarian or person under this Chapter who fails to provide the information requested may be subject to all lawful legal remedies to enforce this Chapter, including but not limited to those set forth in Chapter 1.17 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
Chapter 7.16 - COYOTE CONTROL 
 
7.16.010 - Feeding of coyotes. 
A.  Except as provided herein, no person shall feed or in any manner provide food for any coyote which is not under the ownership or legal possession of such person. 
B.  A person may feed and provide food for a coyote which is trapped, unweaned or injured during that period of time after said person notifies the Police Department or Animal Control Department until said animal is picked up by the City or its designated agent or contractor for animal control. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.16.020 - Control. 
The City, its agents and its contractor for the provision of animal control are hereby authorized to use all legal means to control coyotes and to reduce their number in the City. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
Chapter 7.18 - COMMUNITY CAT INITIATIVE 
 
7.18.010 - Purpose. 
The City recognizes the need for innovation in addressing the issues presented by community cats. To that end, it recognizes that Trap-Neuter-Return is an effective and humane method to manage, and over time, reduce the population of community cats. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
7.18.020 - Authority; trap-neuter return program. 
A.  Trap-Neuter-Return shall be permitted, and Community Cat Caregivers, organizations, City staff, Animal Control Officers, and hereby permitted to carry out Trap-Neuter-Return. Community Cat Caregivers shall be responsible for the costs(if any) associated with the Trap-Neuter-Return that they choose or cause to be performed. 
B.  An ear tipped cat received by local shelters will return to the location where trapped after neutering unless further veterinary care is required or a home is found for the cat. 
C.  Community Cat Caregivers may reclaim impounded Community Cats if ear tipped or for Trap-Neuter-return without proof of ownership. 
(Ord. No. O-09-16, § 2, 6-7-2016)  
Title 8 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES  
Chapter 8.02 - GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
 
8.02.010 - Violations. 
Every Person who causes, aids, abets or conceals a Violation of this Code is guilty of violating this Code. In addition to any other penalties provided in this Code, or in any code adopted by reference by this Code, any condition caused or Permitted to exist in Violation of any of the provisions of this Code, or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this Code, Shall be deemed a Public Nuisance and May be abated by the City. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.02.020 - Penalty for Violations— Misdemeanors and infractions. 
Unless a specific penalty is prescribed for Violation of a specific provision of this Code, every Act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an Act made mandatory by this Code is punishable as a misdemeanor or an infraction. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.02.030 - Prosecution as misdemeanor or infraction. 
The City Attorney Shall have the authority to prosecute any Violation of this Code Designated as a misdemeanor as an infraction in the interests of justice. Additionally, the Court May determine that the offense is an infraction in which event the case Shall proceed as if the defendant had been arraigned on an infraction complaint. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.02.040 - Penalty for misdemeanor Violation. 
Violations of this Code prosecuted by the City Attorney as misdemeanor offenses Shall be punishable by imprisonment in the County Jail not exceeding six Months, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by both. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.02.050 - Penalty for infraction Violations. 
Violations prosecuted by the City Attorney as infractions Shall be punishable to the extent Permitted by Law, as established by Resolution of the City Council. An infraction Shall not be punishable by imprisonment. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.02.060 - Waiver of rights in infraction prosecutions. 
A Person charged with or prosecuted for an offense as an infraction Shall not be entitled to a trial by jury and Shall not be entitled to have the public defender or other counsel appointed at public expense to represent him unless he is arrested and not released on his Written promise to appear, his own recognizance, or a deposit of bail. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.02.070 - Continuing Violations. 
Each Person, firm or corporation Shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense, whether misdemeanor or infraction, for each Day or portion thereof during which any Violation of any provision of this Code is committed, continued or Permitted by such Person, firm or corporation and Shall be punishable as provided in Sections 8.02.040 or 8.02.050 as applicable. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.02.080 - Administrative fines and penalties. 
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-Year period finding that an Owner, lessee, Occupant or Person having charge or control of Property is responsible for a condition that May be abated and the costs thereof made a special assessment against the Property, except for conditions abated pursuant to Section 17980 of the California Health and Safety code, such Person Shall be ordered to pay treble the costs of the abatement, including actual and administrative costs and Attorney's Fees for the prevailing Party. In addition to all other penalties provided in this chapter, the Violation of any City Ordinance or code Shall be subject to the imposition of administrative fines and/or penalties in accordance with Chapter 8.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
Chapter 8.04 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
 
8.04.010 - Intent of chapter. 
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other Laws or Ordinances, or with private restrictions placed upon Property by covenant, deed, or other private agreement or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the City is a Party. The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for the maintenance of Property in the City. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon Property or Structures thereon than is imposed or required by existing provisions of Law, Ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this chapter Shall control. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.020 - Responsibilities for Property maintenance. 
Every Owner, lessee, Occupant or Person having charge or control of Property within the City is required to maintain such Property in a manner so as not to violate provisions of this chapter, and such Owner, lessee, Occupant or Person having charge or control of Property remains liable for Violations thereof regardless of any contract or agreement with any third Party regarding such Property. The duties imposed by this section Shall in no instance relieve those Persons herein referred to from the similar duty. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.030 - Classification of Nuisances. 
The Following Acts and conditions when performed or existing upon any Lot or Parcel of land within the City are declared to be unlawful and are defined as and declared to be Public Nuisances which are injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare, and which have a tendency to degrade the appearance or Property values of surrounding Property or which cause damage to public rights-of-way: 
A.  Structures or Buildings, both permanent and temporary, or other Lot Improvements, which are subject to any of the Following conditions: 
1.  Faulty weather protection including, but not limited to, crumbling, cracked, missing, broken, or loose exterior plaster or other siding, roofs, foundations or floors, broken or missing windows or doors, or unpainted surfaces causing dry rot, warping or termite infestation; 
2.  Buildings or Structures which are not completed within a reasonable time and for which the Permit for such construction has expired; 
3.  Unoccupied Buildings which have been left unlocked or otherwise open or unsecured from Intrusion by Persons, animals or the elements or which are boarded up by method or Materials not Approved by the code enforcement and/or Building division; 
4.  Fences or Walls which are in a Hazardous condition, or which are in disrepair, or which hinder free Access to public Sidewalks; 
5.  Broken windows and doors constituting Hazardous conditions, exposing the interior of the Premises to the elements and inviting trespassers; 
6.  Substantial deterioration of porches, landings, patios, stairways or guardrails which, although not otherwise constituting an Unsafe Structure as defined in the Uniform Building Code or the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, are visible from any public Right-of-Way or neighboring Property and have a tendency to degrade the appearance or Property value of surrounding Property; 
7.  Broken, defective or unmaintained decorative elements of a Building, Structure, Parking Lot or landscaped area which are injurious or potentially injurious to public health, safety and welfare or have a tendency to degrade the appearance or Property values of surrounding Property. 
B.  Dead, decayed, diseased or Hazardous trees; weeds and other overgrown vegetation likely to harbor rats, vermin or Nuisances; weeds or other vegetation which constitutes a fire hazard to any Building, Improvements, crops or other Property, whether located on Private Property, or the Right-of-Way located between Sidewalk and Curb or the entire Right-of-Way area when no Sidewalk exists. 
C.  When visible from a public Right-of-Way or neighboring Property, lack of residential Landscaping, or required Landscaping in Commercial or Industrial Zones, or Landscaping that is dying from lack of adequate water, fertilization, maintenance or is diseased and unsightly whether located on Private Property or the Right-of-Way located between Sidewalk and Curb, or the entire Right-of-Way area when no Sidewalk exists. 
D.  Unregistered, inoperative or disabled, dismantled or partially dismantled trailers, Campers, boats, and other mobile equipment, including nonmotorized trailers, stored in areas not intended for storage or not intended as a primary Use in accordance with applicable zoning regulations. 
E.  Attractive Nuisances (those objects which, by their nature, May attract children or other curious individuals) including, but not limited to, Hazardous pools, ponds, iceboxes, refrigerators, neglected machinery, excavations or stagnant water. 
F.  Storage or scattering over the Property or any public Right-of-Way abutting the Property of any of the Following: 
1.  Debris, Rubbish or trash not stored in Approved trash receptacles and visible from any public Right-of-Way or neighboring Property; 
2.  Abandoned, discarded, broken, wrecked, Inoperable or discarded household furnishings, appliances, machines and tools, or similar objects or equipment; 
3.  Discarded Building Materials or machinery. 
G.  Packing boxes and other debris stored in Yards and visible from a public Right-of-Way or neighboring Property. 
H.  Clotheslines in Front Yard areas. 
I.  Garbage or trashcans or containers stored in front or Side Yards and visible from a public Right-of-Way, except that storage of trash receptacles Shall be Permitted along Side Yards in the R-1 and R-1/PC Zones. 
J.  Signs constructed, erected or maintained in Violation of the provisions of Title 15 and Title 18 of this Code. 
K.  Signs which are a danger to the public or are unsafe. 
L.  Signs which are a traffic hazard. 
M.  Unpaved or deteriorated Parking Lots, Driveways and walkways containing uneven surfaces, drainage problems or that are Hazardous to traffic or Pedestrian circulation. 
N.  Maintenance of Premises in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare or in such a manner as to constitute a Public Nuisance as defined by Section 3480 of the California Civil Code. 
O.  Graffiti or other writing, inscription, word, figure, symbol or Design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted upon any permanent Structure or privately owned Real Property. 
P.  The keeping of fowl, livestock or other animals in Violation of Chapter 18.54 of this Code. 
Q.  Keeping or maintaining of apiaries or bees at any place within the corporate limits of the City and within one thousand feet of an inhabited Dwelling. 
R.  1.  Keeping, storing, or maintaining on any Property in a Residential Zone or on any residentially developed Property any of the Following: 
a.  Construction and/or Business equipment, supplies, Materials, or machinery of any type or description; or 
b.  Buses, tow trucks, dump trucks, flatbed trucks, tractors, tractor trailers, truck trailers; or 
c.  Any other commercial Vehicle over twenty-five feet long or eight feet in height or ninety inches wide. 
2.  The keeping, storing, maintaining, Stopping, standing or parking of any of the Following on any Sidewalk, Street, Alley, lane, Court, Park, Highway, Right-of-Way or other Public Place: 
a.  Construction and/or Business equipment, supplies, Materials, or machinery of any type or description; or 
b.  Buses, tow trucks, dump trucks, flatbed trucks, tractor-trailers, or truck trailers. 
3.  This subsection (8.04.030(R)) Shall not apply to any of the Following: 
a.  The temporary keeping, storing, maintaining, Stopping, standing or parking of such items to the extent reasonably made necessary by any lawful repair, Alteration, remodeling, construction, or Landscaping activities occurring on or, in the case of a Highway or Street, adjacent to the Property where such items are kept, stored, maintained, Stopped, stood or parked; or 
b.  The temporary keeping, storing, maintaining, Stopping, standing or parking of such items to the extent reasonably necessary to make pickups or deliveries of Goods, wares and merchandise to the Property where such items are kept, stored, maintained, Stopped, stood or parked; or 
c.  Any such item that is kept within a fully enclosed, lawful Structure or a lawful, solid, opaque Wall or Fence so as to not be visible from the public Right-of-Way or neighboring Property, and such item is not in a condition as to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of such Property, the public, or any adjoining Property. 
S.  Any existing or threatened "environmental Nuisance," including, without limitation any of the Following definitions set forth in subparagraphs (1) through (3) of this subsection: 
1.  Any condition, whether caused by past or present Acts or omissions and whether created within or outside of the City, that introduces, or May cause or allow the introduction of, Hazardous Substances, Pollutants or wastes into, any navigable lake, river, bay, stream, canal or basin (specifically including any ground water within the territorial boundaries of the City), or any public Park, square, Street or Highway; 
2.  Any condition, whether caused by past or present Acts or omissions and whether created within or outside of the City, that requires an investigation or response of any kind in order to secure adequate protection of public health, welfare, safety or the environment resulting in whole or in Part from a release, or threatened release that causes the incurrence of abatement action costs by the City, of any Hazardous Substance, Pollutant or waste; or 
3.  Any condition, whether created within or outside of the City, arising from the past or present handling, storage, treatment, transportation or disposal of a Hazardous Substance, Pollutant or waste that May present an endangerment that May warrant an investigation or response to secure adequate protection of public health, welfare, safety or the environment. 
4.  For purposes of this subsection (S), the term "Hazardous" means and includes, but Shall not be limited to, the Following: 
a.  Perchlorate, Tetrachloroethene (PCE), Trichloroethene (TCE), 1, 1, 1-Trichloroethane (1, 1, 1-TCA), 1, 1-Dichloroethene (1, 1 DCE), cis 1, 2-Dichloroethene (c-1, 2 DCE), 1, 2-Dichloroethane (1, 2 DCA), 1, 1-Dichloroethane (1, 1, DCA), Benzene, Toluene, Ethylbenzene, Xylene, Chromic Acid, Hexavalent Chromium, Bromodichloromethane, Carbon Tetrachloride, Chloroethane (Ehtyl Chloride), Chloromethane (Methyl Chloride), Dibromochloromethane, 1, 4-Dichlorobenzene, Dichlorodifluoromethane, Dichloromethane, trans-1, 2-Dichloroethene, 1, 2, 3-Trichloropropane, and Chloroethene (Vinyl Chloride); and 
b.  Such other Materials as are included within the definitions set forth in: 
i.  Section 104(14) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended by the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, Pub.L. 99-499, 100 Stat. 1613, and as further amended by the Asset Conversation, Lender Liability, and Deposit Insurance Protection Act of 1996, Pub.L. 104-208, 110 Stat. 3009, 42 U.S.C. Sections 9601—9675 (hereinafter collectively "CERCLA"), 42 U.S.C. Section 9601(14): 
ii.  Section 1004(5) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as further amended by the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984, and as further amended by the Asset Conservation, Lender Liability, and Deposit Insurance Protection Act of 1996, Pub.L. 104-208, 110 Stat. 3009, 42 U.S.C. Sections 6901—6992k (hereinafter collectively "RCRA"), 42 U.S.C. Section 6903(5); 
iii.  Section 9001(8) of RCRA, 42 U.S.C. Section 6991(8); 
iv.  Section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1317(a), and its implementing regulations; 
v.  Section 2701(23) of the Federal Oil Pollution Act of 1990, 33 U.S.C. Section 2701(23); 
vi.  Section 112(6) of the Federal Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 7412(6); 
vii.  Section 25299.22 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
c.  Any radioactive Material; or 
d.  Any other substance, as determined by the City Council of the City, which poses or May pose a threat to the human health, welfare, natural resources or the environment if improperly handled, treated, transported or disposed of within the City. 
T.  Any Violation of this Code or any code adopted by reference by this Code. 
(Ord. 0-12-02 § 1, 2002; Ord. 0-22-01 § 1, 2002; Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.040 - Declaration of Nuisances—Notice of Violation. 
Whenever the City Manager or his Designee finds, upon the recommendation of a duly authorized Representative of the Community Development Department or Code Enforcement Division or other City Official that a Nuisance, as defined by Section 8.04.030, exists on any Premises located within the City, he or she Shall serve upon the Property Owner, lessee, agent, Occupant or Person having charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property on which the Nuisance is located a Notice directing that the Nuisance be abated. The Notice of Violation Shall specify the Violation(s), direct that the Violation be abated and establish a reasonable abatement period. The Notice of Violation Shall be served in accordance with Section 8.04.090. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.050 - Voluntary abatement of Nuisances. 
The Property Owner, lessee, agent, Occupant or Person having charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property on which the Nuisance is located May abate the Nuisance at any time within the abatement period set forth in the Notice of Violation. The Property Owner, lessee, agent, Occupant or Person having charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property on which the Nuisance is located Shall advise the code enforcement division or Building division of the abatement. Once so advised, the code enforcement division or Building division Shall inspect the Premises to insure that the Nuisance has, in fact, been abated. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.060 - Failure to voluntarily abate a declared Nuisance. 
If an alleged Nuisance is not properly abated within the period established in the Notice of Violation, the Property Owner, lessee, agent, Occupant or Person having charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property on which the Nuisance is located May be served with a Written Notice of intention to abate a Nuisance in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.04.070. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.070 - Notice of intention to abate Nuisance and Public Hearing thereon. 
The Notice of intention to abate a Public Nuisance described in Section 8.04.060 Shall demand that the Property Owner, lessee, agent, Occupant or Person having charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property on which the Nuisance is located, abate or remedy the Nuisance within a reasonable period of time, which Shall not be less than seven Days. The Notice to abate a Public Nuisance Shall also advise that if the Nuisance is not abated within the abatement period, the City Shall hold a hearing to establish its right to abate the Nuisance on the Owner's behalf. The Notice to abate a Public Nuisance Shall also advise the Property Owner, lessee, agent, Occupant or Person having charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property on which the Nuisance is located of their right to contest the declaration of Nuisance at a hearing to be held by a Hearing Authority as appointed by the City Manager to review the determination. The hearing Shall be set for a date after the period for voluntary abatement has expired. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.080 - Authority to enter upon land. 
The City Manager or Designee May enter upon any Building, Structure or Property for the purpose of posting or serving Notice, or for the purpose of investigating or abating a Public Nuisance in accordance with State and Federal Law. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.090 - Service of Notices and order to abate. 
Service of the Notice of intention to abate a Public Nuisance, Written orders of the Hearing Authority, or other items as required under this chapter, Shall be made by posting a Notice in a conspicuous place on or in front of the Building, Structure or Property in question, as well as by any one of the Following methods: 
A.  By personal service on the Owner, lessee, agent, Occupant or Person in charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property. 
B.  By registered or certified mail addressed to the Owner at the last known address of said Owner. If there is no known address for the Owner, the Notice Shall be sent to the Property address. Owner, as Used herein, means any Person(s) shown as the Property Owner on the latest equalized Property tax assessment rolls. If the Property Owner cannot be served by personal service or by mail, service by posting Shall be sufficient. 
C.  By any other means which is authorized or required by applicable Law for such Nuisance abatement actions. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.100 - Hearing by the Hearing Authority. 
At any time after the expiration of the abatement period, the code enforcement division Shall schedule a hearing on the determination of the Nuisance before the Hearing Authority appointed by the City Manager. The Property Owner, lessee, agent, Occupant or Person having charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property on which the Nuisance is located Shall be provided with Written Notice of the time, date and place that a hearing Shall be held by the Hearing Authority in accordance with Section 8.04.090, to determine the Appeal of the declaration of Nuisance. At the time and place stated in the Written Notice informing of the Appeal, the Hearing Authority Shall receive, hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections, protests, and testimony of Owners, lessees, agents, Occupants, or Persons in charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property, as well as that of other witnesses, City personnel and interested Persons, relative to such alleged Public Nuisance and to any proposed abatement measures. The hearing May be continued from time to time. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.110 - Decision and order of the Hearing Authority. 
Following the hearing, the Hearing Authority Shall consider all evidence presented and Shall determine whether the Building, Structure or Property in question, or any Part thereof, constitutes a Public Nuisance or contains Nuisance activities as alleged. If the Hearing Authority finds that a Public Nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to abate the Nuisance, the Hearing Authority Shall make a Written order setting forth those findings and ordering the Owner, lessee, agent, Occupant, or other Person having charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property to abate the Nuisance by removal, rehabilitation, repair or Demolition in the manner and by the means specifically set forth in the Hearing Authority's Order. The order Shall set forth the time within which the abatement work Shall be commenced and completed, and it Shall state that if the Nuisance is not abated within such time period, it will be abated by the City. The order Shall also state that all costs of the City's abatement efforts, including the abatement work and any Incidental costs, will be assessed upon the Property on which the Nuisance existed, and will constitute a lien upon the Property until paid in accordance with State Law. Subject to Section 8.04.140, this Decision Shall constitute the City's final administrative Decision. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.120 - Service of the abatement order—One-Year jurisdictional period. 
A.  Within five Days Following the Hearing Authority's Decision, the Owner, lessee, agent, Occupant or Person having charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property Shall be served with a Copy of the Written order of the Hearing Authority in the manner provided in Section 8.04.090. 
B.  The order of the Hearing Authority Shall be effective for a one-Year period after issuance. During such period, the Hearing Authority Shall retain jurisdiction over the conditions of the Building, Structure or Property which constituted the Nuisance established by the Hearing Authority's order, as well as the abatement thereof, to ensure that the Nuisance does not reoccur and that the Building, Structure or Property is maintained in such a manner so as not to create a Nuisance. If, during this one-Year period, the City Manager or Designee determines that the same or another Nuisance, as defined by Section 8.04.030, exists with respect to the Building, Structure or Property, he or she May give Notice to abate the Nuisance, as provided in Section 8.04.070, and establish a reasonable abatement period of no less than ten Days. If the Owner, lessee, agent, Occupant or Person having charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property does not abate the Nuisance at any time within the abatement period, the City May proceed with the abatement itself under the provisions of Section 8.04.150 without further Notice and without action of the Hearing Authority. The City May also recover all of its abatement effort costs, as provided for in Sections 8.04.160 and 8.04.170. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.130 - Abatement by Property Owner. 
The Property Owner, lessee, agent, Occupant, or Person having charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property, may, at his own expense, abate the Nuisance as prescribed by the order of the Hearing Authority prior to the expiration of the abatement period set forth in the order. If the Nuisance has been inspected by the Community Development Department or Code Enforcement Division or other authorized City Employee, and is found to have been abated in accordance with the order, current proceedings Shall be terminated, except that the Hearing Authority's one-Year jurisdictional period Shall continue from the date of the order. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.140 - Appeal to the City Council. 
Whenever any Person is aggrieved by any final order of the Hearing Authority issued pursuant to Section 8.04.110, such Person May Appeal to the City Council the issuance of such order by filing a Written Appeal in accordance with Section 18.58.070(C) of this Code. At a meeting of the City Council not more than thirty Days thereafter, it Shall proceed to hear and pass upon the Appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.58.070(C) of this Code, except that Notice of the City Council's Appeal Shall be given as provided in Section 8.04.090. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.150 - Abatement by The City and summary abatement. 
A.  If a declared Nuisance is not completely abated by the Property Owner, lessee, agent, Occupant or Person having charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property on which the Nuisance is located within the time prescribed in the order issued by the Hearing Authority, the City Manager or Designee Shall be authorized and directed to cause the Nuisance to be abated by City forces or by private contract. In furtherance of this section, the City Manager or Designee is expressly authorized to enter upon the Premises for the purpose of abating the Nuisance in accordance with State and Federal Laws. 
B.  Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, whenever the City Manager or Designee determines that a Public Nuisance is so imminently dangerous to life or Property that such condition Must be immediately corrected, that Person May institute the Following procedures: 
1.  Notice. The City Manager or Designee Shall attempt to contact, through a personal interview or by telephone, the Owner, lessee, agent or other Person, if any, occupying or otherwise in real or apparent charge or control thereof. In the event contact is made, the City Manager or Designee Shall notify such Person(s) of the danger involved and require that such condition be removed, repaired, isolated or otherwise abated, within a reasonable period of time under the circumstances, so as to prevent the immediate danger to life or Property. 
2.  Abatement. In the event the City Manager or Designee is unable to make contact as hereinabove described, or if the appropriate Person(s), after notification, fail to abate the condition within the time frame specified, then the City Manager or Designee May take all steps deemed necessary to remove, repair, isolate or otherwise abate such condition immediately and without further Notice so as to prevent the immediate danger to life or Property. 
3.  Costs. The City Manager or Designee Shall keep an itemized account of all costs incurred by the City in its abatement efforts. Such costs May be recovered pursuant to this chapter or by any other means provided for by Law. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.160 - Record of cost for abatement. 
The City Manager or Designee Shall keep an account of the costs, including Incidental expenses, of abating the Nuisance on each separate Parcel of land where the work is done. The term "Incidental expenses" Shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the City in investigating and inspecting the Nuisance, providing Notices, specifications and contracts, inspecting any abatement work, legal Fees and other related costs made necessary by the City's abatement efforts required hereunder, and any other costs which May be assessed and reimbursed by Law. If the City elects, at the initiation of the action or proceeding, to seek the recovery of legal Fees, such Fees Shall also be recoverable by any prevailing Party in any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding to abate the Nuisance, in accordance with applicable Law. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.170 - Assessment of costs against Property. 
A.  Upon confirmation by the Hearing Authority, the total costs for abating such Nuisance Shall constitute a special assessment against the respective Lot or Parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the County Recorder of a Notice of lien as so made Shall constitute a lien on the Property for the amount of such assessment. Prior to the hearing confirming the costs, the Owner and any lessee agent, Occupant, or Person having charge or control of the Building, Structure or Property Shall be notified of such hearing. The Notice Shall be served pursuant to Section 8.04.090 and Shall specify that the Property May be sold after three Years by the tax Collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. 
1.  After recordation, a Copy Shall be filed with the Assessor and Tax Collector of the County, acting for the City in Order that said County Officials May add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against the respective Parcels of land, and thereafter said amounts Shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and Shall be subject to the same procedure under Foreclosure and Sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes; or 
2.  After such recordation, such lien May be foreclosed by judicial or other Sale in the manner and means provided by Law. 
B.  Such Notice of lien for recordation Shall be in form substantially as follows: 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
(Claim of City of Colton) 
 Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Chapter 8.04 of the City of Colton Municipal Code, the City of Colton did, on or about the _______Day of _______, 20___, cause the Premise hereinafter described, to be rehabilitated, or the Building or Structure of the Property hereafter described, to be repaired or demolished in order to abate a Public Nuisance on said Real Property; and the City of Colton, did on the _______ Day of _______, 20___, assess the cost of such rehabilitation, repair of Demolition upon the Real Property hereinafter described, and that said City of Colton does hereby claim a lien on such rehabilitation, repair or Demolition in the amount of said assessment, to wit the sum of $_______; and the same Shall be a lien upon said Property until the same has been paid in full and Discharged of record. 
 The Real Property hereinbefore mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain Parcel of land lying and being in the City of Colton, County of San Bernardino, State of California, and particularly described as follows: 
(Description) 
DATED: This _______ Day of _______, 20___. 
___________ of the City of Colton, California 
(ACKNOWLEDGMENT) 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.180 - Penalties. 
A.  Any Owner, lessee, Occupant or other Person having charge or control of any such Buildings, or Premises, who maintains any Public Nuisance defined in this chapter, and who fails to comply with the order of abatement served as provided in Sections 8.04.090 and 8.04.110 is guilty of an infraction. 
B.  Any Person who removes any Notice or order posted as required in this chapter, for the purpose of interfering with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of an infraction. 
C.  Any Person who obstructs, impedes or interferes with the City, any Representative of the City, or with any Person who owns, leases or occupies Property when such individual is lawfully engaged in proceedings involving the abatement of a Nuisance under this chapter is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.190 - Alternatives. 
Nothing in the foregoing sections Shall be deemed to prevent the City from enforcing the provisions of the Uniform Housing Code through the procedures provided for therein, or from ordering the City Attorney to commence a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a Public Nuisance under applicable Civil or Penal code provisions; or from imposing administrative fines and penalties pursuant to Chapter 8.12, in addition to or as an alternative to the proceedings set forth herein. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.04.200 - Liability. 
A.  Liability for Nuisances. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, including any provision of this chapter, the Following Person(s) Shall be legally responsible and liable under this chapter for the Nuisance created thereby, whether or not the Property or Facility which is owned, leased, occupied or controlled by such Person(s) is located within the City: 
1.  Any Person who creates, has created or threatens to create any Nuisance; 
2.  Any Person who has contributed to, is contributing to, or threatens to contribute to any Nuisance; 
3.  Any Person who maintains, has maintained or threatens to maintain any Nuisance; 
4.  Any Person who, at any time during the creation or existence of any Nuisance, owned or had control over any Facility at or from which the Nuisance within the City has been created, contributed to, or maintained and, who, regardless of actual knowledge of the existence or nature of the Nuisance condition, failed to abate the Nuisance; 
5.  Any Person who owns or operates any Facility at or from which there has been a release of a Hazardous Substance or Pollutant; 
6.  Any Person who at the time of disposal of any Hazardous Substance or Pollutant owned or operated any Facility at which such Hazardous Substance or Pollutant was disposed of; 
7.  Any Person who by contract, agreement or otherwise arranged for disposal or treatment, or arranged with a transporter for transport for disposal or treatment, of Hazardous Substances or Pollutants owned or possessed by such Person, by any other Party or entity, at any Facility owned or operated by another Party or entity and containing such Hazardous Substances or Pollutant; 
8.  Any Person who owns or operates, or who owned or operated at or after the time of such release, any Property at which Hazardous Substances or Pollutants came to be located during such Person's period of ownership or operation as a result, in whole or in Part, of the previous release of, or the passive migration of previously released, Hazardous Substances or Pollutant, regardless of the source of such original release, and who, having reasonable grounds to know or suspect the existence of the released Hazardous Substances or Pollutants on the Facility he owns or operates, failed to abate it; and 
9.  Any Person (including any past or present generator or past or present transporter) who has contributed to or is contributing to the past or present handling, storage, treatment, transportation or disposal of any Hazardous Substance or Pollutant that presents an environmental Nuisance or that May present an imminent and substantial endangerment to health or the environment. 
B.  Standard of Liability. Unless otherwise expressly indicated, the standard of liability imposed by this chapter is strict liability, without regard to any element of mens rea, fault, negligence or other wrongdoing. 
C.  Scope of Liability. The scope of liability in this chapter is joint and several for any Person who has caused, created, contributed to, or maintained a single indivisible harm to public health, welfare or the environment resulting from, or that May result from, in whole or in any Part, an environmental Nuisance and for which there is no reasonable and reliable basis of apportioning the harm among the responsible parties. Any Responsible Party seeking to apportion the harm Must demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the component of the harm that is sought to be apportioned is scientifically and technologically susceptible to apportionment, that there is a reasonable and practicable basis for apportioning the harm, and that the separate abatement activity proposed for that harm is as practicable, safe, efficient, reliable and cost-effective in providing the degree of protection of the public health, welfare and the environment as the abatement activity or activities, if any, proposed by the enforcing officer. 
(Ord. 0-12-02 § 2, 2002)  
8.04.210 - Abatement. 
For purposes of this chapter, whether in any Notice by any officer or Employee of the City or by any order or directive by the Hearing Authority or otherwise, the term "abatement" Shall include, without limitation, removal, rehabilitation, Demolition, Improvement, restitution and mitigation action to provide adequate protection of the public health, welfare, the ground, air, water, environment or other natural resources, which May include providing substitute resources, including substitute water or soil remediation. 
(Ord. 0-12-02 § 3, 2002)  
Chapter 8.05 - ABANDONED AND DISTRESSED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY 
 
8.05.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this municipal code chapter is to establish uniform and reasonable regulations to prevent the detrimental effects associated with abandoned and distressed residential properties. To that end, this section establishes an abandoned and distressed residential property registration program that requires adequate maintenance and security of abandoned residential properties. 
(Ord. No. O-04-09, § 1, 6-2-2009; Ord. No. O-16-16, § 2.B., 9-6-2016)  
8.05.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the Following terms Shall have the meanings provided in this section. 
"Abandoned Property" means a residentially-used real property that is vacant and either: (a) the subject of a current Notice of Default and/or Notice of Trustee's Sale; (b) the subject of a pending tax Assessors lien Sale; (c) the subject of a Foreclosure Sale where the title was retained by or transferred to the Beneficiary of a Deed of Trust involved in the Foreclosure; (d) has been transferred under a Deed in Lieu of Foreclosure/Sale; or (e) the Property has been surrendered or deserted in contemplation or threat of Foreclosure. 
"Accessible Property" means any Real Property, Structure or Building on Property that is freely accessible, including any Property that is accessible through a compromised or breached Gate, Fence, Wall, window, door, or similar Structure and/or is unsecured in a way as to allow Access to the interior space by unauthorized Persons. 
"Agreement for Sale" means any agreement or Written instrument which provides that title to Real Property Shall be transferred or conveyed from one Person to another Person. 
"Assignment of Rents" means a Written instrument which transfers the beneficial interest under a Deed of Trust from one Person to another Person. 
"Beneficiary" means the Beneficiary (either the original Beneficiary or the assignee) under a note Secured by a Deed of Trust. 
"Buyer" means any Person who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for Property described in an Agreement for Sale. 
"Dangerous Building" means any Building or Structure that is in Violation of any condition referenced in the Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as adopted by Section 15.04.010 of the Colton Municipal Code. 
"Day" means a calendar Day. 
"Deed of Trust" means any instrument, including any Deed of Trust or mortgage, by which legal title to Real Property, or any interest therein, is transferred to a Trustee as security for a real estate loan, including, without limitation, any and all subsequent deeds of trust, i.e.: second Deed of Trust, third Deed of Trust, etc. 
"Deed in Lieu of Foreclosure/Sale" means a document that transfers legal title to a Property from the Trustor to the Trustee, upon consent of the Beneficiary of the Deed of Trust. 
"Default" means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, whether monetary or otherwise. 
"Distressed Property" means Real Property that is under a current Notice of Default or Notice of Trustee's Sale, or pending tax Assessor's lien Sale or has been foreclosed upon by the Trustee or has been conveyed to the Beneficiary or Trustee by way of a Deed in Lieu of Foreclosure, but which is lawfully occupied. 
"Evidence of Vacancy" means any condition that, on its own or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable Person to believe that the Property is Vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown, dead, or dying vegetation, dry brush, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, or mail, past due Utility Notices or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk or debris, broken windows, doors or other means of entry, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters, the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with Occupancy, statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government Employees that the Property is Vacant. 
"Foreclosure" means the process by which a Property, placed as security for a loan, is sold to satisfy the debt if the Trustor Defaults. 
"Local" means the area within forty miles of the subject Property. 
"Neighborhood Standard" means those conditions that are present on a simple majority of other Properties within a three hundred-foot radius of the subject Property. A Property that is the subject of a Neighborhood Standard comparison, or any other Abandoned or Distressed Property within the three hundred-foot radius, Shall not be counted toward the simple majority. 
"Notice of Default" or "Notice of Trustee's Sale" means a Notice that a Default has occurred under a Deed of Trust and that the Beneficiary intends to proceed with a Trustee's Sale or other similar remedies authorized by Law. 
"Out of Area" means the area in excess of forty miles from the subject Property. 
"Owner" means any Person having a legal title in any Real Property. 
"Owner of Record" means the Person having recorded title to the Property as shown in the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office. 
"Person" Shall have the meaning set forth in Section 1.04.010 of the Colton Municipal Code. 
"Property" means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the incorporated territory of the City of Colton, designed and permitted to be used for dwelling or residential purposes and includes the buildings or structures located on the property. 
"Responsible Party" means the Person having actual control of the Property at any given time, including the Owner of Record, Beneficiary, Trustee, servicing company, or real estate agent acting, or any other Party acting on behalf of the Owner of Record, Beneficiary, or Trustee. 
"Secured" or "Securing" or any of its variants means such measures as May be directed by the Colton Police Department Code Enforcement Division that assist in rendering the Property inaccessible to unauthorized Persons, including, but not limited to, the repairing of Fences and Walls, chaining or pad-locking of Gates, and the repair or boarding of door, window or other openings to a minimum of the current HUD Securing standards at the time the boarding is completed or required. 
"Trustee" means the Person holding a Deed of Trust on a Property. 
"Trustor" means a borrower under a Deed of Trust, who deeds the legal title to a Property over to a Trustee as security for the payment of a debt. 
"Vacant" means a Building or Structure that is not legally occupied. 
(Ord. No. O-04-09, § 1, 6-2-2009; Ord. No. O-16-16, §§ 2.C., D., 9-6-2016)  
8.05.030 - Recordation of transfer of loan/Deed of Trust/Assignment of Rents. 
Within ten Days Following the purchase or transfer of a loan or any Deed of Trust Secured by Abandoned or Distressed Property, the new Beneficiary and Trustee Shall both record, with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office, an Assignment of Rents that lists the names of the Beneficiary and Trustee, and the mailing address and contact phone number of the new Beneficiary and Trustee responsible for receiving payments associated with the Deed of Trust. 
(Ord. No. O-04-09, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
8.05.040 - Registration requirements. 
(a)  Any Beneficiary and Trustee under a Deed of Trust, or their Designee, on Abandoned Property located within the City of Colton Shall perform an inspection of the Property that is the security for the Deed of Trust, upon Default by the Trustor, prior to recording a Notice of Default with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office. If the Property is found to be Vacant or shows Evidence of Vacancy, the Beneficiary and Trustee Shall, within ten Days Following the inspection, register the Property with Colton Police Department Code Enforcement Division on forms provided by the City. 
(b)  Any Distressed Property Shall be inspected by the Beneficiary and Trustee, or their Designee, at least monthly until either: 1) the Trustor or other Party remedies the Default, or 2) it is found to be Vacant or shows Evidence of Vacancy, at which time it is deemed Abandoned, and the Trustee Shall, within ten Days Following the required inspection, register the Property with the Colton Police Department Code Enforcement Division on forms provided by the City. 
(c)  The registration Shall contain the names of the Beneficiary and Trustee, the Street address of the Beneficiary and Trustee (no P.O. Boxes), a direct contact name, facsimile and phone numbers for the Beneficiary and Trustee and, in the case of an Out of Area Beneficiary or Trustee, the Local Property Management Company responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the subject Property. 
(d)  At the time of registration, the Beneficiary and Trustee Shall concurrently file a statement of intent which will include: 1) the expected period of Vacancy; 2) a plan for regular maintenance during the period of Vacancy; and 3) a timeline for the lawful Occupancy, rehabilitation or Demolition of the subject Property. 
(e)  An annual registration Fee for the Beneficiary and Trustee Shall accompany the registration form. Registration Fees will not be prorated. The Fee and registration Shall be valid for the calendar Year, or remaining portion of the calendar Year, in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and Fees are due January 1 of each Year and Must be received by the Colton Police Department Code Enforcement Division no later than January 31 of the Year due. The amount of the registration Fee Shall be set by Resolution of the City Council. 
(f)  Anytime after the Property is determined to be Vacant and if there are any changes to ownership, whether recorded or not, or if the loan is transferred to another Beneficiary, Trustee or Owner ("Responsible Party"), the Responsible Party Shall re-register the Property with the City. The re-registration Must occur within ten Days of the change. A re-registration Fee will be assessed. The amount of the re-registration Fee Shall be set by Resolution of the City Council. 
(g)  Properties Shall remain under the annual registration requirement and the security and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain Abandoned or distressed. 
(h)  Any Person that has registered a Property under this chapter Must report in writing any change of information contained in the registration within ten Days Following the change. 
(Ord. No. O-04-09, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
8.05.050 - Management and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  The Beneficiary and Trustee of the subject Property Shall obtain a Local Property Management Company to inspect the Property on a weekly basis to monitor the Property for compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Abandoned or distressed Properties Shall be, in comparison to the Neighborhood Standard, kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, Building Materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, Notices (except those required by Federal, State or Local Law), discarded personal items, including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed Material or any other items that give the appearance that the Property is Abandoned or distressed. 
(c)  The Abandoned or Distressed Property Shall be maintained free of Graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior Grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the Structure. 
(d)  Visible front and Side Yards Shall be landscaped and maintained to the Neighborhood Standard existing at the time registration was required. 
(1)  Required Landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, Hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf or sod. 
(2)  Required Landscaping does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar Material. 
(3)  Required maintenance includes, but is not limited to regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscape and removal of all trimmings. 
(e)  Pools and spas Shall be kept in working order so the water remains clear and free of Pollutants and debris to prevent pools and spas from becoming a breeding ground for mosquitoes and other vectors, or drained and kept dry. In either case Properties with pools or spas Must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the State of California. 
(f)  Adherence to this section does not relieve the Beneficiary, Trustee and Owner of any obligations set forth in any other code or Law, covenants conditions and restrictions, or any home Owners association rules and regulations that May apply to the Property. 
(Ord. No. O-04-09, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
8.05.060 - Security requirements. 
(a)  Abandoned Properties Shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized Persons. Secure manner includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage) Gates and any other opening of such size that it May allow a child to Access the interior of the Property and or Structure(s). In the case of broken windows, Securing means the re-glazing or boarding of the window. Any boards Used Must be painted to match the existing color of the Building. 
(b)  If any Abandoned Property is owned by a corporation or Out of Area Beneficiary, Trustee or Owner, a Local Property Management Company Shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this chapter, and any other applicable Laws, are being met. 
(c)  The Abandoned Property Shall be posted with the name and a twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the Local Property Management Company. The posting Shall be no less than eighteen inches × twenty-four inches and Shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five feet and Shall contain along with the name and twenty-four-hour contact number, the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL". The posting Shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the Street to the front of the Property so it is visible from the Street, or Secured to the exterior of the Building or Structure facing the Street to the front of the Property so it is visible from the Street, or if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is visual from the Street to the front of the Property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting Must be constructed of, and printed with, weather resistant Materials. 
(Ord. No. O-04-09, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
8.05.070 - Enforcement. 
The Colton Police Department Code Enforcement Division Shall have primary responsibility for enforcing this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-04-09, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
8.05.080 - Violations. 
Violations Shall be prosecuted according to Colton Municipal Code Section 8.02.020. Each Day a Violation is committed or Permitted to continue Shall constitute a separate offense and Shall be punishable as such. Violations of this chapter Shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Nothing in this chapter, or any other chapter of the Colton Municipal Code Shall prevent the City of Colton from engaging in efforts to obtain voluntary compliance by means of warnings, Notices, or educational efforts. 
(Ord. No. O-04-09, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
8.05.090 - Penalties. 
Every Violation of a provision of this chapter Shall be subject to an administrative fine and penalty in accordance with Colton Municipal Code Section 8.12.010. 
If the Violation is not corrected, additional Administrative Citations May be issued for the same Violation. The amount of administrative penalty Shall increase at the rate specified above. Penalties Shall not exceed one thousand dollars for each Day, or portion thereof, that the Violation continues to exist. The administrative and civil penalties Shall be payable to the City of Colton. Payment of penalties Shall not excuse the failure to correct the Violation, or bar further enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. O-04-09, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
8.05.100 - Additional authority. 
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this chapter, the Code Enforcement Director Shall have the authority to require the Beneficiary, Trustee or Owner, or any combination thereof, to implement additional maintenance and security measures, including but not limited to, Securing any and all door, window or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard, or other measures as May be reasonably required to arrest the decline of the Abandoned or Distressed Property. 
(Ord. No. O-04-09, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
8.05.110 - Fees. 
The Fee for registering or re-registering a Property subject to this chapter Shall be set from time to time by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. O-04-09, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Chapter 8.06 - SEASONAL ABATEMENT OF WEEDS 
 
8.06.010 - Weeds—Constituting fire hazard—Nuisance. 
All weeds, dry grasses, dead shrubs, dead trees, Rubbish, or any Material growing upon the Streets, Sidewalks, or upon Private Property within the City, which bears seeds of a wingy or downy nature or which by reason of their size, manner of growth and location constitute a fire hazard to any Building, Improvements, crops or other Property, and weeds and grasses which, when dry, will in reasonable probability constitute such a fire hazard, are declared to be a Public Nuisance. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.06.020 - Cultivated Property—Firebreak required when. 
Cultivated and Useful grasses and pastures Shall not be declared a Public Nuisance. However, if the Fire Chief or his authorized Representative Shall determine it necessary to protect adjacent improved Property from fire exposure, an adequate firebreak May be required. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.06.030 - Waste Matter—Nuisance when. 
Waste Matter as defined in Section 8.06.040, which by reason of its location and character is unsightly and interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of Property by neighbors, or which would Materially hamper or interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire upon the Premises, or the abatement of a Nuisance as defined by Section 8.06.010, is declared a Public Nuisance. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.06.040 - Waste Matter—Defined. 
"Waste Matter" is defined for the purpose of this chapter as unused or discarded Matter having no substantial Market Value, which is exposed to the elements and is not enclosed in any Structure or otherwise concealed from public view, and which consists, without limitation or exclusion by enumeration, of such Matter and Material as: 
A.  Rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile; 
B.  Rubbish, crates, cartons, metal and glass containers; 
C.  Vehicle bodies and Parts. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.06.050 - Nuisance—Abatement Notice. 
If it is determined that a Public Nuisance, as herein defined, exists on any Lot or Premises, or upon any Sidewalk, parking or Street adjacent to such Lot or Premises, the Chief of the Fire Department Shall cause a Notice to be issued to abate such Nuisance. Such Notice Shall be headed: "NOTICE TO CLEAN PREMISES" in letters not less than one inch in length and which Shall, in legible characters, direct the abatement of the Nuisance and refer to this chapter for particulars. Notices served by means other than posting as provided by this chapter Shall contain a description of the Property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the Nuisance. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.06.060 - Abatement Notice—Manners of serving Designated. 
The Notice required by Section 8.06.050 of this chapter May be served in any of the Following manners: 
A.  By personal service on the Owner, Occupant or Person in charge or control of the Property; 
B.  By regular mail addressed to the Owner or Person in charge and control of the Property, at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or as otherwise known; 
C.  By posting at a conspicuous place on the land or abutting the public Right-of-Way and insertion of an advertisement at least once a week for the period of two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The newspaper advertisement Shall be a general Notice that Property in the City has been posted in accordance with this chapter and Shall contain a general statement of the effect of such postings. The date of such newspaper advertisements Shall not be considered in computing the Appeal periods provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.06.070 - Abatement Notice—Appeal— Hearing. 
Within ten Days from the date of posting, mailing or personal service of the required Notice, the Owner or Person occupying or controlling such Lot or Premises affected May Appeal to the City Council. Such Appeal Shall be in writing and Shall be filed with the City Clerk. At the Regular Meeting or Regular Adjourned Meeting of the City Council not less than five Days nor more than twenty Days thereafter, it Shall proceed to hear and pass upon such Appeal, and the Decision of the City Council thereupon, Shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.06.080 - Nuisance removal—Owner's duty—Time limit. 
It Shall be the duty of the Owner, the agent of the Owner, or the Person in possession of any Lot or Premises in the City, within ten Days from the date of notification as provided in Section 8.06.060, or in case of an Appeal to the City Council, within ten Days from the determination thereof, unless the same is sustained, to remove the Nuisance as stated. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.06.090 - Nuisance removal—Owner's failure—City action—Report. 
If the Owner fails or neglects to remove the Nuisance as herein defined, within the time specified in this chapter, the Chief of the Fire Department Shall cause such Nuisance to be abated. The abatement work May be done by City crews or by private contractor. A report of the proceedings and an accurate account of the cost of abating the Nuisance on each separate Property Shall be filed with the City Council. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.06.100 - Hearing—Report—Posting Notice. 
The City Clerk Shall set the report and account for hearing by the City Council at the first Regular or Adjourned Meeting which will be held at least seven calendar Days after the date of filing, and Shall post a Copy of the report and account and Notice of the time and place of hearing in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the Council Chambers in the City Hall. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.06.110 - Hearing—Report—Council's Decision—Lien—Resolution. 
The City Council Shall consider the report and account at the time set for hearing, together with any objections or protests by any interested parties. Any Owner of land or Person interested therein May present a Written or oral protest or objection to the report and account. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council Shall either approve the report and account as submitted, or as modified or corrected by the City Council. The amounts so Approved Shall be liens upon the respective Lots or Premises, and the City Council Shall adopt a Resolution assessing said amounts as liens upon the respective Lots or Premises, and the City Council Shall adopt a Resolution assessing said amounts as liens upon the respective Parcels of land as they are shown upon the last available assessment roll, and determining that such weeds, grasses, dead trees, dead shrubs, and Waste Matter constitute a Public Nuisance. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.06.120 - Council's Resolution—Filing. 
The City Clerk Shall prepare and file with the County Auditor a certified Copy of the resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.06.130 - Government Code adopted—Assessment—Collection procedure. 
The Finance Department of the City May accept payment of any amount due at any time prior to the City Council hearing, as called for in Section 8.06.100 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.06.140 - Government Code adopted— Assessment—Collection procedure. 
The provisions of Sections 39580 to 39585, inclusive, of the Government Code are incorporated by reference and made a Part of this chapter. The County Auditor Shall enter each assessment in the County tax roll opposite the Parcel of land. The amount of the assessment Shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes, and if delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedure of Foreclosure and Sale as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.06.150 - Penalty for Violations. 
The Owner, Occupant or agent of any Lot or Premises within the City who Permits or allows the existence of a Public Nuisance as defined in this chapter, upon any Lot or Premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, or who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof Shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six Months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
Chapter 8.08 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
 
8.08.010 - Findings—Nuisance declared. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative Vehicles or Parts thereof as Public Nuisances. The City Council finds and determines that the accumulation and storage of Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative Vehicles or Parts thereof on private or Public Property not including Highways creates a condition tending to reduce the value of Private Property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive Nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of Minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative Vehicles or Parts thereof, on private or Public Property not including Highways, except as expressly hereinafter Permitted, constitutes a Public Nuisance which May be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.020 - Definitions. 
As Used in this chapter: 
"Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the Use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes Street. 
"Inoperable" means mechanically incapable of being driven or prohibited from being operated on a Public Street or Highway pursuant to California Vehicle Code Sections 4000, 5202, 24002 or 40001, relating to license plates, registration, equipment, safety and related Matters. 
"Owner of the Land" means the Owner of the Land on which the Vehicle, or Parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
"Owner of the Vehicle" means the last registered Owner and legal Owner of Record. 
"Public Property" does not include "Highway." 
"Vehicle" means a device by which any Person or Property May be propelled, moved or drawn upon a Highway, except a device moved by human power or Used exclusively upon stationary Rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.030 - Exclusions. 
This chapter Shall not apply to: 
A.  A Vehicle, or Parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a Building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the Street or other public or Private Property; or 
B.  A Vehicle, or Parts thereof, stored or parked in a lawful manner on Private Property in connection with the Business of a licensed dismantler, licensed Vehicle dealer, a Junk Dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted Business or Commercial enterprise; or 
C.  An Inoperable Vehicle parked for a maximum of three hours while awaiting towing or other assistance necessary to effect removal. 
Nothing in this section Shall authorize the maintenance of a Public or Private Nuisance as defined under provisions of Law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.040 - Nonexclusive remedy. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative Vehicles within the City. It supplements and is in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and Ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, the State or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.050 - Enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter Shall be administered and enforced by the City Manager or Designee. In the enforcement of this chapter any authorized Representative of the City May enter upon private or Public Property to examine a Vehicle or Parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of the Vehicle declared to be a Nuisance pursuant to this chapter in accordance with State and Federal Law. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.060 - Removal authority—Contracted Persons—Rights of entry. 
When the City Council has contracted with or granted a Franchise to any Person or Persons, such Person or Persons Shall be authorized to enter upon Private Property or Public Property to remove or cause the removal of a Vehicle or Parts thereof declared to be a Nuisance pursuant to this chapter in accordance with State and Federal Law. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.070 - Cost assessment determination. 
The City Council Shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs under this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.080 - Removal authority—City Manager. 
Upon discovering the existence of Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative Vehicle, or Parts thereof, on Private Property or Public Property within the City, the City Manager or Designee Shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.090 - Notices of intention to abate and remove. 
A ten-Day Notice of intention to abate and remove the Vehicle, or Parts thereof, as a Public Nuisance Shall be personally served or mailed by registered mail to the Owner of the Land and to the Owner of the Vehicle, unless the Vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The Notices of intention Shall be in substantially the Following forms: 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE. 
(Name and Address of Owner of the Land) 
 As Owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to (section of Ordinance or municipal code), has determined that there exists upon said land an (or Parts of an) Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative Vehicle registered to _____, License number _____, which constitutes a Public Nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (Ordinance or municipal code chapter number). 
 You are hereby notified to abate said Nuisance by the removal of said Vehicle (or said Parts of Vehicle) within 10 Days from the date of mailing of this Notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City of Colton and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as Owner of the Land on which said Vehicle (or said Parts of Vehicle) is located. 
 As Owner of the Land on which said Vehicle (or said Parts of Vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 Days after the mailing of this Notice of intention request a Public Hearing and if such a request is not received by the (Hearing Authority) within such 10-Day period, the City Manager or Designee Shall have the authority to abate and remove said Vehicle (or said Parts of Vehicle) as Public Nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a Public Hearing. You May submit a sworn Written statement within such 10-Day period denying responsibility for the presence of said Vehicle (or said Parts of a Vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement Shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You May appear in Person at any hearing requested by you or the Owner of the Vehicle or, in lieu thereof, May present a sworn Written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
Notice Mailed/Served: 	_______ 
	(Date) 
(s) 	_______ 
	(City Official) 
 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE. 
(Name and address of last registered and-or legal Owner of Record of Vehicle-Notice should be given to both if different) 
 As last registered (and-or legal) Owner of Record of (description of Vehicle-make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to (section of Ordinance or municipal code), has determined that said Vehicle (or Parts of a Vehicle) exists as an Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative Vehicle at (described location on public or Private Property) and constitutes a Public Nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (Ordinance or municipal code chapter number). 
 You are hereby notified to abate said Nuisance by the removal of said Vehicle (or said Parts of a Vehicle) within 10 Days from the date of mailing of this Notice. 
 As registered (and-or legal) Owner of Record of said Vehicle (or said Parts of a Vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 Days after the mailing of this Notice of intention, request a Public Hearing and if such a request is not received by the (Hearing Authority) within such 10-Day period, the City Manager or Designee Shall have the authority to abate and remove said Vehicle (or said Parts of a Vehicle) without a hearing. 
Notice Mailed/Served: 	_______ 
	(Date) 
(s) 	_______ 
	(City Official) 
 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.100 - Hearing—Abatement and assessment cost determination. 
Upon request by the Owner of the Vehicle or Owner of the Land where the Vehicle is located that is received by the City Manager or Designee within ten Days after the mailing of the Notices of intention to abate and remove, a Public Hearing Shall be held by the Hearing Authority on the question of abatement and removal of the Vehicle or Parts thereof. The Hearing Authority Shall also consider assessment of the administrative costs and cost of removal of the Vehicle or Parts thereof against the Property on which it is located. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.110 - Hearing—Notice—Nuisance abatement without hearing when. 
If the Owner of the Land submits a sworn Written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the Vehicle on his land within such ten-Day period, the statement Shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require the Owner's presence. Notice of the hearing Shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten Days before the hearing to the Owner of the Land and to the Owner of the Vehicle, unless the Vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within ten Days after mailing of the Notice of intention to abate and remove, the City Shall have the authority to abate and remove the Vehicle or Parts thereof as Public Nuisance without holding a Public Hearing. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.120 - Hearing—Testimony—Owner's statement. 
All hearings under this chapter Shall be held before the Hearing Authority which Shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony May include testimony on the condition of the Vehicle or Parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the Private Property or Public Property. The Hearing Authority Shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The Owner of the Land May appear in Person at the hearing or present a sworn Written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the Vehicle on the land along with the reasons for such denial. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.130 - Hearing—Determination and action—Cost determination— Removal order contents. 
The Hearing Authority May impose such conditions and take such other actions as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It May delay the time for removal of the Vehicle or Parts thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the Public Hearing, the Hearing Authority May find that a Vehicle or Parts thereof has been Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or Public Property and order the same removed from the Property as a Public Nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and cost of removal to be charged against the Owner of the Land. The order requiring removal Shall include a description of the Vehicle or Parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the Vehicle, if available at the site. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.140 - Hearing—Nonassessment determination when. 
If it is determined at the hearing that the Vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the Owner of the Land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the Hearing Authority Shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the Vehicle against the Property upon which the Vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such Owner of the Land. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.150 - Hearing—Notification of Decision. 
If the Owner of the Land submits a sworn Written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the Vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested Party makes a Written presentation to the Hearing Authority but does not appear, he Shall be notified in writing of the Decision. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.160 - Appeal—Procedure. 
A.  Any interested Party May Appeal the Decision of the Hearing Authority by filing a Written Notice of Appeal with the hearing body or officer within five Days after its Decision. 
B.  Such Appeal Shall be heard by the City Council which May affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate. 
C.  The clerk Shall give Written Notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those Persons and in the same manner as specified in Section 8.04.090. 
D.  In conducting the hearing the City Council Shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.170 - Effective date of removal. 
Five Days after adoption of the order declaring the Vehicle or Parts thereof to be a Public Nuisance, five Days from the date of mailing of the Notice of the Decision if such Notice is required, or fifteen Days after such action of the Governing Body authorizing removal Following Appeal, the Vehicle or Parts thereof May be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or Automobile Dismantler's Yard or May be subject to lien-Sale in accordance with requirements of State Law. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.180 - Notice and evidences of registration to Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Within five Days after the date of removal of the Vehicle or Parts thereof, Notice Shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the Vehicle or Parts thereof removed. At the same time there Shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.08.190 - Nonpayment of costs—Assessment against land. 
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the Owner of the Parcel of land are not paid within thirty Days of the date of the Order, or the final disposition of an Appeal therefrom, such costs Shall be assessed against the Parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and Shall be transmitted to the tax Collector for collection. The assessment Shall have the same priority as other City taxes. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
Chapter 8.12 - ADMINISTRATIVE FINES AND PENALTIES 
 
8.12.010 - Administrative fines and penalties for Violations of code. 
Every Violation of a provision of this Code, the penalty for which is defined as an "infraction" or "misdemeanor," Shall be subject to an administrative fine and penalty. The provisions of this chapter relating to administrative fines and penalties are in addition to all other remedies, criminal or civil, which May be pursued by the City to address any Violation of codes, Ordinances, mandates, regulations, resolutions, rules or other Laws adopted by the City, or other applicable State codes. Use of this chapter Shall be at the sole discretion of the City and nothing in this chapter Shall prevent the City from initiating a civil, criminal or other legal or equitable proceedings as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in the administrative fine and penalty provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.12.020 - Definitions. 
The Following definitions Shall apply for purposes of this chapter: 
"Administrative Citation" means the Written Notice provided to a Responsible Person to inform that Person of a Violation of City Codes. 
"City" means the City of Colton. 
"City Codes" means any codified or noncodified Ordinance or Law adopted by the City. 
"Enforcement Officer" means any individual employed or otherwise charged by the City to enforce codes, Ordinances, mandates, regulations, resolutions, rules or other Laws adopted by the City. 
"Hearing Authority" means the Person, entity or board Designated by the City Manager to determine the validity of a Violation or complaint. 
"Nonemergency Health or Safety Violation" means a Violation of any Building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or Zoning Ordinance which does not create an immediate danger to health or safety. 
"Responsible Person" means a natural Person or legal entity; a natural Person or legal entity who is the Owner, Tenant, Co-Tenant, lessee, sublessee or other Person with any right to possession of the Property where a City Code Violation occurs that is related to the Use of Property; the Owner, majority stockholders, corporate officers, Trustees, and general partners of a legal entity; and the on-site manager who normally works daily at the site and is responsible for the activities at such Premises. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.12.030 - Administrative Citations. 
A.  It is unlawful for any Person to violate any provision of the City Codes. 
1.  Administrative Citations for Violations of City Codes. Whenever an Enforcement Officer finds that a Violation of this Code has occurred, the Enforcement Officer Shall issue an Administrative Citation notifying any Responsible Person or Persons of the Violation and the administrative fine owed to the City. The Administrative Citation Shall inform the Responsible Person or Persons that the Violation Shall be remedied or otherwise corrected immediately or within a reasonable time as determined by the Enforcement Officer. Administrative fines Shall be due and payable within twenty-four hours of the issuance of the Administrative Citation. Additional Administrative Citations May be issued and fines imposed for every Day the Violation continues uncorrected. The Responsible Person or Persons Shall be liable for and Shall pay to the City any additional fine. Such additional fines Shall be due within twenty-four hours of the issuance. 
2.  Nonemergency Health and Safety Violations. When an Enforcement Officer finds that a Nonemergency Health and Safety Violation has occurred, the Enforcement Officer Shall have the authority to issue an Administrative Citation that provides for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed thirty calendar Days, to correct or otherwise remedy the Nonemergency Health and Safety Violation prior to the imposition of an administrative fine. The Responsible Person May request an extension of the correction period provided that a Written request is filed with the Chief of Police or Designee before the correction period ends. The Chief of Police or Designee may, in his or her discretion, grant a reasonable extension of the period of time to correct the Violation if the Responsible Person has supplied substantial evidence showing that the correction cannot reasonably be made within the correction period. The Decision of the Chief or Designee Shall be in writing and Shall be final. If the Responsible Person provides proof to the Enforcement Officer, or Designee, that the Violation has been corrected or otherwise remedied within the period of time allotted for correction, no fines Shall be assessed and the Administrative Citation Shall be canceled. 
3.  Noncorrection of Nonemergency Health and Safety Violations. If the Nonemergency Health and Safety Violation has not been corrected or otherwise remedied within the correction period, the Enforcement Officer Shall have the authority to issue an Administrative Citation notifying the Responsible Person or Persons of the Violation and the administrative fine owed to the City. Administrative fines Shall be due and payable within twenty-four hours of the issuance of the Administrative Citation. Additional Administrative Citations May be issued and fines imposed for every Day the Violation continues uncorrected and the Responsible Person or Persons Shall be liable for and Shall pay to the City any additional fine. Such additional fines Shall be due within twenty-four hours of their issuance. 
B.  Each Administrative Citation issued Shall contain the Following information: 
1.  The date and time the Violation was observed; 
2.  The address or a definite description of the location where the Violation occurred; 
3.  The section of the City Code violated and a description of the Violation; 
4.  A description of the action required to correct the Violation; 
5.  The number of Days provided to correct or otherwise remedy a Nonemergency Health and Safety Violation prior to the imposition of fines and/or penalties; 
6.  The amount of the fine/penalty assessed for the Violation; 
7.  A description of the fine/penalty payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine/penalty Shall be paid; 
8.  An Order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the Violation described in the Administrative Citation; 
9.  A description of the Administrative Citation review process, including the time within which the Administrative Citation May be contested and the procedure for contesting the Administrative Citation; 
10.  The name and signature of the citing Enforcement Officer. 
C.  Service of the Administrative Citation or Administrative Citation of a Nonemergency Health or Safety Violation Shall be made by: (1) personal service on the Responsible Person(s) in the same manner as a summons in a civil action pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure § 415.10; or (2) certified mail, return receipt requested. When certified mail is Used, service Shall be complete at the time the citation is deposited into the United States mail; or (3) in instances when personal service or certified mail is unsuccessful, then service Shall be provided by publishing a Notice in a newspaper of general circulation and posting an eight and one-half inches by eleven inches enlargement of the Administrative Citation in a conspicuous location on or in front of the Property. 
D.  Preliminary Review of Administrative Citation or Administrative Citation of a Nonemergency Health or Safety Violation. 
1.  Any Person issued an Administrative Citation May request a preliminary review of the applicability of the Administrative Citation by the Police Department immediately or within seven Days of the date the Administrative Citation is issued. To obtain a preliminary review the Person issued the Administrative Citation Shall appear at the Police Department and bring a Copy of the Administrative Citation and file a signed Written request stating the reasons why and any evidence showing that no Violation occurred or that the Person is not a Responsible Person. All filed requests Shall be date stamped by the code enforcement division. 
2.  The preliminary review Shall be conducted by the Chief of Police or Designee. The reviewer Shall not be the Enforcement Officer who issued the Administrative Citation. The preliminary review is intended to correct errors that are easily verifiable and is not intended to resolve factual disputes concerning the Violation that is the subject of the Administrative Citation. 
3.  The preliminary review May be decided on the same Day it is filed and Shall consist of a review of the Administrative Citation, the Written statement and any other evidence submitted at the time of the request. Where the preliminary review is not completed within three Working Days of its receipt, it Shall be deemed denied. 
4.  The Person requesting the preliminary review Shall be notified of the results of the review within three Working Days of its receipt. The notification May be made by telephone, facsimile, or in Person. The code enforcement division Shall keep a record of all requests, the results of the review, and how the Person requesting the preliminary review was notified of the results. 
5.  A request for preliminary review Shall not extend any time periods for compliance, including the final compliance date, the time any correction period ends or the time to request an administrative hearing. If the conclusion of the preliminary review is that no Violation occurred or that the Person cited was not a Responsible Person, the Administrative Citation Shall be canceled. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.12.040 - Amount of fines and penalties. 
A.  The amount of administrative fines for Violations of City Codes and penalties for delinquent payment of such fines imposed pursuant to this chapter Shall be established by separate Resolution of the City Council. 
B.  Administrative fines not paid prior to their due date Shall be subject to a penalty for every Day of delinquency. Penalties Shall not be assessed to Responsible Persons who have been granted a payment schedule for the payment of fines and/or penalties pursuant to Section 8.12.090(K). 
C.  Pursuant to Section 8.12.030 of this Code, a Violation of this Code can be filed as an infraction or misdemeanor at the City Attorney's discretion. For purposes of this chapter, Violations Shall not be subject to the maximum infraction penalties provided in California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.12.050 - Payment of fines. 
A.  All fines are due within twenty-four hours of the date the Administrative Citation is issued, except that fines imposed for Nonemergency Health and Safety Violations Shall be due twenty-four hours Following the expiration of the reasonable period of time granted to correct or otherwise remedy the Violation or upon twenty-four hours Following the expiration of any extension granted. 
B.  Any Administrative Citation fine or penalty paid pursuant to subsection A of this section Shall be refunded if it is determined, after hearing, that the Person charged was not the Responsible Person or there was no Violation as charged in the Administrative Citation. 
C.  Payment of a fine or penalty under this chapter Shall not excuse or Discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of a Violation of this Code that is the subject of an Administrative Citation. 
D.  The City May Use all available legal means to collect any past due fines, penalties and other related costs including, but not limited to, initiating an action in small claims Court, assessing a lien against the Property or referring the Matter to a collection agency. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.12.060 - Request for hearing. 
A.  Any recipient of an Administrative Citation May contest that there was a Violation of this Code or that he or she is the Responsible Person. A recipient May request an administrative hearing by filing, no later than ten calendar Days from the date on which the Administrative Citation was issued, a Written request for hearing. The Written request Shall include a detailed Written explanation as to why the Administrative Citation is being contested. 
B.  The recipient of an Administrative Citation Shall deposit the amount of the fine and/or penalty specified on the Administrative Citation with the Police Department at the time he/she returns the request for hearing form, or he/she Shall request an advance deposit Hardship waiver pursuant to Section 8.12.070. 
C.  The recipient of an Administrative Citation requesting the hearing Shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten calendar Days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing Shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen nor more than thirty calendar Days from the date that a completed request for administrative hearing is filed in accordance with the above provisions. However, the City and the recipient of an Administrative Citation May mutually agree to an extension of the time limits provided in this section. Any extension Shall be confirmed in writing and be provided to the recipient of the Administrative Citation. 
D.  No hearing Shall be held unless and until the fine or penalty has been deposited with the Police Department or an advance deposit Hardship waiver has been issued. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.12.070 - Deposit Hardship waivers. 
A.  Any Person who intends to request an administrative hearing and is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine or penalty as required herein, May file a request for an advance deposit Hardship waiver. 
B.  The recipient of an Administrative Citation Shall complete an advance deposit Hardship waiver form and return it to the Police Department along with the Written request for hearing. The recipient of an Administrative Citation May request an advance deposit Hardship waiver form by telephone, mail or in Person, but Shall be solely responsible for assuring its receipt, completing and returning it within the required time. 
C.  The Chief of Police or Designee May waive the requirement of an advance deposit and issue the advance deposit Hardship waiver only if the Applicant submits the required advance deposit Hardship waiver form and includes a sworn affidavit and any supporting documents or Materials demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police or Designee that it would be a significant financial detriment on the recipient of the Administrative Citation to deposit the full amount of the fine or penalty in advance of the hearing. The requirement for depositing the full amount of the fine or penalty Shall be sustained unless or until the City Manager or Designee makes this determination. The Police Department Shall serve Written Notice of the Chief's or Designee's determination on the recipient of the Administrative Citation by certified mail, return receipt requested. Service Shall be deemed complete at the time the Notice is deposited into the mail and addressed to the Person at the address indicated on the administrative hearing request form. The Notice Shall include a brief description of the reasons for the Chief's or Designee's determination to issue or not issue the advance deposit Hardship waiver. The Written determination of the Chief of Police or Designee Shall be final. 
D.  If the Chief of Police or Designee determines not to issue an advance deposit Hardship waiver, the recipient of the Administrative Citation Shall remit the deposit amount to the City Clerk within ten Days of service of that Decision, or thirty calendar Days from the date of the administrative Decision. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.12.080 - Hearing Officer. 
The City Manager Shall Designate the Hearing Authority for the Administrative Citation hearings. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.12.090 - Hearing procedure. 
A.  All hearings Shall be held before the Hearing Authority. 
B.  At the hearing, all Persons contesting the validity of an Administrative Citation Shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence concerning the Administrative Citation. 
C.  If the Enforcement Officer submits an additional Written report concerning the Administrative Citation to the Hearing Officer, then a Copy of this report Shall be served on the Person requesting the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested at least five calendar Days prior to the date of the hearing. Service Shall be deemed complete at the time the report is deposited into the mail and addressed to the Person at the address indicated on the administrative hearing request form. 
D.  Failure of the Party contesting the Administrative Citation to appear at the hearing Shall constitute forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust his/her administrative remedies. 
E.  The Administrative Citation and any additional report submitted by the Enforcement Officer Shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
F.  The Hearing Authority May continue the hearing from time to time and provide the Responsible Person with additional time in which to remedy the Violation. In addition, the Hearing Authority May request additional information or evidence from the Enforcement Officer or the recipient of the Administrative Citation prior to issuing a Written Decision. 
G.  All hearings Shall be recorded by a video or audio device, unless the City decides to utilize a Court reporter. If a Court reporter is not utilized, the City is not required to provide transcriptions of any hearings, but is required to make the video or audio tape(s) available to the Responsible Person within thirty Days after the hearing. The City May charge a reasonable Fee for reproducing the tapes. If a Court reporter is utilized, the recipient of the Administrative Citation May obtain a Copy of the transcript upon payment of any applicable reasonable Fees or costs. The City May destroy such tapes or transcripts Following the time during which any and all Appeals of the Administrative Citation Shall have been made. 
H.  The hearings need not be conducted in accordance with technical rules of evidence. Hearsay evidence May be Used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but Shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in a civil action in a California Court of competent jurisdiction. Any relevant evidence Shall be admitted if it is the type on which reasonable Persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common Law or statutory rule which might consider such admission improper in a civil action. Oral evidence Shall be taken only on Oath or affirmation. Irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence Shall be excluded. 
I.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the Hearing Authority Shall issue a Written Decision to affirm or cancel the Administrative Citation. The Written Decision Shall include the Hearing Authority's findings for that Decision, as well as information regarding the recipient's Appeal rights to the Courts. The recipient of the Administrative Citation Shall be served with a Copy of the Hearing Authority's Written Decision by certified mail, return receipt requested. The Decision of the Hearing Authority Shall be the City's final administrative Decision. 
J.  If the Hearing Authority determines that the Administrative Citation should be affirmed, the fine and/or penalty amount on deposit with the City Shall be retained by the City. In addition, the Hearing Authority Shall assess the hearing costs associated with holding the hearing. 
K.  If the Hearing Authority determines that the Administrative Citation should be upheld, but the fine and/or penalty has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit Hardship waiver, the Hearing Authority Shall set forth in the Decision a payment schedule for the fine and/or penalty as well as the hearing costs associated with holding the hearing. 
L.  If the Hearing Authority determines that the Administrative Citation should be canceled, and the fine and/or penalty has been deposited with the City, the City Shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine and/or penalty. In addition, no hearing costs Shall be assessed. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.12.100 - Recovery of Abatement Costs. 
The Administrative Citation process described in this chapter does not preclude the City from recovering any code Violation Abatement Costs incurred by the City in performing its code enforcement efforts pursuant to this Code. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.12.110 - Right to judicial review. 
Any Person aggrieved by the administrative Decision of a Hearing Authority May obtain review of the administrative Decision by filing a petition for review with the municipal Court in the County within thirty Days of the Decision, in accordance with the provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.12.120 - Notices. 
Any and all Notices or Decisions required to be given by the administrative provisions of this chapter Shall be served on the Responsible Person by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. The Notices or Decisions Shall be addressed to the recipient at the last known address for that Person, including the address provided on forms required by the administrative provisions of this chapter. Personal service May be substituted for mailed Notice any time. Actual Notice Shall be deemed adequate Notice regardless of the method of service. Failure to receive any Notice Shall not affect the validity of any proceedings conducted hereunder. 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
8.12.130 - Code enforcement administrative fine account. 
All money collected pursuant to this chapter Shall be deposited into a separate account to fund further code enforcement activities. The account Shall be known as "The Code Enforcement Administrative Fine Account." 
(Ord. 0-07-00 § 3 (part), 2000)  
Chapter 8.14 - SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF NUISANCE VEHICLES 
 
8.14.010 - Findings, purpose and intent. 
The City Council has determined that Persons who operate Vehicles and Use them to illegally dump Refuse bring decay to Local neighborhoods where they dump such Matter. The Council has further determined that seizing the Vehicles of Persons who come into the Local neighborhoods to illegally dump Refuse will be deterred from creating said Nuisances if their Vehicles are subject to seizure and forfeiture. The City Council finds there is a need to provide for the abatement of such Nuisance Vehicles. 
(Ord. 0-11-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.14.020 - Nuisance Vehicle. 
Any Vehicle Used to illegally dump Refuse in Violation of Section 6.16.030 of this Code is declared a Nuisance, and the Vehicle Shall be subject to seizure and forfeiture as provided in this chapter. "Refuse" Shall be defined as set forth in Section 6.16.010 of this Code. Any Person or his or her servant, agent or Employee who owns, leases, possesses, conducts, Uses or maintains any Vehicle (hereinafter referred to as "the Vehicle"), Used for any of the purposes or Acts set forth in this section is guilty of a Nuisance. 
(Ord. 0-11-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.14.030 - Right, title and interest in Vehicle. 
All right, title and interest in any Vehicle described in Section 8.14.020 Shall vest in the City upon Commission of the Act giving rise to the Nuisance under this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-11-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.14.040 - Process. 
Vehicles subject to forfeiture under this chapter May be seized by any Peace Officer upon process issued by any Court having jurisdiction over the Vehicle. Under this chapter, seizure without process May be made if any of the Following situations exist: 
A.  The seizure is incident to an arrest or a search pursuant to a search warrant; or 
B.  There is probable cause to believe that the Vehicle was Used in Violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-11-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.14.050 - Receipts. 
Receipts for Vehicles seized pursuant to this chapter Shall be delivered to any Person arrested out of whose possession such Vehicle was seized, in accordance with Section 1412 of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. 0-11-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.14.060 - Evidence. 
Property seized pursuant to Section 8.14.040, where appropriate, May be held for evidence. The City Attorney Shall institute and maintain the proceedings. 
(Ord. 0-11-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.14.070 - Forfeiture. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection H of this section, or Section 8.14.100, if the City Attorney determines that the factual circumstances do warrant that a Vehicle described in Section 8.14.020 is subject to forfeiture, the City Attorney Shall file a petition for forfeiture with the Superior Court of San Bernardino County. 
B.  A petition for forfeiture under this Subdivision Shall be filed as soon as practicable, but in any case within one Year of the seizure of the Vehicle which is subject to forfeiture. 
C.  The City Attorney Shall cause a Notice of the seizure and of the intended forfeiture proceedings, as well as Notice stating that any interested Party May file a verified claim with the Superior Court in San Bernardino County, to be served by personal delivery or by registered mail upon any Person who has an interest in the Vehicle. Whenever a Notice is delivered pursuant to this section, it Shall be accompanied by a claim form as described in Section 8.14.090 and directions for the filing and service of a claim. Notice Shall also be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in San Bernardino County. The City Attorney Shall provide Notice of the proceedings under this subsection, including the Following information: 
1.  A description of the Vehicle; 
2.  The date and place of seizure; 
3.  The Violation of Law alleged with respect to forfeiture of the Property; 
4.  The instruction for filing and servicing a claim with the City Attorney pursuant to Section 8.14.090 and time limits for filing a claim. 
D.  An investigation Shall be made by the Police Department as to any claimant to a Vehicle whose right, title, interest, or lien is of record in the Department of Motor Vehicles or appropriate Federal agency. If the Police Department finds that any Person, other than the registered Owner, is the legal Owner thereof, and such ownership did not arise subsequent to the date and time of arrest or notification of the forfeiture proceedings or seizure of the Vehicle, it Shall forthwith send a Notice to the legal Owner at his or her address appearing on the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles or appropriate Federal agency. 
E.  All Notices Shall set forth the time within which a claim of interest in the Vehicle seized or subject to forfeiture is required to be filed pursuant to Section 8.14.090. 
F.  With respect to a Vehicle described in Section 8.14.020 for which forfeiture is sought and as to which forfeiture is contested, the City Shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the Vehicle was Used as set forth in Section 8.14.020. Trial Shall be before the Court or jury. The presiding judge of the Superior Court Shall assign the action brought pursuant to this chapter for trial. 
G.  Upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence that the Vehicle was Used for any of the purposes set forth in Sections 8.14.010 and 8.14.020 of this chapter, the Court Shall declare the Vehicle a Nuisance and order that the Vehicle be seized, if not previously seized and held by the Police Department, forfeited and sold and the proceeds distributed in accordance with this chapter. 
H.  If no claims are filed, the City Attorney Shall prepare a Written declaration of forfeiture of the Vehicle to the Court and dispose of the Vehicle in accordance with this chapter. A Written declaration of forfeiture signed by the City Attorney under this section Shall be deemed to provide good and sufficient title to the forfeited Vehicle. The City Attorney ordering forfeiture pursuant to this section Shall provide a Copy of the declaration of forfeiture to any Person who received Notice of the forfeiture proceedings. 
I.  If a claim is timely filed, then the City Attorney Shall file a petition for forfeiture to this section within thirty Days of the receipt of the claim. 
(Ord. 0-11-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.14.080 - Innocent parties—Return of Vehicle. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the Police Department Shall return a seized Vehicle upon the filing of a timely claim pursuant to Section 8.14.090 and upon a showing by the claimant that: 
A.  The Vehicle is owned by two or more Persons and there is a community Property interest in the Vehicle by a Person other than the Person who Used or maintained the Vehicle for the purpose of illegally dumping Refuse, and the Vehicle is the sole Vehicle available to the Person's immediate Family; or 
B.  The Vehicle is owned by the employer of the Person who Used or maintained the Vehicle for the purpose of illegally dumping Refuse and employer files and serves on the City Attorney a declaration or affidavit under penalty of perjury that he or she had no knowledge of the illegal dumping; or 
C.  The Vehicle is owed by a Rental car agency with a duly executed contract with the Person who Used or maintained the Vehicle for the purpose of illegally dumping Refuse. 
(Ord. 0-11-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.14.090 - Interest claim. 
Any Person claiming an interest in a Vehicle seized pursuant to Section 8.14.020 Must, at any time within ten Days from the date of the Notice of seizure, file with the Superior Court of San Bernardino County a claim, verified in accordance with Section 446 of the Code of Civil Procedure, stating his or her interest in the Vehicle. An endorsed Copy of the claim Shall be served by the claimant on the City Attorney within ten Days of the filing of the claim. 
A.  If a verified claim is filed, the forfeiture proceeding Shall be set for hearing on a Day not less than thirty Days therefrom. 
B.  The hearing Shall be before the Court or jury. 
C.  The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure Shall apply to proceedings under this chapter unless otherwise inconsistent with the provisions or procedures set forth in this chapter. However, in proceedings under this chapter, there Shall be no joinder of actions, coordination of actions, except for forfeiture proceedings, or cross-complaints, and the issues Shall be limited strictly to the questions related to this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-11-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.14.100 - Alternative settlement procedures. 
Any Person, or his or her servant, agent or Employee who owns, leases, conducts, Uses or maintains any Vehicle for the purpose of illegally dumping Refuse and whose Vehicle has been seized in accordance with this chapter May request to execute a voluntary settlement agreement with the City for the return of the Vehicle. Such request Shall be made in writing or orally to the Police Department or the City Attorney. The minimum amount of the settlement agreement Shall be sufficient to cover all of the City's reasonable administrative costs, including Attorney's Fees and personnel time for the seizure and forfeiture action. The actual amount Shall be at the sole and absolute discretion of the City Attorney. The executed settlement agreement Shall be accompanied by the appropriate settlement Fee amount in the form of a money order, cash or cashier's check. All settlement funds Shall be distributed as set forth in Section 8.14.100(B) and (C). 
(Ord. 0-11-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.14.110 - Sale of Vehicles. 
In all cases where a Vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter is forfeited to the City, the Vehicle Shall be sold and the proceeds of the Sale Shall be distributed and appropriated as follows: 
A.  To the bona fide or innocent purchaser, conditional vendor, mortgagee or lien holder of the Vehicle, if any, up to the amount of his or her interest in the Vehicle, when the Court or City Attorney declaring the forfeiture and Sale of the Vehicle orders a distribution to that Person. 
B.  To the City for all expenditures made or incurred by it in connection with the publication of the Notices set forth in this chapter, and Sale of the Vehicle, including expenditures for any necessary repairs, storage or transportation of any Vehicle seized under this chapter. 
C.  The remaining funds Shall be placed in the General Fund, subject to appropriate accounting controls and financial audits for all deposits and expenditures. 
D.  All the funds placed in the General Fund pursuant to this chapter Shall not supplant any funds that would, in the absence of this chapter, be made available to support the Law enforcement and prosecutorial efforts of the Department. 
(Ord. 0-11-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.14.120 - Nonexclusive remedy. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation or penalty for the illegal dumping of Refuse. It supplements and is in addition to Section 6.16.290 of this Code, as well as other regulatory codes, statutes, and Ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, the State or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 0-11-03 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 8.16 - REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF VACANT AND ABANDONED COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY 
 
8.16.010 - Purpose. 
Vacant buildings are a major cause and source of blight in both residential and nonresidential neighborhoods, especially when the owner of the building fails to actively maintain and manage the building to ensure that it does not become a liability to the neighborhood. Vacant buildings (whether or not those buildings are boarded), substandard, or unkempt buildings, and long-term vacancies discourage economic development and retard appreciation of property values. Vacant buildings are potential fire hazards and can jeopardize the ability of owners of neighboring property from securing or maintaining affordable fire insurance. It is the responsibility of property ownership to prevent owned property from becoming a burden to the neighborhood and community and a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare. One vacant building which is not actively and well maintained and managed can be the core and cause of spreading blight. It is the purpose and intent of the city council, through the adoption of this chapter, to define the responsibilities of owners of, and to establish registration and monitoring programs for, vacant commercial, and/or industrial buildings and properties. 
(Ord. No. O-16-16, § 3, 9-6-2016)  
8.16.020 - Definitions. 
In construing the provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Agreement" means any written instrument that transfers or conveys title to real property from one owner to another after a sale, trade, transfer or exchange. 
"Beneficiary" means a lender participating in a real property transaction that holds a secured interest in the real property in question identified in a deed of trust. 
"Boarded building" means a vacant building or portion of a vacant building whose doors and windows have been covered with plywood or other material for the purpose of preventing entry into the vacant building by persons or animals. 
"Building" means any structure, including, but not limited to, any commercial, industrial, or assembly structure, approved for occupancy on either a lot of record or within a single project approved by the city pursuant to the city's Development Code or applicable specific plan. 
"Buyer" means any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity that agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for real property via an "Agreement." 
"Chief building official" means manager of the city building division for the city or the designee of the chief building official. 
"Days" means calendar days. 
"Deed in lieu of foreclosure" means a recorded instrument that transfers ownership of real property between parties to a particular deed of trust as follows: from the trustor, i.e., borrower, to the trustee upon consent of the beneficiary, i.e., lender. 
"Deed of trust" means an instrument whereby an owner of real property, as trustor, transfers a secured interest in the real property in question to a third party trustee, said instrument relating to a loan issued in the context of a real property transaction. This definition applies to any and all subordinate deeds of trust, i.e., second trust deed, third trust deed, etc. 
"Default" means the material breach of a legal or contractual duty arising from or relating to a deed of trust, such as a trustor's failure to make a payment when due. 
"Distressed" means any building, structure or real property that is subject to a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessors lien sale, and/or any real property conveyed via a foreclosure sale resulting in the acquisition of title by an interested beneficiary of a deed of trust, and/or any real property conveyed via a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale, regardless of vacancy or occupancy by a person with no legal right of occupancy. 
"Evidence of vacancy" means any real property condition that independently, or in the context of the totality of circumstances relevant to that real property, would lead a reasonable enforcement official to believe that a property is vacant or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. Such real property conditions include, but are not limited to: 
1.  With respect to commercial/industrial: property: overgrown or dead vegetation in landscape; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail; past due utility notices or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk or debris; the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters; the absence of furnishings or equipment items consistent with commercial/industrial use; abandoned and/or damaged signs and other advertising structures; graffiti; severely cracked, buckled or damaged asphalt or concrete parking areas; and/or statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant. 
"Foreclosure" means the process by which real property subject to a deed of trust is sold to satisfy the debt of a defaulting trustor (i.e., borrower). 
"Hearing officer" means an individual or board as designated by the city manager to conduct hearings, including appeals hearings, and make decisions as provided in this code. 
"Local" means within forty driving miles of the building, structure or real property in question. 
"Notice of default" means a recorded instrument that reflects and provides notice that a default has taken place with respect to a deed of trust, and that a beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale. 
"Out of area" means in excess of forty road or driving miles of the subject property. 
"Owner" means any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity having a legal or equitable title or any interest in real property. 
"Owner of record" means the person holding recorded title to the real property in question at any point in time when official records are produced by the San Bernardino County recorder's office. 
"Property" means any unimproved or improved real property or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition. 
"Trustee" means any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity holding a deed of trust securing an interest in real property. 
"Trustor" means any owner/borrower identified in a deed of trust, who transfers an interest in real property to a trustee as security for payment of a debt by that owner/borrower. 
"Vacant building" means a building where at least thirty-five percent of the total floor area within the building is not occupied. 
"Vacant shopping center/industrial complex" means a shopping center or industrial complex on a single property containing one or more buildings where fifty percent of the gross leasable area is not occupied. 
(Ord. No. O-16-16, § 3, 9-6-2016)  
8.16.030 - Property Owner Responsibilities. 
A.  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall allow a commercial or industrial building designed for human use or occupancy to stand vacant for more than forty-five days, unless the owner establishes by substantial evidence to the reasonable satisfaction of the chief building official that one of the following applies: 
1.  The building is the subject of an active building permit for repair or rehabilitation and the owner is progressing diligently to complete the repair or rehabilitation; 
2.  The building meets all applicable codes, is actively maintained in accordance with all city ordinances, and is ready for occupancy, and is actively being offered for sale, lease, or rent; 
3.  The building does not contribute to and is not likely to contribute to blight because the owner is actively maintaining and monitoring the building so that it does not contribute to blight. Active maintenance and monitoring shall include: 
a.  Maintenance of landscaping and plant materials in good condition, 
b.  Maintenance of the exterior of the building, including, but not limited to, paint and finishes, in good condition, 
c.  Regular removal of all exterior trash, debris and graffiti, 
d.  Maintenance of the building in continuing compliance with all applicable codes and regulations, 
e.  Prevention of criminal activity on the premises, including but not limited to, use and sale of controlled substances, prostitution and criminal street gang activity, 
f.  Windows screened with opaque material that is compatible with the building that prevents interior space of the building from being visible from public rights of way or public property, 
g.  Securing the property in a manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, the replacement of broken windows and the closing and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening that may allow access to the interior of the property. 
B.  The owner of any boarded building, whether boarded by voluntary action of the owner or as a result of enforcement activity by the city, shall cause the boarded building to be rehabilitated for occupancy within ninety days after the building is boarded and shall comply with the provisions of subsection A. of this section. 
C.  It is declared a public nuisance for any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary, or other legal entity that owns, leases, occupies, controls or manages any building or property subject to this chapter to cause, permit, or maintain such building or property in violation of subsections A. or B. of this section. 
D.  Upon the expiration of fifty-five days after a premises becomes a vacant building as defined herein, the owner of a vacant commercial or industrial building shall cause said building to be registered as a vacant building pursuant to the provisions of section 8.16.050 of this chapter and shall pay the registration fee required per section 8.16.060 of this chapter. Further, the owner of said vacant building shall comply with the provisions of sections 8.16.070, 8.16.080, and 8.16.090 of this chapter relating to local property management requirements and monitoring. 
(Ord. No. O-16-16, § 3, 9-6-2016)  
8.16.040 - Bonding and fencing requirements for vacant commercial or industrial buildings. 
A.  Whenever a vacant commercial or industrial building remains vacant for a period of ninety days or more, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter the owner, beneficiary or trustee, as the case may be, shall post with the city a bond or similar security in an amount equal to three months estimated costs of blight prevention activities, as estimated by the chief building official. 
B.  Whenever a vacant commercial or industrial building remains vacant for a period of ninety days or more, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, the owner, beneficiary or trustee, as the case may be, shall cause to be installed a minimum six-foot high chain link fence adjacent to the property boundaries, or other alternative fencing acceptable to the development services director that is adequate to protect the public safety and welfare, unless the director determines that the installation of such fencing will be detrimental to the public safety and welfare. Any fencing required under this section may additionally require screening if the director finds it necessary in order to protect the safety, streetscape and overall appearance of the site. The director may promulgate additional fencing standards for vacant properties consistent with this section. 
(Ord. No. O-16-16, § 3, 9-6-2016)  
8.16.050 - Registration requirements for vacant property. 
A.  Each beneficiary and trustee, who holds a deed of trust on a property located within the City, shall perform an inspection of the property in question prior to recording a notice of default or similar instrument with the San Bernardino County clerk-recorder's office. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, as defined by the chapter, it is hereby deemed to be vacant. 
B.  Within ten days of identification of any vacant property, the beneficiary and trustee must register the property with the chief building official on specified forms. 
C.  If the property is occupied but distressed, the trustee and beneficiary or a designee shall also inspect the property on a monthly basis until: 
1.  The trustor or another party remedies the default; or 
2.  The property is found to be vacant, or shows evidence of vacancy, and is rendered subject to subsection B. 
D.  The registration pursuant to subsection B. shall contain the identity of the beneficiary and trustee, the direct mailing address of the beneficiary and trustee and, in the case of a corporate or out of area beneficiary or trustee, the local property management company, if any, responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the property in question. 
E.  The registration pursuant to subsection B. shall be renewed annually. 
F.  An annual registration fee, adopted in conformance with section 8.16.060, shall accompany the submission of each registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for one year from the date of registration. Registration fees will not be prorated. 
G.  This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale wherein title has been transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure, and to any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale. 
H.  Properties subject to this chapter shall remain subject to the annual registration requirement, security and maintenance standards of this chapter as long as they remain vacant. 
I.  Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity that has registered a property under this chapter must make a written report to the chief building official of any change of information contained in the registration within ten days of the change. 
J.  The duties/obligations specified in this section shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. 
(Ord. No. O-16-16, § 3, 9-6-2016)  
8.16.060 - Registration fees. 
The fee for registering and reregistering a vacant property shall be set, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. The amount of the fee charges shall not exceed the reasonable estimated cost of administering the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-16-16, § 3, 9-6-2016)  
8.16.070 - Monitoring program and purpose. 
A.  Vacant buildings are a major cause and source of blight in residential and nonresidential neighborhoods, especially when the owner of the building fails to maintain and manage the building to ensure that it does not become a liability to the neighborhood. Vacant buildings often attract transients and criminals, including drug users. Use of vacant buildings by transients and criminals, who may employ primitive cooking or heating methods, creates a risk of fire for the vacant buildings and adjacent properties. Vacant properties are often used as dumping grounds for junk and debris and are often overgrown with weeds and grass. Vacant buildings which are boarded up to prevent entry by transients and other long-term vacancies discourage economic development and retard appreciation of property values. 
B.  Because of the potential economic and public health, welfare and safety problems caused by vacant buildings, the city needs to monitor vacant buildings, so that they do not become attractive nuisances, are not used by trespassers, are properly maintained both inside and out, and do not become a blighting influence in the neighborhood. City departments involved in such monitoring include the police department, development services department, and the public works department. There is a substantial cost to the city for monitoring vacant buildings (whether or not those buildings are boarded up), which should be borne by the owners of the vacant buildings. The fees for a monitoring program pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be separate from and in addition to any registration fees or administrative penalties required or otherwise assessed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-16-16, § 3, 9-6-2016)  
8.16.080 - Monitoring program procedures. 
A.  Authority. The chief building official shall be responsible for administering a program for identifying and monitoring the maintenance of all vacant buildings in the city. The program shall be documented and regularly updated. The program shall be available for public review. 
B.  Purposes. The purposes of the monitoring program shall be: 
1.  To identify buildings that become vacant; 
2.  To order vacant buildings that are open and accessible to be secured against unlawful entry pursuant to City codes, including the building code, or other applicable law; 
3.  To initiate proceedings against the owner of any vacant building found to be substandard as defined in this chapter or a nuisance under any other provision of this code; 
4.  To maintain surveillance over vacant buildings so that timely enforcement proceedings are commenced in the event a building becomes substandard or a nuisance; and 
5.  To establish and enforce rules and regulations for the implementation and compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  Fee Imposed. There is imposed upon every owner of a vacant building monitored pursuant to this chapter, an annual vacant building monitoring fee in an initial amount as the city council may establish by resolution, provided that the fee shall not exceed the estimated reasonable cost of monitoring the vacant building. The fee shall be payable as to any building, residential or nonresidential, which: 
1.  Is boarded up by voluntary action of the owner or as the result of enforcement activities by the city; or 
2.  Is vacant for more than ninety days for any reason. 
D.  Fee Deferral. The vacant building monitoring fee may be deferred upon a showing by the owner that: 
1.  The owner has obtained a building permit and is progressing diligently to repair the premises for occupancy; and 
2.  The building meets all applicable codes and is actively being offered for sale, lease, or rent; and 
3.  Imposition of the fee is paid prior to final inspection and/or close of escrow of a pending sale. 
E.  Procedure. The vacant building monitoring fee shall be billed to the owner of the property and mailed to the owner's address as set forth on the last equalized assessment roll of the San Bernardino County assessor. Any owner billed may apply for a waiver on the grounds set forth in subsection d of this section by submitting a written statement of the grounds for the waiver, and the owner's daytime telephone number, to the chief building official within thirty days after the billing is mailed to the owner. The owner shall provide substantial evidence in support of the owner's statement of the grounds for the waiver. The chief building official shall review the written statement and all related evidence and may contact the owner to discuss the application for waiver. The chief building official shall prepare a written decision which shall be mailed to the owner and shall set forth the reasons for the decision. 
F.  Any owner aggrieved by the decision of the chief building official relating to an application for waiver may appeal the chief building official's decision to the city manager by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal within ten days of the decision. The city manager shall set a time and place for a hearing of such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the owner at his or her last known address at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. The decision and order of the city manager on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
G.  If the fee is not paid within sixty days after billing, or within sixty days after the decision of the chief building official or the city manager, the city manager may thereupon order that the fee be specially assessed against the property involved. If the city manager orders that the fee be specially assessed against the property, it shall confirm the assessment and thereafter said assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary real property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary real property taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of real property taxes are applicable to the special assessment. 
H.  The city manager may also cause a notice of lien to be recorded. The notice shall, at a minimum, identify the record owner or possessor of the property, set forth the last known address of the record owner or possessor, a description of the real property subject to the lien, and the amount of the fee. 
(Ord. No. O-16-16, § 3, 9-6-2016)  
8.16.090 - Local property management requirement. 
A.  If a property is determined to be vacant, and the property is owned by a corporation and/or out of area beneficiary, trustee, or owner, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws, are being met. 
B.  The property shall be posted with the name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than eighteen inches by twenty-four inches, shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five feet, and shall contain the following verbiage: 
"THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY ___________," and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL (name and phone number)." 
C.  The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street of the front of the property so it is visible from the street. If no such area exists, the posting shall be on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting, in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property, and to the extent possible, not readily accessible to potential vandalism. Exterior posting must be constructed of, and printed with weather resistant materials. 
D.  The local property management company shall inspect the property on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. If the property management company determines the property is not in compliance, it is the company's responsibility to bring the property into compliance. 
E.  The duties/obligations specified in this section shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. 
(Ord. No. O-16-16, § 3, 9-6-2016)  
8.16.100 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. 
B.  Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity, that owns, leases, occupies, controls or manages any property subject to this chapter and that causes, permits, or maintains a violation of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapters 8.02 and 8.05 of this code. Violations shall be treated as a strict liability offense, a violation shall be deemed to have occurred regardless of a violator's intent. 
C.  If an enforcement official determines a violation of this chapter exists, the enforcement official may issue an administrative citation for each day a violation exists, containing fines up to one thousand dollars per day, per violation, as provided in section 8.05.090 of this code. 
D.  This section is intended to be cumulative to, and not in place of, other rights and remedies available to the city pursuant to the City of Colton Municipal Code, including any civil, criminal and/or administrative action. 
E.  Any and all costs, including attorney's fees, incurred by the City in enforcing this chapter shall be recoverable, and shall constitute a lien and special assessment against the subject property, pursuant to the definitions and procedures in chapters 8.02 and 8.12 and as otherwise provided by this code. 
(Ord. No. O-16-16, § 3, 9-6-2016)  
8.16.110 - Joint and several liability. 
The duties/obligations specified in this chapter shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. In addition, local property management companies retained pursuant to section 8.16.090 shall also be jointly and severally liable for compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-16-16, § 3, 9-6-2016)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE  
I. - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT 
(Reserved)  
II. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 
(Reserved)  
III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY  
Chapter 9.11 - LEWD CONDUCT—INDECENT EXPOSURE* 
 
9.11.010 - Finding, purpose and authority. 
A.  The City Council finds it to be a fact that a place where female nude dancing is combined with drinking Alcoholic Beverages creates a concentration of adult male Persons with stimulated aggressive impulses and diminished inhibitions who are disposed to engage in obnoxious conduct, the Commission of crime and the injury of Persons and Property. 
B.  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the exposure of Designated portions of the human anatomy by Persons in Establishments which serve Alcoholic Beverages for consumption on the Premises of such Establishments. Such Establishments are herein sometimes referred to as saloons. Saloons are licensed by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the State of California. The holder of such a license is referred to herein as "licensee." The location of the saloon is referred to herein as "licensed Premises." 
C.  This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code of the State. All words Used in this chapter which are also Used in said Sections 318.5 and 318.6 are Used in the same sense and mean the same as the same respective words Used in said Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code of the State. 
(Ord. 0-1-86 § 1 (part), 1986)  
9.11.020 - Theater, Concert hall, or Other Similar Establishment defined. 
As Used in this chapter and in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code of the State, the phrase "Theater, Concert Hall, or Other Similar Establishment which is Primarily Devoted to Theatrical Performances" means a Building, room, hall, or other place having permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage upon which theatrical, vaudeville, or similar performances are given and in which the serving of food and/or beverages is clearly Incidental to such performances. This definition Shall not, however, supersede the provisions of Section 9.11.010 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-1-86 § 1 (part), 1986)  
9.11.030 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter Shall not apply to: 
A.  A theater, concert hall, or other similar Establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances; or 
B.  An Establishment not serving Alcoholic Beverages for consumption on its Premises; or 
C.  Any Act authorized or prohibited by any statute of the State. 
(Ord. 0-1-86 § 1 (part), 1986)  
9.11.040 - Female saloon entertainer. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any Person, while acting as an entertainer in a saloon, to be unclothed, or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of her breasts below the top of the areola. 
(Ord. 0-1-86 § 1 (part), 1986)  
9.11.050 - Employing Person to engage in conduct. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any Person to employ, procure, Permit or assist any female Person to engage in conduct prohibited by the provisions of Section 9.11.040. 
(Ord. 0-1-86 § 1 (part), 1986)  
9.11.060 - Licensee Permitting in Premises. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any licensee to Permit any female Person who exposes to public view any portion of her breasts below the top of the areola to remain in or upon the licensed Premises. 
(Ord. 0-1-86 § 1 (part), 1986)  
9.11.070 - Manager Permitting in Premises. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any manager or managing Employee of a licensee, or officer or Director of a corporate licensee, who is then present on the licensed Premises, to Permit any female Person, who exposes to public view any portion of her breasts below the top of the areola, to remain in or upon the licensed Premises. 
(Ord. 0-1-86 § 1 (part), 1986)  
9.11.080 - Violations of provisions—Penalties. 
Any Act made a misdemeanor by the provisions of this chapter Shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six Months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 0-1-86 § 1 (part), 1986)  
9.11.090 - Violations of provisions—Nuisances. 
In addition to any other penalty provided by Law, the Violation of the provisions of this chapter Shall also constitute a Nuisance and May be abated by action by the City seeking an injunction to prohibit the further and continued Violation thereof. 
(Ord. 0-1-86 § 1 (part), 1986)  
9.11.100 - Severability. 
It is declared that it is the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter are severable and, if any thereof are held to be invalid, that Shall not affect the remainder. 
(Ord. 0-1-86 § 1 (part), 1986)  
Chapter 9.12 - GAMBLING* 
 
9.12.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to conform Laws relating to gaming clubs within the City to the provisions of California Business and Profession Code Section 19819 and 19819.5(a) which read as follows: 
19819. No gaming club Shall be located within the territorial limits of any County, City or City and County which had not Permitted gaming clubs prior to January 1, 1984 unless a majority of electors voting thereon affirmatively Approved a measure Permitting legal gambling with that City, County or City and County. 
. . . . 
19819.5(a). On or after January 1, 1996, neither the governing Board nor the Electors of a County, City, or City and County that has not authorized legal gaming within its boundaries prior to January 1, 1996 Shall authorize legal gaming. 
The City Council finds and determines that to Permit the Establishment and operation of gaming clubs in the City would be contrary to the public health, safety and welfare of the Residents of the City. 
(Ord. 0-1-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
9.12.020 - Applications prohibited. 
No Application to establish or operate a gaming club in the City Shall be accepted or processed unless and until the electors of the City affirmatively propose and approve an initiative measure in accord with California Law Permitting legal gambling within the City. 
(Ord. 0-1-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
9.12.030 - City Council prohibited from proposing ballot measure. 
No ballot measure addressing the issue of legal gambling Shall be proposed by the City Council. In the event such a ballot measure is Approved through the initiative process, any Application Fee for a license to operate a gaming club in the City Shall include such sum of money as is necessary to reimburse the City for all costs and expenses incurred by the City with respect to such ballot measure, as determined by the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 0-1-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
9.12.040 - Games prohibited. 
All games played with cards, dice, or other instrument, thing, device or machine for money, chips, credit, or any other article exchangeable for or redeemable in money, which games are not prohibited by any Law of the State of California are unlawful within the City. 
(Ord. 0-1-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
9.12.050 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person, or Persons, violating any provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof Shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding three Months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 0-1-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
Chapter 9.13 - BINGO GAMES 
 
9.13.010 - Organizations eligible for City license to conduct Bingo games. 
Bingo games Shall be allowed for the benefit of organizations exempted from the payment of bank and corporation tax by Subsections 23701A, 23701B, 23701D, 23701E, 23701F, 23701G, or 23701L of the California Revenue and Taxation Code and by Mobilehome Park associations and senior citizen's organizations; provided, that the proceeds of such games are Used only for charitable purposes. 
(Ord. 1531 § 1, 1978: Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.020 - Application for license. 
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain such license to conduct Bingo games in the City Shall file an Application upon a form prescribed by the license Collector in the office of the Finance Director. The Application Shall be accompanied by Written evidence that the organization is one included in Section 9.13.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 1531 § 2, 1978: Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.030 - Applicant Must be qualified. 
No license Shall be issued to any organization unless such Applicant is an eligible organization under Section 9.13.010 and its Application conforms to the requirement, terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.040 - Contents of Application. 
The Application for a license required by Section 9.13.020 Shall contain the Following: 
A.  The name of the Applicant organization and a statement that the Applicant is an eligible organization under Section 9.13.010; 
B.  The name and signature of at least two officers, including the presiding officer, of the corporation or community chest and the Trustee of any trust; 
C.  The particular Property within the City, including the Street number Used by such Applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the Applicant is organized, on which Property Bingo games will be conducted, together with the Occupancy capacity of such place; 
D.  Proposed Days of week and hours of Day for conduct of Bingo games; 
E.  That the Applicant agrees to conduct Bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter, as they May be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct Bingo games May be revoked by the City Manager upon Violation of any of such provisions; 
F.  Said Application Shall be signed by the Applicant under penalty of perjury; 
G.  The annual license Fee fixed by the City Council by Resolution Shall accompany the Application. 
(Ord. 1531 § 3, 1978: Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.050 - Investigation of Applicant. 
Upon receipt of the completed Application and the Fee, the Finance Director Shall refer the same to interested Departments of the City, including, but not limited to, the City Manager, City Attorney, Planning and Special Services Department, Police Department, and the Fire Department, for investigation as to whether or not all the statements in the Application are true and whether or not the Property of the Applicant qualifies and the extent to which it qualifies, as Property on which Bingo games May lawfully be conducted, as to fire, Occupancy, and other applicable restrictions. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.060 - Contents of license. 
Upon being satisfied that the Applicant is fully qualified, under the Law, to conduct Bingo games in the City, the Finance Director Shall issue a license to said Applicant, which Shall contain the Following information: 
A.  The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued; 
B.  The address where Bingo games are authorized to be conducted; 
C.  The Occupancy capacity of the room in which Bingo games are to be conducted; 
D.  The date of expiration of such license; 
E.  Such other information as May be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.070 - Summary suspension of license. 
Whenever it appears to the Chief of Police that the licensee is conducting a Bingo game in Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the Chief of Police Shall have the authority to summarily suspend the license and order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any Bingo games. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.080 - Appeal of revocation to City Council. 
A.  Any holder of a license whose license is revoked under this chapter Shall have the right, within ten Days after receiving Notice in writing of the revocation, to file a Written Appeal to the City Council. Such Appeal Shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The City Council Shall hold a hearing on the Appeal within thirty Days after its receipt by the City, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and Shall cause the appellant to be given at least ten Days' Written Notice of such hearing. At the hearing, the appellant or its authorized Representative Shall have the right to present evidence and a Written or oral argument, or both, in support of his Appeal. The determination of the City Council on the Appeal Shall be final. 
B.  Any organization whose license is finally revoked May not again apply for a license to conduct Bingo games in the City for a period of one Year from the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, such organization May again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of said exemption. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.090 - Definition of Bingo. 
As Used in this chapter "Bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of Designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.100 - Maximum amount of prize. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any Bingo games Shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind; or both, for each separate game which is held. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.110 - Profits to be kept in separate fund or account. 
All profits derived from a Bingo game Shall be kept in a special fund or account and Shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. The licensee Shall keep a full and accurate record of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of Bingo games which are authorized by this chapter. The Chief of Police or his appointee Shall have the right to examine and audit such record at any reasonable time and licensee Shall fully cooperate with the City by making such record available. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.120 - Financial interest in licensee only. 
No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the licensee Shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such Bingo game. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.130 - Exclusive operation by licensee. 
A Bingo game Shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Such members Shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any Bingo game. Only the licensee Shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game. The licensee Shall furnish the Chief of Police with the names and residence addresses of all its members. The members who staff or operate the game Shall furnish the Chief of Police with such information as he reasonably requires to determine that they are of good moral character. Persons determined by the Chief of Police not to be of good moral character Shall not operate or staff a game. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.140 - Bingo games open to public. 
All Bingo games Shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensee organization. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.150 - Attendance limited to Occupancy capacity. 
Notwithstanding that Bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any Bingo game Shall be limited to the Occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the Fire Department and Building Department of the City, in accordance with applicable Laws and regulations. Licensee Shall not reserve seats or space for any Person. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.160 - Bingo games conducted only on licensee's Property. 
A licensee Shall conduct a Bingo game only on Property owned or leased by it, which Property is Used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The license issued under this chapter Shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct Bingo games only on such Property, the address of which is stated in the Application. In the event the described Property ceases to be so Used, the license Shall have no further force or effect. A new license May be obtained by an eligible organization upon Application under this chapter when it again has Property owned or leased by it, which Property is Used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. 
(Ord. 1531 § 4, 1976: Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.170 - Minors not to participate. 
No Person under eighteen Years of age Shall be allowed to participate in a Bingo game. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.180 - Intoxicated Persons not to participate. 
No Person who is obviously intoxicated Shall be allowed to participate in a Bingo game. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.190 - Hours of operation. 
No licensee Shall conduct any Bingo game more than six hours out of any twenty-four-hour period, nor more than once in any seven-Day period. No Bingo game Shall be conducted between two a.m. and ten a.m. 
(Ord. 1627, 1982: Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.200 - Participant Must be present. 
No Person Shall be allowed to participate in a Bingo game, unless the Person is physically present at the time and place in which the Bingo game is being conducted. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.210 - Receipt or payment of profit by Person a misdemeanor under State Law. 
It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5B of the Penal Code of the State of California for any Person to receive or pay a profit, wage or salary for any Bingo game authorized under this chapter, a Violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars. A Violation of any provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, other than Subdivision B, is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1531 § 5, 1978: Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
9.13.220 - City May enjoin Violation. 
The City May bring an action in Court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a Violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1976)  
Chapter 9.14 - BLINDER RACKS 
 
9.14.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise stated, certain words and phrases Used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Blinder Rack" means an opaque piece of Material or other device, which when placed in front of Materials providing a public display of Harmful Matter serves to completely obscure the Harmful Matter, and which is placed in such manner that it obscures at least the lower two-thirds portion of the harmful Material from exposure to view. 
"Exhibit" means to show or display. 
"Harmful Matter" means Matter, taken as a whole, which to the average Person, applying contemporary statewide standards, Appeals to the prurient interest, and is Matter which, taken as a whole, depicts or describes in a patently offensive way sexual conduct and which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for Minors. 
"Matter" means any book, magazine, newspaper, video recording or other printed or Written Material or any picture, drawing, photograph, Motion Picture or other pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription, or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction or any other articles, equipment, machines or Materials. 
"Minor" means any natural Person under eighteen Years of age. 
"Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity. 
(Ord. 0-13-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
9.14.020 - Requirement of Blinder Racks. 
No Person Shall Exhibit Matter which is defined as Harmful Matter and is therefore harmful to Minors in any Public Place, other than a Public Place from which Minors are excluded, unless Blinder Racks are placed in front of the Matter. 
(Ord. 0-13-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
9.14.030 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person, or Persons, violating any of the provisions of this chapter Shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof Shall be subject to punishment by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for not more than one Year, or by both such fine or imprisonment. 
(Ord. 0-13-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 9.15 - HOST OBLIGATIONS TO PROTECT MINORS FROM ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AT GATHERINGS 
 
9.15.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth in this Section: 
"Alcohol" shall have the same meaning as in California Business and Professions Code section 23003, as it may be amended from time to time, or any successor section. 
"Alcoholic Beverage" shall have the same meaning as in California Business and Professions Code section 23004, as it may be amended from time to time, or any successor section. 
"Controlled Substance" shall mean any controlled substance listed in the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (California Health and Safety Code section 11000 et seq.) or the Federal Controlled Substances Act (21 USC 801 et seq.), as they may be amended from time to time. 
"Gathering" means a group of two or more persons who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity at a residence or on other public or private property. 
"Guardian" means: (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
"Harmful Substances" shall include all of the following, as defined in this Chapter: alcohol, alcoholic beverage, controlled substance, inhalant, marijuana and tobacco products. 
"Inhalant" includes but is not limited to any aerosol or aerosol spray, any volatile solvent including but not limited to toluene or any substance or material containing toluene, any gas including but not limited to nitrous oxide or any substance containing nitrous oxide, nitrites (commonly known as "poppers," "snappers," or "whippets"), and any other chemical substance or chemical compound that is inhaled for the purpose of becoming intoxicated. 
"Marijuana" shall have the same meaning as in California Health and Safety Code section 11018 or United States Code, Title 21, section 802, as they may be amended from time to time, or any successor sections. 
"Minor" means any person under 21 years of age for purposes of alcohol, alcoholic beverages, controlled substances, inhalants and marijuana, and under the age of 18 years of age for purposes of tobacco products. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person. 
"Premises" means any residence or other private property, individual unit or place, including any commercial or business premises. 
"Public Place" means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
"Tobacco Products" shall have the same meaning as in Chapter 9.22 of this Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. O-02-12, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
9.15.020 - Host obligations. 
A.  Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any person to permit, allow, or host a gathering at his or her place of residence or other private property, public place, or any other premises under his or her control where any harmful substances have been consumed by a minor, if such person either knows or reasonably should know that a minor has consumed any harmful substances. 
B.  Any person who permits, allows or hosts a gathering shall be rebuttably presumed to have actual or constructive knowledge that minors have consumed harmful substances if such person is present at the premises of the gathering at the time any minor consumes a harmful substance, or if that person has not taken all reasonable steps necessary to prevent the consumption of harmful substances by minors, as set forth in subdivision subsection 9.15.020 E. below. 
C.  This Section shall not apply to gatherings where religious services and/or activities protected by Article I, Section 4 of the California Constitution are exercised, nor shall the prohibition apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or guardian. 
D.  This Section shall not apply to any location or place regulated by the California Department of Alcohol and Beverage Control. 
E.  It is the duty of any person who permits, allows or hosts a gathering at his or her place of residence, other private property, public place, or any other premises under his or her control, where minors will be present, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of harmful substances by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps shall include, at a minimum, the following: (1) preventing any access by minors to any harmful substances at the gathering; (2) controlling access to alcoholic beverages and tobacco products at the gathering; (3) controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages and tobacco products at the gathering to an amount which can be monitored and its access controlled effectively; (4) verifying the age of persons who consume alcoholic beverages or tobacco products at the gathering by inspecting drivers licenses or other government-issued identification cards; (5) prohibiting the use of controlled substances and marijuana at the gathering; (6) prohibiting the defined use of inhalants at the gathering (e.g., inhaled for the purpose of becoming intoxicated); and (7) monitoring the activities of all persons at the gathering, including minors. 
F.  A person who hosts a gathering shall not be in violation of this Chapter if he or she, before any other person makes a complaint to the Colton Police Department or other law enforcement agency, seeks assistance from the Colton Police Department or other law enforcement agency to either: (1) remove any person who refuses to abide by the host's rules or requirements with respect to his or her performance of the duties imposed by this Chapter; or (2) terminate the gathering because the host has been unable to prevent minors from consuming harmful substances, despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so. 
(Ord. No. O-02-12, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
9.15.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Criminal violations of this Chapter shall be misdemeanors and shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 8.02 of this Code. 
B.  Amounts of fines and/or penalties for violations of this Chapter shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
C.  Nothing in this Chapter in any way limits any other remedy that may be available to the City, or any penalty that may be imposed by the City. 
(Ord. No. O-02-12, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
9.15.040 - Collection of enforcement costs. 
As provided for in Section 8.02.010 of this Code, every violation of this Chapter 9.15 shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and abated by the City. The City may seek reimbursement for actual costs associated with the enforcement of this Chapter pursuant to Chapters 8.02 and 8.12 of the Colton Municipal Code, as well as any other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. O-02-12, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE  
Chapter 9.16 - DISTURBING THE PEACE 
 
9.16.010 - Prohibited—Penalty. 
A.  Prohibition. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code and in addition thereto, it Shall be unlawful and is hereby declared a Public Nuisance for any Person or entity to willfully make, suffer, Permit, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, and unusual Noise or any disturbance, commotion, gathering or event, which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes or tends to cause discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable Person of normal sensitivity within the area. 
B.  Standards. The standards which May be considered in determining whether Violation of the provisions of this section exists May include, but not be limited to, the Following: 
1.  Noise: 
a.  The level of the Noise; 
b.  Whether the nature of the Noise is usual or unusual; 
c.  Whether the origin of the Noise is natural or unnatural; 
d.  The level and intensity of the background Noise, if any; 
e.  The proximity of the Noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
f.  The nature and zoning of the area within which the Noise emanates; 
g.  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the Noise emanates; 
h.  The time of the Day and Night the Noise occurs; 
i.  The duration of the Noise; 
j.  Whether the Noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; or 
k.  Whether the Noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
2.  Public Safety: 
a.  The number of Persons present in relation to the location Used; 
b.  The effect on nearby Pedestrian traffic; 
c.  The effect on nearby vehicular traffic or parking or both; 
d.  The extent of past threats to public safety at the particular location or at gatherings or events held or attended by the same individual or individuals or both; or 
e.  The presence of alcohol at the gathering or event. 
C.  Public Safety Service Fee. 
1.  In addition to any penalty or other remedy provided by Law, including without limitation this Code, a public safety service Fee May be imposed when: 
a.  A Peace Officer or any other City Employee charged with enforcing this Code has given Written Notice to a Person or entity responsible for a Violation of this section that such Person or entity is in Violation of the Law; and 
b.  A subsequent Peace Officer or any other City Employee charged with enforcing this Code is required to respond to the same Violation to control a threat to public peace, safety and welfare. 
2.  The service Fee, which May be established hereafter by Resolution of the City Council, May be collected by either of the Following alternatives: 
a.  A monetary judgment against the Person responsible for the Violation; 
b.  A Nuisance abatement lien or assessment against the Real Property at which the Violation occurs. If this alternative is Used, the Peace Officer or Colton Code Enforcement Officer Shall provide any Owner, lessee, agent, Occupant and Person having charge or control of the Real Property at which the Violation occurs with a Notice pursuant to Section 8.04.070 informing such Person or entity of a reasonable time frame within which to abate such Violation, which time frame may, notwithstanding Section 8.04.070, be less than seven Days. Said Notice Shall further inform such Person or entity that the City Shall hold a hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 8.04.100 to establish the City's right to recover the service Fee as either a Nuisance abatement lien or assessment; 
c.  As a criminal fine imposed in addition to any other fine authorized by Law. 
3.  The Chief of Police or his or her Designee Shall cause appropriate billings to be sent to the Person responsible for a public safety service Fee. Each Person responsible for the Violation for which a public safety service Fee is imposed under this section Shall be jointly and severally liable for the public safety service Fee. Where a Person responsible for a public safety service Fee is a Minor, the Parent or guardians Shall be jointly and severally liable for the public safety service Fee. Where there is more than one Person responsible for a Violation of this section, the Chief of Police or Designee May in his or her discretion bill each such Person for the portion of the public safety service Fee that is attributable to such Person's actions in causing the Violation of this section. 
4.  Any Person owing a public safety service Fee pursuant to this section Shall, in addition, be liable to the City for the City's Attorneys' Fees and costs in any action brought by the City to recover such amount or otherwise enforce this section, whether through a civil, criminal or administrative action or proceeding; provided however, that should the City chose to collect the public safety service Fee as a special assessment, the prevailing Party Shall be entitled to Attorneys Fees' and costs in any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding relating thereto. 
D.  Violations. Any Person or entity found violating this section Shall be subject to the imposition of an administrative fine and penalty pursuant to Section 8.12.030(A)(1), provided however, that notwithstanding Section 812.030(A)(1), additional Administrative Citations May be issued and fines imposed for every hour or other interval of time provided by the citing official during which the Violation continues uncorrected. Any gathering in Violation of Section 9.16.010(C) Shall be deemed an unlawful assembly. 
(Ord. 0-21-01 § 1, 2002: Ord. 838 § 1, 1953)  
Chapter 9.20 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
9.20.010 - Definition. 
As Used in this chapter, "Alcoholic Beverage" includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
(Ord. 0-18-01 § 1 (part), 2001)  
9.20.020 - Drinking prohibited. 
It Shall be unlawful for any Person to drink an Alcoholic Beverage while upon any Street, Alley, way, Sidewalk, Parkway, playground, or Park within the City, or within any Building owned by or leased to the City, whether such Person is or is not in or upon any automobile or other Vehicle or conveyance. 
(Ord. 0-18-01 § 1 (part), 2001)  
9.20.030 - Possession prohibited. 
It Shall be unlawful for any Person to possess any can, bottle, or other receptacle containing an Alcoholic Beverage, as defined in Section 9.20.010, that has been opened, or had its seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, in any City Park or other City-owned Property or other Public Place, including, but not limited to, City-owned or City-leased Buildings, Parking Lots, Streets, Alleys, ways, Sidewalks, Parkways and playgrounds. 
(Ord. 0-18-01 § 1 (part), 2001)  
9.20.040 - Retail off-sale Alcoholic Beverage licensees. 
It Shall be unlawful for any Person possessing any can, bottle, or other receptacle containing an Alcoholic Beverage, as defined in Section 9.20.010, that has been opened, or had its seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, to enter or remain on the posted Premises of, including the posted Parking Lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale Alcoholic Beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the Business & Professions Code. All licensees Shall comply with the Following requirements: 
A.  All retail package off-sale Alcoholic Beverage licensees licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the Business & Professions Code to operate in the City Shall post the licensed Premises with permanent Signs not less than seventeen inches wide by twenty-two inches high, with letters not less than one inch in height, which Signs Shall be Approved by the City and which Signs Shall include the Following language: 
"No Person in possession of any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any Alcoholic Beverage which has been opened, or seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, Shall enter, be, or remain on the posted Premises of, including the posted Parking Lot immediately adjacent to, this Business. California Penal Code 647e and Colton Municipal Code 9.20.040" 
B.  Required Signs Shall be posted such that they are visible to (i) patrons of the licensee; (ii) patrons using the Parking Lot immediately adjacent to the licensed Premises; and (iii) Persons on any public Sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed Premises. 
C.  For purposes of this subsection "Posted Premises" Shall mean those Premises which are subject to licensure under any retail off-sale Alcoholic Beverage license, the Parking Lot immediately adjacent to the licensed Premises, and any public Sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed Premises which are posted with Notices pursuant to this section. "Parking Lot Immediately Adjacent to the Licensed Premises" Shall mean any Parking Lot which is contiguous to the licensed Premises and is utilized by patrons of the licensed Premises, except a private residential Parking Lot immediately adjacent to the posted Premises. 
(Ord. 0-18-01 § 1 (part), 2001)  
9.20.050 - Officially sanctioned events. 
Sections 9.20.020 and 9.20.030 Shall not apply to any Designated area or location within the City for a temporary period of up to seven Days, which Designated area or location has been Approved by Resolution of the City Council upon the concurrence of the Chief of Police and necessary Approval of any State or Federal authorities having jurisdiction therefore. Sections 9.20.020 and 9.20.030 Shall not apply to any Designated area or location within the City for a temporary period of up to seven Days, which Designated area or location has been Approved by the City Manager, upon the concurrence of the Chief of Police, after determining that public convenience would be served and that the public health, safety and welfare would not be affected and necessary Approval of any State or Federal authorities having jurisdiction therefore. Such Designation Shall be reported to the City Council at their next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. 
(Ord. 0-18-01 § 1 (part), 2001)  
9.20.060 - Recycling. 
This chapter Shall not apply when an individual is in possession of an Alcoholic Beverage container for the purpose of recycling or other related activity. Nor Shall this section be deemed to make punishable any Act or Acts which are prohibited by any Law of the State of California. 
(Ord. 0-18-01 § 1 (part), 2001)  
9.20.070 - Penalty for Violation. 
Any Person in Violation of this chapter Shall be guilty of an infraction. Alcoholic Beverage licensees in Violation of Section 9.20.040 Shall also be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 0-18-01 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 9.22 - TOBACCO SALES RESTRICTIONS 
 
9.22.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to discourage actions that promote the unlawful Sale of Tobacco Products to Minors, as well as the unlawful purchase or possession of Tobacco Products by Minors. 
(Ord. 0-02-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
9.22.020 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise indicated, the Following definitions Shall apply to all provisions of this chapter: 
"Business" means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other Business entity formed for profit making purposes, including retail Establishments where Goods or services are sold, as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other Professional Services are delivered. 
"Minor" means any individual who is less than eighteen Years old. 
"Retail Tobacco Store" means a retail store utilized primarily for the Sale of Tobacco Products and accessories and in which at least eighty percent of the square footage of the available retail floor and shelf space is devoted to the Sale of tobacco-related products and accessories. 
"Self-Service Display" means an open display of Tobacco Products that the public has Access to without the intervention of an Employee. 
"Tobacco Product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco or any other form of tobacco that May be utilized for Smoking, chewing or other manner of ingestion. 
"Tobacco Retailer" means any Person that operates a store, stand, concession booth, or other place at which Sales of Tobacco Products are made to purchasers for consumption or Use. 
"Tobacco Vending Machine" means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper currency, or other things Representative of value, which dispenses or releases a Tobacco Product. 
"Vendor-Assisted" means only a store or Tobacco Retailer Employee has Access to the Tobacco Product and assists the customer by supplying the Tobacco Product. The customer does not take possession of the Tobacco Product until it is purchased. 
(Ord. 0-02-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
9.22.030 - Sale and distribution of Tobacco Products. 
It is unlawful for any Person, Business or Tobacco Retailer, except for a Retail Tobacco Store, to sell, Permit to be sold, offer for Sale or display for Sale any Tobacco Product by means of Self-Service Display or by means other than Vendor-Assisted Sales. 
(Ord. 0-02-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
9.22.040 - Identification required for purchase of Tobacco Products. 
It is unlawful for any Person, Business or Tobacco Retailer to sell any Tobacco Product to any individual who appears to be younger than twenty-six Years of age, without first verifying by means of photographic identification containing the bearer's date of birth, that the purchaser is at least eighteen Years old, unless the Person, Business or Tobacco Retailer has some other reliable basis for determining the purchaser's age. 
(Ord. 0-02-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
9.22.050 - Posting of Signs regarding Sales to Minors. 
No Person, Business or Tobacco Retailer Shall engage in the Sale of Tobacco Products without first posting a plainly visible Sign at the point of purchase of Tobacco Products which states: "THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW AND SUBJECT TO PENALTIES. PHOTO IDENTIFICATION IS REQUIRED." The letters of the Sign Shall be at least one-quarter inch high. 
(Ord. 0-02-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
9.22.060 - Unpackaged Tobacco Products. 
It Shall be unlawful for any Person, Business or Tobacco Retailer to sell or offer for Sale Tobacco Products not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer. 
(Ord. 0-02-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
9.22.070 - Tobacco Vending Machines prohibited. 
It Shall be unlawful for any Person, Business or Tobacco Retailer to locate, install, keep, maintain or Use, or Permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance or Use of a Tobacco Vending Machine for purposes of selling or distributing any Tobacco Product. 
(Ord. 0-02-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
9.22.080 - Time for compliance. 
A.  Any Person, Business or Tobacco Retailer required to make modifications to its Business Premises in order to comply with this chapter Must comply within sixty calendar Days of the effective date of this chapter. 
B.  Any Person, Business or Tobacco Retailer May apply to the City for a reasonable extension of time within which to comply with this chapter, provided that the Application for extension is submitted on or before the last Day of the sixty Day compliance period. 
C.  An extension of time within which to comply with this chapter May be granted only for good cause for a maximum of six Months from the effective date of this chapter. A good cause means the extension is necessary to prevent the Business from suffering unreasonable financial Hardship or to prevent unreasonable disruption in Business operations. 
(Ord. 0-02-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
9.22.090 - Enforcement. 
Any Person, Business or Tobacco Retailer violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and Shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six Months, or by both such fine and imprisonment and Shall be subject to administrative fines and penalties pursuant to Chapter 8.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-02-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 9.23 - PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE, PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS AND OTHER SYNTHETIC DRUGS 
 
9.23.010 - Purpose and intent. 
Recreational use of psychoactive herbal incense, psychoactive bath salts and similar products known as "synthetic drugs" has been documented to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal ideations, cannibalism and death. While state and federal laws and regulations prohibit some synthetic drugs, the makers of these drugs continually alter the composition of the compounds in their products so as to escape the purview of these laws and regulations. 
It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to prohibit the sale or possession of psychoactive herbal incense and psychoactive bath salts, as those terms are defined herein, in the City in order to protect and preserve the public peace, safety, health, and welfare of those within the City and to provide the City with reasonable measures to address the dangers to the community posed by synthetic drugs, including those not regulated by state or federal law. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to cease or limit or encroach in any way upon any field of law occupied by federal law or by the laws of the state of California. 
The prohibition of psychoactive herbal incense and psychoactive bath salts is necessary and in the interests of the public health, safety and general welfare because there is the substantial likelihood of the sale and use of these illegal drugs in the City of Colton. The sale and use of psychoactive herbal incense and psychoactive bath salts in the City would result in undesirable impacts to the community. Among these impacts are: increased potential for the sale of these controlled substances to minors and adults for their use, increased dependency on these controlled substances, increased harm to the users of these controlled substances, and increased risk of injury to persons or property by users of these controlled substances. 
(Ord. No. O-07-16, § 2, 4-19-2016)  
9.23.020 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Business" shall have the same meaning as the term is defined in section 5.02.020 of this Municipal Code. 
"Consume, consuming" or "consumption" shall mean to ingest, inhale, inject, smoke or snort (insufflate). 
"Distribute, distributing," or "distribution" shall mean to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver or supply, whether for monetary gain or not. 
"Person" shall include any natural person, business, firm, company, corporation, public corporation, club, trust, partnership, association or similar organization. 
"Possess, possessing" or "possession" shall mean to have for consumption, distribution or sale in one's actual or constructive custody or control, or under one's authority or power, whether such custody, control, authority or power be exercised solely or jointly with others. 
"Provide, providing" or "provision" shall mean offering to distribute or sell a product or substance to any person. 
"Psychoactive bath salts" shall mean any crystalline or powder product that contains a synthetic chemical compound that, when consumed, elicits psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects. The term "psychoactive bath salts" includes without limitation: 
1.  Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects and contain any of the following intoxicating chemical compounds: 
a.  Salvia Divinorum or Salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as Salvia Divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
b.  Cathinone (2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone), 4- methylmethcathinone (2-methylamino-1-(4-methylphenyl)propan-1-one), 4-methoxymethcathinone (1-(4-methoxyphyenyl)-2-(methylamine)propan-1-one), MDPV (methylenedioxypyrovalerone), MDMA (3, 4- methylenedioxy-N-methylamphetamine), methylene (3,4-methylenedioxy- N-methylcathinone), methcathinone (2-(methylamino)-1-phenyl-propan-1- one), flephedrone (4-fluoromethcathinone), 3-FMC (3- fluoromethcathinone), ethcathinone (2-ethylamino-1-phenyl-propan-1-one), butylone (ß-keto-N-methylbenzodioxolylbutanamine), a-PPP (a- pyrrolidinopropiophenon), MPPP (4'-methyl-a-pyrrolidinopropiophenone), MDPPP (3',4'-methylenedioxy-a-pyrrolidinopriopiophenone), a-PVP (1- phenyl-2-(1-pyrrolidinyl)-1-pentanone) or naphyrone (1-naphthalen-2-yl-2- pyrrolidin-1-ylpentan-1-one), 6-APDB (6(2aminopropyl)2,3 dihydrobenzo-furan), and analogs of MDA (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine); 
c.  Any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; 
d.  Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical structure similar to the above listed compounds; 
e.  Any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; or 
f.  Any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound; and 
2.  Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects and are marketed under any of the following trade names: Bliss, Blizzard, Blue Silk, Bonzai Grow, Charge Plus, Charlie, Cloud Nine, Euphoria, Hurricane, Ivory Snow, Ivory Wave, Lunar Wave, Ocean, Ocean Burst, Pixie Dust, Posh, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Red Dove, Scarface, Snow Leopard, Stardust, Vanilla Sky, White Dove, White Night and White Lightning. The term "psychoactive bath salts" shall not include any product, substance, material, compound, mixture or preparation that is specifically excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act ("UCSA") (Health and Safety Code §§ 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA's schedules of controlled substances (Health and Safety Code §§ 11053-11058), regulated by one of the UCSA's Synthetic Drug Laws (Health and Safety Code §§ 11357.5, 11375.5 and 11401), regulated by the Federal Controlled Substances Act (the "CSA") (21 USC §§ 801 et seq.) or approved by the Food and Drug Administration ("FDA"). 
"Psychoactive herbal incense" shall mean any organic product consisting of plant material that contains a synthetic stimulant compound that, when consumed, elicits psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects. The term "psychoactive herbal incense" includes without limitation: 
1.  Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects and contain any of the following chemical compounds: 
a.  Cannabicyclohexanol (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methylnonan-2-yl)phenol), JWH-018 (naphthalene-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone), JWH-073 (napththalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone), JWH-200 ((1-(2-morpholin-4- ylethyl)indol-2-yl)-naphthalen-1-ylmethanone), HU-210 or 1.1-dimethylheptyl-11-hydroxy-delta8-tetrahydrocannabinol) ((6aR,10aR)-9- (Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol), CP 47, 497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3- hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) and the dimethylhexyl, dimethyloctyl and dimethylnonyl homologues of CP 47,497 (2-[1R,3S)-3- hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) or AM-2201 (1-[(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]-(napthalen-1-yl)methanone), 1-Pentyl-3 (2- methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (also known as JWH-250), 1-Hexyl-3-(1- naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-019), 1-Pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1- naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-398), N-benzylpiperazine (also known as BZP), 1-(3-trifluoromethylphenyl)piperazine (also known as TFMPP); 
b.  Any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; 
c.  Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical structure similar to the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; 
d.  Any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; 
e.  Any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound; or 
f.  Any other synthetic cannabinoid. 
2.  Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects and are marketed under any of the following names: K2, K3, Spice, Genie, Smoke, Potpourri, Buzz, Spice 99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery, Earthquake, Black Mamba, Stinger, Ocean Blue, Stinger, Serenity, Fake Weed and Black Mamba. The term "psychoactive herbal incense" shall not include any product, substance, material, compound, mixture, or preparation that is specifically excepted by the UCSA (Health and Safety Code §§ 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA's schedules of controlled substances (Health and Safety Code §§ 11053—11058) regulated by one of the USCA's Synthetic Drug Laws (Health and Safety Code §§ 11357.5, 11375.5 and 11401), regulated by the CSA (21 USC §§ 81 et seq.) or approved by the FDA. 
"Psychoactive" or "psychotropic stimulant effects" shall mean affecting the central nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cocaine, methylphenidate or amphetamines. 
"Psychoactive" or "psychotropic euphoric effects" shall mean affecting the central nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cannabis. 
"Sell, selling" or "sale" shall mean to furnish, exchange, transfer, deliver or supply for monetary gain. 
"Synthetic drug" shall include psychoactive bath salts and psychoactive herbal incense, as those terms are defined hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. O-07-16, § 2, 4-19-2016)  
9.23.030 - Provision, display for sale, sale or distribution of synthetic drugs prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to store, provide, display for sale, distribute or sell any synthetic drug within the City of Colton. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to permit the storage, provision, display for sale, distribution or sale of any synthetic drugs from any real property owned, possessed, managed or controlled by such person in the City of Colton. 
C.  Merely disclaiming a synthetic drug as "not safe for human consumption" will not avoid the application of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-07-16, § 2, 4-19-2016)  
9.23.040 - Provision, display for sale, sale or distribution of substances claimed or represented to be synthetic drugs prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to claim or represent that a product that person is storing, providing, displaying for sale, distributing or selling is a synthetic drug within the City of Colton. 
B.  To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a product is a synthetic drug, the enforcing officer may consider any of the following evidentiary factors: 
1.  The product is not suitable for its marketed use (such as a crystalline or powder product being marketed as "glass cleaner"); 
2.  The business providing, displaying for sale, distributing or selling the product does not typically provide, distribute or sell products that are used for that product's marketed use (such as a liquor store selling "plant food"); 
3.  The product contains a warning label that is not typically present on products that are used for that product's marketed use (such as "not for human consumption," "not for purchase by minors," or "does not contain chemicals banned by section 11357.5"); 
4.  The product is significantly more expensive than products that are used for that product's marketed use (such as half of a gram of a substance marketed as "glass cleaner" costing fifty dollars); 
5.  The product resembles an illicit street drug (such as cocaine, methamphetamine or marijuana); or 
6.  The product's name or packaging uses images or slang referencing an illicit street drug (such as "Eight Ballz" or "Green Buddha"). 
C.  Merely disclaiming a substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug as "not safe for human consumption" will not avoid the application of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-07-16, § 2, 4-19-2016)  
9.23.050 - Possession of synthetic drugs prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to possess any synthetic drug within the City of Colton. 
(Ord. No. O-07-16, § 2, 4-19-2016)  
9.23.060 - Public nuisance. 
A.  It is a public nuisance for any person to store, provide, display for sale, distribute or sell any synthetic drug within the City of Colton. 
B.  It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the storage, provision, display for sale, distribution or sale of any synthetic drug on property owned, controlled or managed by such person within the City of Colton. 
C.  It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, display for sale, distribute or sell any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug within the City of Colton. 
D.  It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision, display for sale, distribution or sale of any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug on property owned, controlled or managed by such person within the City of Colton. 
E.  To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a substance or product is a synthetic drug, the enforcing officer may consider any of the evidentiary factors set forth in section 9.23.040 of this Chapter. 
F.  A criminal conviction is not required for establishing the occurrence of nuisance activity pursuant to this Chapter. The occurrence of nuisance activity may be established by documented evidence that the nuisance activity was witnessed by a code enforcement officer, peace officer or other witness willing to testify. 
G.  The remedies set forth in this Chapter are cumulative and additional to any and all other legal remedies available whether set forth elsewhere in the Colton Municipal Code, or in state or federal laws, regulations, or case law. 
(Ord. No. O-07-16, § 2, 4-19-2016)  
9.23.070 - Summary abatement. 
Because the use of synthetic drugs has been documented to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal ideations, cannibalism and death, any violation of this Chapter presents a grave and imminent danger not only to the person consuming the synthetic drug, but also to the public at large. If the code enforcement officer, based on the facts then known, determines that a violation of this division presents an imminent danger or hazard or is imminently injurious to the public health or safety, then that violation is punishable by the summary abatement procedures set forth in Section 8.04.150 of this Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. O-07-16, § 2, 4-19-2016)  
9.23.080 - Revocation of business license. 
No person holding a city business license and owning or operating a business in the city may use that business to store, provide, distribute or sell any synthetic drug or any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug. A violation of this section by the holder of a city business license, shall constitute grounds for modification, suspension, revocation, or any combination thereof, of said license. 
(Ord. No. O-07-16, § 2, 4-19-2016)  
9.23.090 - Penalties. 
A.  Misdemeanor violation. Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period not exceeding six months or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by both, provided that where the city attorney determines that such action would be in the interest of justice, he/she may specify in the accusatory pleading that the offense shall be an infraction. 
B.  Infraction violation. Where the City Attorney determines that, in the interest of justice, a violation of this Chapter is an infraction, such infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional infraction violation of the same provision within one year. An infraction is not punishable by imprisonment. A person charged with an infraction shall not be entitled to a trial by jury and shall not be entitled to have the public defender or other counsel appointed at public expense to represent him/her, unless he/she is arrested and not released on his/her written promise to appear, his/her own recognizance or a deposit of bail. However, any person who has previously been convicted two or more times during any twelve-month period for any violation of this division for a crime made punishable as an infraction shall be charged with a misdemeanor upon the third violation. 
C.  Separate Offense; Cumulative Remedies. Each person committing, causing, or maintaining a violation of this Chapter or failing to comply with the requirements set forth herein shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Chapter is committed, continued, maintained, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. The remedies set forth in this Chapter are cumulative and additional to any and all other legal remedies available whether set forth elsewhere in the Colton Municipal Code, or in state or federal laws, regulations, or case law. 
D.  Administrative Citations. In lieu of issuing a criminal citation, the city may issue an administrative citation pursuant to Chapters 8.02 and 8.04 of the Colton Municipal Code to any person responsible for committing, causing or maintaining a violation of this Chapter. 
E.  Additional Penalties; Costs of Abatement. In any administrative, civil, or criminal proceeding involving the abatement of a public nuisance, the City shall also be entitled to recover its full reasonable costs of abatement, including, but not limited to, investigation, analysis, and prosecuting the enforcement against the responsible party. The prevailing party in any proceeding associated with the abatement of a public nuisance shall be entitled to recovery of attorneys' fees incurred in any such proceeding, where the City has elected at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding to seek recovery of its own attorneys' fees. 
(Ord. No. O-07-16, § 2, 4-19-2016)  
9.23.100 - Seizure of evidence. 
Any product(s) or substance(s) stored, possessed, provided, distributed or sold in violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be seized by the enforcing officers and removed, stored and disposed of in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. O-07-16, § 2, 4-19-2016)  
9.23.110 - Exclusions. 
A.  This Chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully prescribed or to intoxicating chemical compounds that have been approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration or which are specifically permitted by California law, including without limitation, intoxicating chemical compounds that are specifically excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (Health and Safety Code § 11000 et seq.). 
B.  This Chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances that are prohibited by state or federal law, including without limitation, California Health and Safety Code §§ 11357.5, 11375.5, 11401 and the Federal Controlled Substances Act. 
C.  This Chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit any act that is positively permitted, prohibited or preempted by any state or federal law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. O-07-16, § 2, 4-19-2016)  
V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY  
Chapter 9.24 - PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
9.24.010 - Destroying or injuring prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any Person to destroy or in any wise injure Public Property in the City. 
(Ord. 241 § 1, 1908)  
9.24.030 - Intended Use not prevented. 
Section 9.04.010 Shall not be deemed to prevent the free Use of Public Property in the manner in which by its nature it was intended that it should be Used. 
(Ord. 241 § 3, 1908)  
9.24.040 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the County Jail not exceeding six Months, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or both. 
(Ord. 0-9-92 § 3, 1992: Ord. 241 § 3 1/2, 1908)  
Chapter 9.27 - GRAFFITI* 
 
9.27.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The City Council finds and determines that the writing, spraying, scratching, etching or otherwise affixing Graffiti or other inscribed Materials on public or privately owned real or Personal Property without the consent or Permission of the Owner is injurious to the public health, safety and welfare, for the Following reasons: 
A.  Graffiti Markings are often placed on real or Personal Property, or Structures or Components thereof, by gangs to indicate illicit control over certain locations or areas for purposes of criminal activity. 
B.  Graffiti Markings directly and indirectly encourage gang warfare, including drive-by shootings, and other Acts of violence that result in injuries and fatalities to gang members and innocent by-standers. 
C.  Graffiti Markings are destructive to public and Private Property and cause depreciation of Property values and depreciation in the value of adjacent and surrounding Properties. 
D.  Graffiti Markings result in blight and deterioration of Property and Business values in the community and lead to economic loss. 
The City Council also finds it necessary to enlist Property Owners to actively engage in immediately removing Graffiti and preventing its spread. In the past, the City has provided unlimited, free Graffiti removal services. While this is a valuable service to Property Owners, the City Council recognizes that such actions do not encourage Property Owners to deal directly with the problem of Graffiti and formulate their own ideas, solutions and defense strategies to prevent its spread. In addition, as a result of the City's limited financial resources and resulting reductions in available staff and crews directly assigned to Graffiti removal, the City Council finds that it Must develop alternative approaches to prevent the spread of Graffiti in the City of Colton. 
Therefore, the purposes of this chapter are: (1) to prohibit the defacement of public and Private Property with Graffiti and declare Graffiti to be a Public Nuisance; (2) prohibit the possession of Graffiti Implements by Minors; and (3) provide for the removal of Graffiti and the recovery of costs incurred by the City in such removal. By enacting the provisions contained herein, the City Council seeks to diminish the negative and undesirable impact of Graffiti and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Colton. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the Following terms Shall have the meanings provided in this section. 
"Abatement Costs" means and includes, but Shall not be limited to, the City's costs incurred to remove Graffiti from public or private real or Personal Property, including, but not limited to, the City's staff and administrative costs, investigation costs, Attorney's Fees, Court costs and the costs of repair and replacement of the defaced real or Personal Property upon which Graffiti is placed. 
"Aerosol Paint Container" means any aerosol container, regardless of the Material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance designed for or capable of defacing Property. 
"City" means the City of Colton. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Colton or his or her Designee. 
"Etching Cream" means any caustic cream, gel, liquid or solution designed for or capable by means of a chemical action of defacing, damaging, or destroying hard surfaces in a manner similar to acid. 
"Etching Tool" means an instrument, tool or device designed for commonly Used for marking, curing or defacing glass, and includes devices designed for marking surfaces and capable of marking glass. 
"Felt Tip Marker" means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip, which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth inch, containing ink that is not water-soluble. 
"Graffiti" means any inscription, word, figure, symbol, mark, or Design that is Written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn, inscribed, posted, painted or otherwise marked or affixed, including but not limited to stickers, on any public or private real or Personal Property such that it is visible from any public Right-of-Way or other Property. 
"Graffiti Implement" means any Aerosol Paint Container, Etching Cream, an Etching Tool, a Felt Tip Marker, Graffiti Stick, or gum label designed for or capable of defacing a surface. 
"Graffiti Stick" means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy or similar substance designed for or capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon Application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width and not water-soluble. 
"Minor" means any unemancipated Person who is less than eighteen Years of age. 
"Person" means an individual or firm, partnership, corporation or similar organization. 
"RESPONSIBLE PARTY" means and includes the record Owner of public or Private Property (excluding Property owned by the City) or Property owned by public utilities or Railroad corporations located within the City; a Person with primary responsibility for control of such public or Private Property; and any Person with primary responsibility for the maintenance of such public or Private Property. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.030 - Defacement of public or Private Property—Declaration of Nuisance. 
A.  It is unlawful for any Person to maliciously write, paint, spray, scratch or otherwise affix or apply Graffiti on or in any public or private real or Personal Property, or any Structure or Component thereof within the City. 
B.  Any Graffiti placed or existing upon public or Private Property located within the City is declared to be a Public Nuisance. Graffiti not voluntarily removed as provided in this chapter May be abated as provided herein. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.040 - Possession of Graffiti Implement—Minors. 
A.  It is unlawful for a Minor to possess any Graffiti Implement while upon Public Property, in a public Right-of-Way, or near any type of public infrastructure, except as May be authorized by the City. 
B.  It is unlawful for a Minor to possess any Graffiti Implement while upon Private Property, except as May be authorized by the Property Owner. 
C.  It is unlawful for a Minor to have in his or her possession any Graffiti Implement, except for the Minor's Use under the supervision of the Minor's Parent, guardian, instructor or employer. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.050 - Possession of Graffiti Implement—Generally. 
A.  It is unlawful for any Person to have in his or her possession any Graffiti Implement while upon any real or Personal Property of the City, other than while traveling on public Highways, Streets, Alleys or ways, except as May be authorized by the City. 
B.  It is unlawful for any Person to have in his or her possession any Graffiti Implement while upon public or Private Property, except as May be authorized by the Owner of the Property. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.060 - Furnishing to Minors—Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any Person, other than a Parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan or otherwise furnish, or cause or Permit to be exchanged, given, loaned or otherwise furnished, any Graffiti Implement to any Minor without the Written consent of the Minor's Parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.070 - Aerosol paint Sales—Display regulations. 
No Person Shall display or store for Sale, trade or exchange, any such paint accessible to the public without Employee assistance. Two acceptable methods for display or storage Shall include the Following: 
A.  A completely enclosed storage device permanently affixed to a Building or fixture therein that Shall, at all times except during Access by authorized Employees, remain locked; or 
B.  Display or storage behind a Sales or service counter where the public May not enter. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.080 - Graffiti reward system. 
A.  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.5, the City offers a reward of five hundred dollars for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any Person for Violation of California Penal Code Section 594 by the Use of Graffiti, not to exceed one thousand dollars per incident of Graffiti, for up to six Months after such conviction. 
B.  In the event of multiple contributors of information leading to such arrest and conviction, the City May divide the reward equally among the contributors. 
C.  A Written claim for reward under this section Shall be filed with the City Clerk. The City Manager Shall verify the accuracy of all claims and report to the City Council. A claim Shall be awarded only after City Council Approval of the City Manager's report. Each claim Shall: 
1.  Specifically identify the date, location and kind of Property damaged or destroyed; 
2.  Identify by name the Person who was convicted; 
3.  Identify the Court rendering the conviction and the date of the conviction. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. O-02-10, § 1, 8-3-2010)  
9.27.090 - Adult/parental responsibility. 
It is unlawful for a Parent or legal guardian having custody or control of a Minor to knowingly Permit, or by insufficient control allow, a Minor to possess a Graffiti Implement unless adult supervision to the Minor is provided. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.100 - Removal of Graffiti—Consent. 
Any Graffiti placed or existing upon public or private real or Personal Property located in the City is declared a Public Nuisance and May be removed as provided herein: 
A.  Any Person applying Graffiti within the City Shall have the duty to remove the Graffiti upon being provided twenty-four hours' Written Notice by the City or the public or private Owner of the real or Personal Property upon which the Graffiti was placed. Failure of any Person to so remove Graffiti Shall constitute an additional Violation of this chapter. Where Graffiti is applied by a Minor, the Parent(s) or legal guardian(s) Shall be responsible for such removal or for the payment of Abatement Costs for the removal of the Graffiti in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  Whenever the City Manager determines that Graffiti is so located on public or private real or Personal Property within the City, the City Manager is authorized, but not required, to provide for the removal of the Graffiti solely at the City's expense, without reimbursement from the Property Owner upon whose Property the Graffiti has been applied, upon the Following conditions: 
1.  In removing the Graffiti, the painting or repair of an area more extensive than where the Graffiti is located Shall not be authorized, except where the Structure or Property is City-owned and the City Manager determines that a more extensive area is to be repainted and repaired, or where the Private Property Owner, or other public entity, Utility company or Railroad corporation agrees to pay the costs of repainting or repairing a more extensive area. 
2.  Where the Structure or Property is owned by a public entity other than the City, the removal of the Graffiti May be authorized only after Securing the consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the Property or Structure and release of the City from liability. 
3.  Where a Structure or Property is privately owned, the removal of Graffiti by City forces or by a private contractor under the direction of the City May be authorized only after Securing the Written consent of the Owner and release of the City from liability. 
4.  The removal of Graffiti on Private Property by the City Shall be at the sole and absolute discretion of the City Manager and based upon available resources. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.110 - Removal of Graffiti—Nuisance abatement. 
A.  If a Private Property Owner's consent cannot be obtained or the Owner of the real or Personal Property upon which Graffiti has been placed has not removed the Graffiti or caused the removal of Graffiti within two calendar Days of its placement, then the City May remove and abate the Graffiti at the Owner's or other Responsible Party's expense pursuant to the Following procedures: 
1.  The City Manager Shall cause Written Notice to be served upon the Owner of the real or Personal Property upon which Graffiti has been placed, as such Owner's name and address appears on the latest equalized assessment roll. The Notice Shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with the requirements of the California Code of Civil Procedure. If the Owner or other Responsible Party cannot be found, then the Notice May be served by posting a Copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the Property upon which the Graffiti has been placed and not removed for a period of ten Days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City pursuant to California Government Code Section 6062. The failure of any Person to receive such Notice Shall not affect the validity of any proceeding hereunder. The Owner or Responsible Party Shall have two calendar Days after the date of service of the Notice to remove the Graffiti or be subject to City removal of the Graffiti and assessment of the Abatement Costs of such removal and a lien on the Property upon which the Graffiti was placed and not removed if the Abatement Costs are not paid. 
2.  The Notice Shall be on City letterhead in substantially the Following form: 
"NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI 
"NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required at your own expense to remove or paint over the Graffiti located on the Property commonly known as _______, Colton, California (Assessor Parcel No. _______) which is visible to public view within two (2) calendar Days after the date of this Notice. The Graffiti is visible to public view and therefore constitutes a Nuisance pursuant to Section 9.27.030 of the Colton Municipal Code. If you fail to comply with this Order, City Employees or private contractors under the direction of the City May enter your Property and abate the Public Nuisance by removing or painting over the Graffiti. The costs of abatement, including the labor, Materials, legal and other administrative costs associated with the removal of Graffiti on your Property, if not paid, will be assessed upon your Property and such costs will constitute a lien upon your Property until paid. 
All Persons having any objections to, or interest in, said Matters are hereby notified to submit any objections to the City Manager within two (2) calendar Days of the date of this Notice. 
At the conclusion of this two calendar (2) Day period, the City may, without prior Notice, obtain a Court Order to proceed with the abatement of the Graffiti on your Property at your expense. Any questions concerning this Notice should be directed to the Following: ___________." 
3.  Service of the Notice by the City Manager Shall be made on the Day the Notice is dated and by affidavit, the original of which Shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
4.  If any objections are submitted to the City Manager within two calendar Days after the date appearing on the Notice of intent to remove Graffiti, abatement of the Graffiti Shall be tolled and the City Manager Shall hold a hearing on the objections. If the City Manager overrules the objections, the Owner or other Responsible Party Shall have two calendar Days from the date of the Decision to remove the Graffiti. The Decision of the City Manager Shall be final. 
5.  If no objection is submitted during the two-Day period or if the objections are overruled Following a hearing, and if the Owner or other Responsible Party fails to remove or fails to cause the removal of Graffiti to be removed by the Designated date, or such continued date thereafter as the City Manager May authorize, then the City Manager May cause the Graffiti to be abated by City forces or private contract. The City or its private contractor Shall be Permitted to enter upon the Premises for such purpose upon authorization of a Court Order where required. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.120 - Payment of Abatement Costs. 
Should the City Manager be required to abate the Graffiti as set forth in Section 9.27.110 of this chapter, the City Manager Shall track and account for the Abatement Costs. The Owner or other Responsible Party Shall then be sent a Notice of the Abatement Costs and will be given thirty Days from the mailing of such Notice to pay the City for the full Abatement Costs. Nothing contained herein Shall be deemed to prevent the City Manager from granting a reasonable extension of time, upon showing good cause, to Permit the Owner or other Responsible Party to pay the Abatement Costs. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.130 - Nuisance abatement lien against Property Owner. 
A.  Should the Owner or other Responsible Party fail to pay the Abatement Costs within the time allotted, the City Manager Shall thereafter cause the collection of the Abatement Costs identified in the Notice as a Nuisance abatement lien in accordance with the procedure set forth in California Government Code Section 38773.2. 
B.  The Nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section Shall specify the amount of the lien (which Shall consist of the unpaid amount of the Abatement Costs); the name of the City (on whose behalf the lien is imposed); the date of the Notice of intent to remove Graffiti; the Street address, legal description, and Assessor's Parcel number of the Parcel on which the lien is imposed; and the name and address of the recorded Owner of the Parcel. The Notice of lien for purposes of this chapter Shall be in substantially the Following form: 
"NOTICE OF LIEN 
(CLAIM OF THE CITY OF COLTON) 
Pursuant to California Government Code, Section 38773.2 and the authority of Chapter 9.27 of the Colton Municipal Code, the City Manager of the City of Colton did on or about the _______ Day of _______ 20___ cause the painting over or removal of Graffiti at the Premises hereinafter described in the _______, 20___ Order to Abate a Public Nuisance on said Real Property, and the City Council of the City of Colton did on the _______ Day of _______ 20___ assess the costs of such abatement upon the Real Property hereinafter described since the same has not been paid. Further, the City of Colton does hereby claim a lien for such Abatement Costs in the amount of said assessment, to wit, the sum of _______ dollars and _______ cents. This amount Shall be a lien upon said Real Property until paid in full and Discharged of record. 
The Real Property hereinafter mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain Parcel of land in the City of Colton, County of San Bernardino, State of California more particularly described as follows: 
[ADD LEGAL DESCRIPTION] 
DATED this_______ Day of ________ 20___. 
City of Colton, California" 
C.  The Nuisance abatement lien Shall be recorded in the County Recorder's Office and from the date of recordation, it Shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien. If the Nuisance abatement lien is Discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or Foreclosure, Notice of the Discharge Shall be recorded by the City. The Nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien Shall be indexed in the grantor-Grantee index. A Nuisance abatement lien May be satisfied through Foreclosure in an action brought by the City for a money judgment. The City May recover from the Property Owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien in the event the County Recorder's Office imposes a Fee upon the City for processing and recording the lien, and Shall provide Notice to the Property Owner as Part of its Foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
D.  As an alternate lien abatement procedure to that procedure set forth in Government Code Section 38773.2, the City Council also establishes the Following optional abatement procedure resulting in a special assessment against a Parcel of land owned by a Property Owner upon which Graffiti has been placed and not removed. This optional assessment procedure is established pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.6. To establish an abatement assessment against land, the same procedural steps set forth in this section Shall be followed. However, the Notice of intent to abate Graffiti May be mailed by certified mail and Shall include a statement specifying that the Property May be sold after three Years by the Tax Collector for unpaid delinquent taxes. The Tax Collector's power of Sale Shall not be affected by the failure of the Property Owner to receive any Notice required by this chapter. Further, when the City Uses the alternate assessment procedures contained in this section, Attorney's Fees Shall be awarded to the prevailing Party, but only in circumstances when the City seeks recovery of its own Attorney's Fees. The assessment against land Shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as municipal taxes. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.140 - City program to remove Graffiti. 
Notwithstanding the City Manager's discretion to order the removal of Graffiti without cost to the Property Owner, the City Council may, by Resolution, establish a program and applicable charges to be charged to Property Owners ordered to abate Graffiti and who wish to contract with the City to send City crews to remove Graffiti existing on their real or Personal Property. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.150 - Additional remedies—Recovery from Parents of Minors. 
Pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1714.1(b), any Parent or legal guardian having custody or control of a Minor who knowingly Permits, or by insufficient control, allows the Minor to possess a Graffiti Implement without supervision thereof Shall by jointly and severally liable with such Minor for any and all costs incurred in connection with the removal of any Graffiti caused by the Minor, including all Abatement Costs, Attorney's Fees and Court costs resulting from the civil prosecution of any claim for damages, not to exceed thirty-seven thousand dollars, pursuant to the amount set by the California Judicial Council in accordance with California Civil Code section 1714.1(c). The City, including the Colton Police Department, Shall be entitled to seek full cost recovery from the Parent or legal guardian of a Minor found to be guilty of violating any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. O-02-10, § 2, 8-3-2010)  
9.27.160 - Additional remedies—Recovery of Law enforcement costs. 
A.  Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 594, a Person convicted for acts of vandalism including defacing Property with Graffiti May be subject to additional punishment imposed by the Court. Such punishment imposed by the Court May include the Following: 
1.  If the amount of defacement, damage or destruction is four hundred dollars or more, vandalism is punishable by imprisonment for up to one Year, or by a fine of up to ten thousand dollars. 
2.  If the amount of defacement, damage or destruction is less than four hundred dollars, vandalism is punishable by imprisonment for up to one Year, or by a fine of up to one thousand dollars, or by both a fine and imprisonment. 
3.  If the amount of defacement, damage or destruction is less than four hundred dollars and the defendant has been previously convicted of vandalism or affixing Graffiti, the vandalism is punishable by imprisonment for up to one Year, or by a fine up to five thousand dollars, or by both a fine and imprisonment. 
B.  These remedies are in addition to any other costs incurred or recovered by the City, and payment of these costs Shall not in any way limit, preclude or restrict any other right, remedy or action otherwise available to the City. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. O-02-10, § 3, 8-3-2010)  
9.27.170 - Additional remedies—Lien—Minors and Parents. 
A.  Pursuant to California Government Code, Section 38772, the City May make the expense of the abatement of Graffiti committed by Minors: (1) a personal obligation of the Minor causing the Graffiti Nuisance and a personal obligation of the Parent or guardian having custody or control of the Minor; and (2) a lien against the Property of the Minor or a lien against the Property of the Parent or guardian having custody or control of the Minor. In accordance with California Government Code, Section 38772(c), the County Probation Officer Shall be requested to report the names and addresses of the Parent or guardian having custody and control of the responsible Minor to the City Clerk. 
1.  Should the City Manager be required to abate any Graffiti committed by a Minor, the City Manager Shall track and account for the Abatement Costs. 
2.  The Minor or Parent or guardian having custody of the Minor Shall then be sent a Notice of Abatement Costs and proposed lien. The Notice of Abatement Costs and proposed lien Shall be substantially similar to the Notice of lien required by Section 9.27.130 of this chapter. If the applicable Party desires to protest the lien, the Party May do so by requesting an informal hearing before the City Manager in writing within two calendar Days from receipt of the Notice of Abatement Costs and proposed lien. The City Manager Shall then render a final Decision on the lien in writing within five Days and mail it by first class mail to the Party. The affected Party Shall then have five calendar Days to Appeal the City Manager's Decision to the City Council. The Appeal Shall be in writing. 
3.  The proposed lien Shall be calendared for Approval and confirmation by the City Council, whether an Appeal has been filed or not. 
4.  The Notice of Abatement Costs and proposed lien Shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with the requirements of the California Code of Civil Procedure. At a minimum, the Notice of the Abatement Costs and proposed lien Shall be personally served on the Minor or Parent or guardian having custody and control of the Minor at least seven calendar Days prior to the City Council meeting. If after diligent search, the Minor, Parent or guardian, as the case May be, cannot be found, the Notice May then be served by: (i) posting a Copy of the Notice in a conspicuous place upon the Property owned by the applicable Party for a period of ten Days; and (ii) the Notice Shall be published in a newspaper by the City Clerk pursuant to Government Code Section 6062. Notice of the City Council consideration of the proposed adoption of the lien Shall be served by First Class U.S. mail. 
5.  The City Council Shall have the authority to adopt a Resolution confirming the lien, which, Following adoption, Shall be recorded by the City Clerk in the County Recorder's Office pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.2(c). From date of recording, the lien Shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien. If the lien is Discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or Foreclosure, Notice of the Discharge Shall be recorded by the City. The lien and the release of the lien Shall be indexed in the grantor-Grantee index. A Nuisance abatement lien May be satisfied through Foreclosure in an action brought by the City. The City May also recover from the Minor, Parent or guardian of the Minor any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien in the event the County Recorder's Office imposes a Fee upon the City for processing and recording the lien, and Shall provide Notice to the Minor, Parent or Guardian of its Foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
6.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.2(d), the Resolution confirming the abatement lien Shall specify the amount of the lien; the name of the City (on whose behalf the lien is imposed); the date of the Abatement Order; the Street address, legal description, and Assessor's Parcel Number; and the name and address of the recorded Owner of the Parcel. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.180 - Additional remedies—Alternate assessment procedure—Parents of Minors. 
As an alternate abatement procedure to that procedure set forth in Section 9.27.170 of this chapter, the City Council also establishes the Following optional abatement procedure resulting in a special assessment against a Parcel of land owned by a Minor or other Person creating, causing, or committing Graffiti or the Parent or guardian of the Minor. This optional assessment procedure is established pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.6. To establish an abatement assessment against land, the same procedural steps set forth in Section 9.27.170 of this chapter Shall be followed. However, the Notice of Abatement Costs and proposed lien May be served by certified mail and Shall include a statement specifying that the Property May be sold after three Years by the Tax Collector for unpaid delinquent taxes. The Tax Collector's power of Sale Shall not be affected by the failure of the Minor, Parent or guardian to receive any Notice required by this chapter. Further, when the City Uses the alternate abatement procedures contained in this section, Attorney's Fees Shall be awarded to the prevailing Party, but only in circumstances when the City seeks recovery of its own Attorney's Fees. The assessment against land Shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as municipal taxes. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.180.5 - Additional remedies—Administrative Citation. 
A.  Pursuant to Sections 8.12.010 through 8.12.130 of this Code, whenever a Peace Officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter determines that a Violation of this chapter has occurred, the Peace Officer Shall have the authority to issue an Administrative Citation to any Person responsible for the Violation, or in the case of a Minor, to such Minor's Parent or legal guardian having custody or control of the Minor. 
B.  Whenever a Peace Officer charged with the enforcement of this chapter determines that a Violation of this article has occurred, the Peace Officer May issue an Administrative Citation for each Violation found to have occurred. 
C.  The amount of administrative fines for Violations of this chapter of this Code and penalties for delinquent payment of such fines imposed pursuant to this chapter Shall be established by separate Resolution of the City Council. 
D.  The Parent or legal guardian having custody or control of the Minor who has violated this chapter Shall be jointly and severally liable with the Minor for the administrative fines and related costs. 
E.  Administrative fines Shall be a debt to the City and subject to all remedies for debt collection as allowed by Law. When the administrative fine is unpaid within the prescribed time, the amount of the fine and related administrative costs May be recorded as a lien upon the Property of the Person responsible for the Violation, or in the case of the Minor, to such Minor's Parent or legal guardian having custody or control of the Minor. The lien procedure Shall be similar to the procedure described in Section 9.27.170 of this chapter of this Code. 
F.  Violations of this chapter May also be cited as criminal misdemeanor Violations in accordance with Chapter 8.02 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-02-10, § 4, 8-3-2010)  
9.27.190 - Land Use entitlements—Conditions. 
In approving Subdivision maps, Conditional Use Permits, Variances or other land Use entitlements, the City May impose any or all of the Following conditions for the purpose of controlling Graffiti: 
A.  Use of anti-Graffiti Materials on surfaces exposed to public view acceptable to the City Manager and kept on file at the Department of Community Development; 
B.  Use of Landscaping to screen or provide a barrier to surfaces prone to Graffiti; 
C.  Right of Access by City to remove Graffiti; 
D.  Applicant or Permittee Shall supply City with Graffiti removal Material on demand such as matching paint for a period of two Years from final Approval or Permit issuance; 
E.  Applicant or Permittee Shall immediately remove any Graffiti; 
F.  Applicant or Permittee Shall maintain extra paint matching the exterior portions of the Project, in order to paint over Graffiti. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.200 - Encroachment Permits—Conditions. 
In approving Encroachment Permits, the City May impose any or all of the Following conditions for the purpose of controlling Graffiti: 
A.  Use of anti-Graffiti Materials on surfaces exposed to public view acceptable to the City Manager and kept on file at the Department of Community Development; 
B.  Use of Landscaping to screen or provide a barrier to encroaching object; 
C.  The immediate removal by the Permittee of any Graffiti; 
D.  The right of the City to remove Graffiti or to paint the encroaching object to conceal Graffiti; 
E.  Applicant Shall provide the City with sufficient matching paint on demand for Use in painting the encroaching object to conceal Graffiti for the duration of the Permit. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.210 - Graffiti-prone surfaces—Retrofitting. 
Any Owner of an object, including but not limited to a Sign, Structure, Building, Wall or Part thereof, which has been defaced with Graffiti and required the City to remove the Graffiti more than three times in six Months, Shall Permit the City to enter upon his or her land for the purpose of retrofitting such surface with an anti-Graffiti coating at the Property Owner's expense to Permit more efficient or convenient removal of Graffiti. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.27.220 - Violation—Penalties. 
A.  Parental Civil Liability. In addition to the administrative and other penalties identified in this chapter, a Parent or legal guardian of a Minor May be held liable in a civil proceeding for damages to public or Private Property, including Attorney's Fees and Court costs, incurred as a result of such Minor violating any provision of this chapter. The Parent or guardian having custody and control of a Minor who has violated this chapter Shall be jointly and severally liable with the Minor. 
B.  General Civil Liability. In addition to the administrative and other penalties identified in this chapter, any Person May be held liable in a civil proceeding for damages to public or Private Property, including Attorney's Fees and Court costs, incurred as a result of such Person violating any provision of this chapter. 
C.  Criminal Penalties. In addition to the administrative and other penalties identified in this chapter, Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor subject to the penalties prescribed by California Penal Code Section 594. Any Person convicted of Violation of the provisions of this chapter who is granted probation, and any Juvenile offender under a Juvenile Court's jurisdiction, as prescribed in California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602, as a result of committing an offense set forth in this chapter, Shall, in additional to any other penalties prescribed by Law, make restitution to the victim. The Parent or legal guardian having custody or control of the Juvenile offender Shall be jointly and severally liable for restitution to the victim with the Juvenile offender. 
D.  Community Service Requirement. Upon the conviction of any Person for the Application of Graffiti, the City May request the Court to order the Person to complete community service not to exceed one hundred twenty-five hours for the first conviction. Upon the second and subsequent conviction of any Person for the same offense, the City May request the Court to order the Person to complete community service not to exceed two hundred fifty hours. 
E.  Driving Privilege Suspension. In accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 13202.6, upon the conviction of any Person for the Application of Graffiti committed while the Person was thirteen Years of age or older in Violation of California Penal Code Section 594, the City May request the Court to suspend the Person's driving privilege for one Year. 
If the Person convicted does not yet have the privilege to drive, the City May request that the Court Order the California Department of Motor Vehicles to delay issuing the privilege to drive for one Year subsequent to the time the Person becomes legally eligible to drive. For each successive offense, State Law requires that the Court suspend the Person's driving privilege for those possessing a Driver's license or delay the eligibility for those not in possession of a Driver's license at the time of their conviction for one additional Year. 
F.  Prosecution as Infraction. Notwithstanding any penalty provision provided in this Municipal Code, where the City Attorney or City Prosecutor (or in the case of a Notice to appear, the citing official) determines that such action would be in the interests of justice, the City Attorney or City Prosecutor May prosecute any such offense as an infraction. In the event a Notice to appear is prepared as a misdemeanor, the City Attorney or City Prosecutor May nonetheless prosecute any such offense as an infraction. Each and every Day that a Violation of this chapter is committed Shall be deemed a separate offense and Shall be punishable as herein provided. 
G.  Nothing in this chapter Shall prevent the City initiating civil, criminal or other legal or equitable proceedings as an alternative or in addition to the proceedings set forth in the administrative fine and penalty provisions of Chapter 8.12 of this Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 0-07-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. O-02-10, § 5, 8-3-2010)  
VI. - CONSUMER PROTECTION  
Chapter 9.28 - FORTUNETELLING AND OCCULT ARTS 
 
9.28.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the Following words and phrases Shall have the meanings given in this section: 
A.  "Chief of Police" means the Chief of Police or another City official Designated by the Chief of Police to act for him. 
B.  "Establishment" means the Premises, location or place advertised for or purported to be Used for the practice of Fortunetelling and/or occult arts. 
C.  "Fee" means for a Fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value in exchange for the practice of Fortunetelling and Occult Arts. 
D.  "Fortuneteller" means any Person who advertises by Sign, circular, handbill, newspaper, periodical, magazine or other means whatsoever the practice of Fortunetelling and/or occult arts, and Shall include any Person who advertises as a "psychic" or "spiritual reader" or "spiritual counselor" for the purpose of the practice of Fortunetelling and/or the occult arts. 
E.  "Fortunetelling and Occult Arts" means telling of fortune and forecasting of futures by means of an occult, psychic power, faculty, force, clairvoyance, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, numerology, hypnosis, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship, seership, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mindreading, telepathy or other craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, cunning or foresight, crystal gazing, mysteries or magic of any kind or nature. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.015 - License required. 
No Person, association, partnership or corporation Shall conduct, operate or advertise for an Establishment in which the practice of Fortunetelling and Occult Arts is carried on for pay, compensation or gratuity without obtaining and maintaining in effect a license as required by this chapter. 
No licensee hereunder Shall employ any Person who practices Fortunetelling and/or occult arts, and who offers to or solicits to perform Fortunetelling and Occult Arts, or who holds himself/herself out to be a Fortuneteller if said Person does not hold a current, unrevoked license as required by this chapter. No license Shall be issued to any Person who is not eighteen Years of age or older. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.020 - Exemptions. 
This chapter Shall not apply to: 
A.  Any Person solely by reason of the fact that he or she is engaged in the Business of entertaining the public by demonstrations or mind reading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings, at Public Places and in the presence of and within the hearing of other Persons and at which no questions are answered, as Part of such entertainment, except in a manner to Permit all Persons present at such Public Place to hear such answers, when not conducted in connection with the Business of Fortunetelling. 
B.  Any Person who conducts or participates in any religious ceremony or service when such Person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer or clairvoyant from any bona fide Church or religious association maintaining a Church and holding regular services, and having a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by all Churches of like faith; provided, further, that the Fees, gratuities, emoluments and profits thereof Shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of said Church or religious association. 
C.  Nothing in this section Shall be construed as exempting any Person from the payment of any applicable Business License Fee which May be required to be paid by the licensing provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.025 - Establishment. 
Every Person who engages in and is licensed for the practice of Fortunetelling and Occult Arts Shall maintain a fixed Establishment for said practice, and Shall maintain a current Business License for said Establishment as required by the licensing provisions of this Code and Shall conduct said practice only on the Premises of the fixed Establishment. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.030 - Classification of Use. 
The practice of Fortunetelling/occult arts is a Use similar to, compatible with and no more objectionable than those Uses Permitted in the C-2 General Commercial Zone. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.035 - License Application and renewal—Fees. 
An Application for a license to practice Fortunetelling and Occult Arts Shall be made to a duly authorized Representative of the Chief of Police under penalty of perjury on forms provided by the Chief of Police. The Application to practice Fortunetelling and Occult Arts Shall be accompanied by an investigation filing Fee of five hundred dollars, plus the Fee charged by Department of Justice for fingerprinting processing. 
Said Fees are not refundable in the event such Application is denied. 
Each license under this chapter Shall expire on June 30th of the Current Year. 
An unrevoked license May be renewed for one Year on Written Application to the Chief of Police, made on or before May 15th of each Year, accompanied by the required Fees. Said Application for renewal Shall be made on a form provided by the Chief of Police. 
The renewal Application Shall be accompanied by an investigation filing Fee of two hundred fifty dollars. The first renewal Fee for a license issued during the Months of January, February or March Shall be one-half the normal renewal Fee. Licenses issued April, May or June of the Current Year Shall expire June of the Following Year. 
Licenses and Fees required under this chapter Shall be in addition to any license, Permit or Fee required under any other chapter of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.040 - Application contents. 
Any Applicant for a license under this chapter Shall submit the Following information under penalty of perjury: 
A.  The full name and present residence and Business address and telephone numbers of the Applicant; 
B.  Any and all maiden, fictitious or other names ever Used by the Applicant; 
C.  Prior residence and Business addresses Used by the Applicant during the ten-Year period Preceding the date of the Application; 
D.  The birthdate and place of birth of the Applicant; 
E.  The Social Security number and a California Driver's license or California identification card number or other satisfactory government issued identification number of the Applicant; 
F.  The Applicant's height, weight, hair and eye color, and all distinguishing marks, scars or tattoos; 
G.  Business, occupation or employment history of the Applicant for a period of ten Years Preceding the date of Application; 
H.  The name or names under which the Applicant proposes to conduct said activity or practice and the Business address of the Premises where such practice is to be carried on and if it is to be in connection with a similar or other kind of Business; 
I.  The name or names, both true and fictitious, and addresses of any and all Persons, associations, partnerships or corporations holding an interest or involvement in said activity; 
J.  A statement of any and all criminal convictions, except Minor traffic offenses not Designated as a felony, including the nature thereof where they occurred and the sentence therefor; 
K.  A list of Fortunetelling or similar licenses currently or previously held by the Applicant and whether any such license had been revoked or suspended and the reason therefor; 
L.  A list of at least three character references unrelated to the Applicant by blood or marriage, and known to the Applicant for at least five Years. The list Shall include true and fictitious names and current addresses and telephone numbers of said character references; 
M.  Such other identification and information as is necessary to discover the validity of the Matters hereinabove specified as required to be set forth in the Application. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.045 - Required information and documents. 
Before the Application is considered to be complete, the Applicant Must produce, provide and submit to the Following: 
A.  A California Driver's license or California identification card, or other valid and satisfactory documentary evidence of the age and identity of the Applicant. To be "satisfactory," the documentary evidence of age and identity Must be of official issue of some governmental agency, be currently valid and furnish a photograph, weight, height, color of eyes and hair, sex, age and/or date of birth and signature of the Applicant. Birth certificates are not satisfactory identification as they do not include evidence or identity by description of the Person named; 
B.  A photograph of the Applicant, to be taken by an authorized Employee of the Chief of Police at the time of Application; 
C.  Fingerprints of the Applicant, to be taken by an authorized Employee of the Chief of Police at the time of Application; 
D.  Consent in writing, on a form determined by the Chief of Police, for the Use of all information available in the investigation herein provided to be made. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.050 - Separate license for individuals. 
Each and every Person engaged in or who proposes to engage in the practice of Fortunetelling and Occult Arts Shall file a separate and individual Application as set forth in this chapter and Shall pay separate and individual filing and renewal Fees. This Shall include Persons who engage in said practice under one common Establishment. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.055 - Notification of change. 
Any Person granted a license to practice Fortunetelling and Occult Arts Shall report immediately to the Chief of Police, or his authorized Representative, any change of individuals, associations, partnerships or corporations having a financial interest in the Fortunetelling Establishment, or any transfer of interest in said Establishment by such individuals, associations, partnerships or corporations. 
Further, any Person granted said license Shall report immediately to the Chief of Police, or his authorized Representative, any change of location or address of the Fortunetelling Establishment. Said change Shall be Approved by the Police Chief upon the determination that the provisions of this chapter have been fully met and upon the payment of a fifty dollar change of location Fee. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.060 - Investigation. 
The Chief of Police, or his authorized Representative, Shall conduct and complete an investigation of the moral character and reliability of the Applicant and either grant or deny the license within a period of thirty Days after the submission of the completed Applications, except as provided by the Following exceptions: 
A.  If good cause exists the Chief of Police May extend the period of investigation for a period of time not to exceed thirty Days, provided that Applicant is notified in writing that the investigation has not been completed; 
B.  If good cause exists the Applicant May appear in Person and submit a Written request for a thirty-Day extension on a form provided by the Chief of Police. Said request Must be submitted no later than five Working Days prior to the last Day required herein for the Chief of Police to grant or deny the license. Said request May or May not be granted by the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.065 - Refusal to issue license. 
The Chief of Police Shall not issue or grant a license if any of the Following occurs: 
A.  An Applicant fails to or refuses to furnish the information and documents required by this chapter or who submits false or misleading information on said Application; 
B.  The Fortunetelling Establishment does not comply with the City's Building, Fire, Health or Zoning Regulations; 
C.  Upon receiving satisfactory evidence that the Applicant has been convicted of, or has entered plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any Violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other Law or Ordinance relating to morals, theft, fraud or narcotics or other restricted drugs, unless the Chief of Police finds that the offense occurred ten Years or more before the date of Application. 
Denial of a license Shall be given to the Applicant in writing and Shall specify the grounds for such denial. Notice of the denial of the license Shall be deemed to have been served upon personal service of the Applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the Applicant at his or her last known address. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.070 - Revocation. 
The Chief of Police Shall revoke any license upon any grounds for which he May have refused the issuance thereof or upon conviction or upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for any Violation of this chapter or the operation of the Establishment does not comport with the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
To revoke a license the Chief of Police, or his authorized Representative, Shall serve upon the holder thereof, a Written Notice either by personal service or by deposit in a United States mail receptacle with appropriate postage affixed, to the address shown on the Application or otherwise more recently of record, that said license Shall be revoked effective upon personal service or five Days after the date of mailing of said Notice. 
A revoked license Shall be immediately surrendered to the Chief of Police or his authorized Representative. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.075 - Appeal. 
A Notice of Appeal Must be deposited with the City Clerk within thirty Days after denial of the Application or revocation of the license has been served. Upon the filing of a Notice of Appeal, the revocation of a license Shall remain in effect until such time as a Decision has been rendered. 
Upon the filing of the Written Notice of Appeal, the City Clerk Shall set the Matter for hearing before the Planning Commission, which hearing Shall be within thirty Days after the date of said Notice. The Planning Commission Shall receive a Copy of the denial or revocation Notice and Shall conduct a hearing to determine whether or not the license should be granted or reinstated. The scope of evidence presented to the Planning Commission Shall be limited to evidence regarding the reasons for denial or revocation. The burden of proof Shall be upon the appellant/Applicant. 
The Decision of the Planning Commission Shall be final with no right of further Appeal to the City Council. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.080 - Location of Establishment. 
No Person Shall conduct, carry on or engage in the practice of Fortunetelling and/or occult arts except in an area where the City's Zoning Laws, Rules and Regulations allow such activity. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.085 - Hours Permitted. 
It Shall be unlawful to keep open to the public or to conduct the activity and practices defined in this chapter on any Day of the week between the hours of twelve midnight and eight a.m. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.090 - Inspection. 
The City's Police Chief, Fire Chief and Building Official and their authorized Representatives, Shall have the right to enter the Fortunetelling Establishment from time to time during regular Business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with applicable Building, fire or electrical regulations and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.095 - Records. 
Every Person, association, partnership or corporation operating a Fortunetelling Establishment under a license as herein provided Shall keep accurate Business records. 
Said records Shall be maintained and open for inspection for a period of three Years and Shall be kept on the Premises of the Fortunetelling Establishment. Failure to keep and maintain said records as provided in this section Shall be grounds for suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.100 - Display of license. 
The license issued to a Fortuneteller Shall be prominently displayed at the licensed Premises. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.105 - Compliance and penalty. 
No Person Shall commence, engage in, carry on or advertise that he or she will engage in or carry on any Fortunetelling or occult arts activity as described in this chapter without first having procured a license as required by the licensing provisions of this chapter, or without complying with any and all regulations of such activity contained in this chapter or any other Ordinance of the City. 
Failure to comply with the provisions contained in this chapter Shall constitute a separate Violation of this chapter for each and every Day that such activity is so advertised, and engaged in or carried on. 
Revocation of a license Shall not be a defense against prosecution. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.110 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by Decision of any Court of competent jurisdiction, such Decision Shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. The City Council declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, clauses or phrases May be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.115 - Violation—Penalty. 
A Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars or imprisonment in the County Jail for six Months or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 0-28-89 § 1 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 9.30 - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
9.30.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases Used herein are defined as follows: 
A.  "Alarm Agent" means any Person who is employed by an Alarm Business, either directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the Following: selling, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring on any Building, place or Premises any Alarm System. 
B.  "Alarm Business" means any Person engaged in selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing, or monitoring any Alarm System or causing to be sold, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, installed or monitored an Alarm System in or on any Building, place or Premises. 
C.  "Alarm System" means any device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on Premises or for alerting others of the Commission of an unlawful Act, or both, and, when actuated emits a sound or transmits a signal or message. 
D.  "Audible Alarm" means a device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on Premises and which, when actuated, generates a sound audible at and outside the Premises. 
E.  "False Alarm" means an alarm signal which, under ordinary circumstances, will necessitate or cause response by the Police Department where an Emergency situation does not exist. 
F.  "Proprietor Alarm" means an alarm which is not serviced by an Alarm Business. 
G.  "Silent Alarm" means that type of Alarm System which, when activated, sounds a bell or buzzer or turns on a light at a predesignated place other than the location where the alarm has been installed. 
H.  "Subscriber" means a Person contracting with an Alarm Business for the leasing, servicing or maintaining of an Alarm System. 
(Ord. 1549 (part), 1978)  
9.30.020 - Exemptions—Special Alarm Systems. 
The provisions of this chapter Shall not be applicable to: 
A.  Audible Alarms affixed to automobiles; 
B.  Fire or Smoke sensor Alarm Systems or detectors when such systems are not Used as, or in lieu of, Intrusion detection devices or Alarm Systems; 
C.  Emergency medical crisis alarms when such systems are not Used as, or in lieu of, Intrusion detection devices or Alarm Systems. 
(Ord. 1549 (part), 1978)  
9.30.030 - Administration, regulations and standards. 
The provisions of this chapter Shall be administered and enforced by the City Manager. He and his Designees are authorized to make inspections of Alarm Systems, and of the Premises whereon such systems are located. He and his Designees Shall have the power to enforce such rules and regulations and standards as May be applicable pursuant to this chapter or other Ordinance or Law. 
(Ord. 1549 (part), 1978)  
9.30.040 - Intrusion alarms—General requirements. 
A.  No Person Shall install or maintain any Audible Alarm or other Alarm System which upon actuation emits a sound similar to sirens in Use on Emergency Vehicles or for civil defense purposes. 
B.  No Person who, as Owner or Business manager or real estate agent or as other responsible Employee or agent, maintains an Audible Alarm which does not contain a means to effect an automatic turnoff of the alarm within ten minutes after it is first activated, and which alarm is not serviced on a twenty-four-hour basis by an Alarm Business, Shall fail, refuse or neglect to notify the Police Department of: 
1.  His name and the telephone number at which he May be reached at any time of the Day or Night; and 
2.  The name and telephone number of an alternate Responsible Person who May be reached to turn off the alarm at all times that the Person listed in Subdivision 1 of this subsection is absent or otherwise unavailable. 
The Alarm Business or the above-listed Person, as appropriate, Shall be responsible for deactivating any alarm within thirty minutes of notification that such alarm has been activated or is ringing. 
C.  The ringing of any alarm for a period of time in excess of thirty minutes after such notification or reasonable efforts of notification has been made is a Public Nuisance which May be made the subject of a prosecution. 
(Ord. 1549 (part), 1978)  
9.30.050 - Faulty systems—False Alarms. 
A.  No Person Shall maintain, Use or possess an operative Alarm System, proprietor, or Audible Alarm which is faulty in that it signals or sounds an excessive number of False Alarms. 
B.  Any Alarm System, proprietor, or Audible Alarm Shall be presumed to be in Violation of this section whenever there are any one of the Following numbers of False Alarms whether activated through possessor's negligence, equipment malfunction or for any other reason under the ability to control of the possessor, whether such causes are sole or in combination: 
1.  More than two within any thirty-Day period; or 
2.  More than four within any ninety-Day period; or 
3.  More than six within any one-hundred-eighty-Day period; or 
4.  More than eight within any one-Year period. 
(Ord. 1549 (part), 1978)  
9.30.060 - Reimbursement to City for False Alarm costs. 
A.  Whenever the Police Department has responded to a False Alarm which is in excess of any of the tolerable numbers according to the criteria set forth in subsection B of Section 9.30.050, and whenever the Police Department has responded to any alarm sound, signal or message emitted or transmitted from or by an Alarm System, Proprietor Alarm or Audible Alarm, the Police Chief Shall compute the costs directly and indirectly incurred by his Department and any other Department of the City. This cost will be based upon one hour for each Employee responding to such False Alarm for any hour or fraction of one hour. Cost will be computed by using the Current "E" Step of a Police Officer's hourly wage of the Police Department, or other City Department Employee, responding to such False Alarm. The Chief of Police Shall promptly transmit a report of such costs to the City Manager, together with an appropriate report relating the facts and circumstances concerning the incident to which the report of costs relates. 
B.  The City Manager Shall review the reports and unless he determines that exigencies of the facts and circumstances show the incident to be excusable or that for any other reason it would not be in the public interest to pursue this reimbursement procedure, he Shall cause billings, for the total costs as reported by the Police Chief, or for such lesser portion thereof, as he determines is reasonable in view of the surrounding circumstances, to be mailed or transmitted to all of the Following or as many thereof appropriately as shown to be involved in connection with the particular incident and with the Alarm System thereby involved: 
1.  The Owner of the Alarm System; 
2.  Any Person, firm or corporation occupying the Premises where the Alarm System is located; 
3.  The Alarm Business responsible for maintaining or servicing the Alarm System, if the alarm signal responded to was activated through equipment malfunction or failure of the Alarm Business to adequately maintain or service the Alarm System; 
4.  Any other Person, firm or corporation shown to have activated the False Alarm (is such was the case) intentionally, carelessly or by negligent Act or omission. 
C.  Upon billings being mailed or transmitted per subsection B of this section, each Person, firm and/or corporation so billed Shall become indebted and liable, severally and jointly, for payment to the City of the entire amount due, and additionally for such further legal costs as May be incurred by the City, including a reasonable Attorney's Fee to be set by the Court, in the event the total amount billed is not paid and it becomes necessary for the City to resort to legal action in order to collect. In the event any billing is not paid within a reasonable time, an action or actions May be brought for collection of any amounts due pursuant hereto, in any Court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1549 (part), 1978)  
9.30.070 - Instruction as to operation of systems. 
It Shall be the responsibility of an Alarm Business, and no such Person Shall fail, refuse or neglect to instruct each Subscriber, and (if a different Person) the Occupant of the Premises wherein an Alarm System is installed, in the proper Use and operation of such device or alarm, whether silent or audible including specifically all necessary instruction in turning off the alarms, and that intentionally activating an alarm in the absence of an Emergency is a criminal offense under Section 148.3 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 1549 (part), 1978)  
9.30.080 - Alarm Systems terminating at the Police Department. 
No Alarm System Shall be installed which when activated causes an alarm or signal to be sent directly to the Colton Police Department or any Facility thereof, unless and until Written Permission therefor is received from the Police Chief. The Chief is authorized to limit the number of such devices terminating into the Police Department if he determines that any such device or devices would interfere with the normal functions of the Police Department. 
(Ord. 1549 (part), 1978)  
9.30.090 - Automatic calling devices. 
No Person other than an authorized agent of the Police Department Shall Use, maintain, operate, or attempt to Use or operate, or cause to be Used or operated any Alarm System or other device or combination of devices that is arranged, adjusted or programmed so that it will upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by other automatic means, initiate, call and deliver a recorded message to any telephone number assigned to the City, its Police Department or to any radio frequency Used thereby. 
(Ord. 1549 (part), 1978)  
9.30.100 - Alarm Agents registration. 
Alarm Agents Shall register their names and file a Copy of their State Identification Card with the Chief of Police of the City. No Fee Shall be charged; therefore, no Person Shall act as an Alarm Agent in the City without first so registering. 
(Ord. 1549 (part), 1978)  
VII. - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS  
Chapter 9.32 - JUVENILE CURFEW AND DAYTIME LOITERING* 
 
9.32.010 - Juvenile curfew regulations. 
A.  Purpose. The City is concerned with the level of Juvenile violence, Juvenile gang Activity, and Juvenile crime in the City. The City finds that Juveniles are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful and gang-related Activities and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime. Recent Local statistics regarding Juvenile crime and victimization indicate that enforcement of a curfew for Juveniles decreases Juvenile victimization and increases the number of arrests for violent crimes during curfew hours. The City Council believes that having an enforceable Juvenile curfew Ordinance is critical to preserving the public health, safety and welfare. 
The City further finds and determines that Juveniles are repeatedly detained and supervised by Law enforcement personnel for violating curfew and that Daytime loitering Laws impose an extraordinary burden on the manpower and resources of the Law enforcement services division because Juveniles taken into custody by Law enforcement personnel Must be supervised in an unsecured area of the Law enforcement station until they are released to a Parent or guardian. Law enforcement personnel who supervise Juveniles who have been detained are then unavailable to carry out Law enforcement duties in the Field which decreases the level of Police protection thereby decreasing public safety in the community. One purpose of this section is to inhibit crime committed by Juveniles at Night and by truants during the Day and to defray the reasonable costs that the City incurs to provide extraordinary Law enforcement services to respond to, detain and supervise repeat curfew and Daytime loitering violators. 
B.  Definitions. 
"Emergency" means the unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting State that calls for immediate Action. The term includes but is not limited to fire, natural disaster, automobile accident or requirement for immediate medical care for another Person. 
"Establishment" means any privately owned place of Business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
"Juvenile" means any Person under eighteen Years of age who is not emancipated pursuant to Law. 
"Parent" means a Person who is the natural or adoptive Parent of a Person. The term includes a Court appointed guardian or other Person eighteen Years of age or older authorized by the Parent, by a Court order or by a Court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of that Juvenile. 
"Public Place" means any place to which the public has Access and includes but is not limited to Streets, Highways, Parks and the common areas of Schools, Hospitals, office Buildings, transport facilities, shopping centers, and malls. 
C.  Curfew for Juveniles. It is unlawful for any Juvenile to remain in any Public Place or on the Premises of any Establishment in the City between the hours of ten p.m. of any Day and sunrise of the Following Day, unless the Juvenile is: 
1.  Accompanied by the Juvenile's Parent; 
2.  On an errand at the direction of the Juvenile's Parent; 
3.  Engaged in an employment Activity or going to or returning home from an employment Activity without any detour or Stop; 
4.  Involved in an Emergency; 
5.  On the Sidewalk abutting the Juvenile's residence; 
6.  Attending an official School, religious or recreational Activity supervised by one or more adults and sponsored by the City, a civic organization or other entity that takes responsibility for the Juvenile, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or Stop, an official School, religious or other recreational Activity supervised by one or more adults and sponsored by the City, a civic organization or another entity that takes responsibility for the Juvenile; 
7.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech or the right of assembly where the Juvenile is not intentionally exercising such rights solely for the purpose of creating a defense to the enforcement of this Section 9.32.010C. 
(Ord. 0-04-98 § 1, 1998)  
9.32.020 - Parental or guardian responsibility. 
It is unlawful for the Parent or legal guardian of any Juvenile to knowingly Permit or, by insufficient control, to allow the Juvenile to be in Violation of Sections 9.32.010C or 9.32.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-04-98 § 2, 1998)  
9.32.030 - Daytime loitering or truancy. 
It is unlawful for any Juvenile, who is subject to compulsory full-time education or to compulsory continuation education under State Law, to remain in or upon any Public Streets, Highways, roads, Alleys, Parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, Public Places, public Buildings, or the Premises or any Establishment, Vacant Lots, or other place away from his or her place of residence, including any Railway car, engine, truck or other Vehicle without the consent of the Owner or Person rightfully in charge thereof during the hours and on Days when the Juvenile's School is in session. The provisions of this section do not apply if: 
A.  The Juvenile is accompanied by his or her Parent, legal guardian or other adult having the care and custody of the Juvenile; or 
B.  The Juvenile is on an Emergency errand directed by a Parent, legal guardian or other adult having care and custody of the Juvenile; or 
C.  The Juvenile is going to or coming directly from his or her place of employment; or 
D.  The Juvenile is going to or from a medical appointment; or 
E.  The Juvenile is a student who has Permission to leave the School campus for lunch or School related Activity, and has in his or her possession a valid, School-issued, off-campus Permit; or 
F.  The Juvenile is going to or coming from a compulsory alternative education program Activity; or 
G.  The Juvenile is attending or, without any detour or Stop, going to or returning from an official School, religious, government-sponsored Activity, or other recreational Activity supervised by adults; or 
H.  The Juvenile is attending or, without any detour or Stop, going to or returning from an event or Activity directly related to the medical condition of the Parent or legal guardian; or 
I.  The Juvenile is officially enrolled in home Schooling; or 
J.  The Juvenile is exempt by Law from compulsory education or compulsory continuation education; or 
K.  The Juvenile is authorized to be absent from his or her School pursuant to the provisions of California Education Code Section 48205, or any other applicable State or Federal Law. 
(Ord. O-20-99 § 1, 1999: Ord. 0-04-98 § 3, 1998)  
9.32.040 - Violation and enforcement. 
A.  Violation and Penalties. Each Violation of the provisions of this chapter is a separate offense and is a misdemeanor. 
1.  Any Juvenile convicted of a misdemeanor for Violations of any section of this chapter May be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars or by a requirement to perform City or School-Approved work Projects or community service or both. If required to perform a Project, the total time for performance Shall not exceed twenty hours over a period not to exceed sixty Days, during times other than a Juvenile's hours of School attendance or Juvenile, Parent or legal guardian's hours of employment. 
2.  Any Parent or legal guardian violating any provisions of this chapter Shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction Shall be fined in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than three Months in the County Jail or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Enforcement. A Peace Officer May issue a citation to any Juvenile, Parent or guardian found to be in Violation of this chapter and May detain any Juvenile, until the Juvenile can be placed in the care and custody of a Parent or legal guardian or May transport the Juvenile to his or her home or to the School from which the Juvenile is absent. If cited, the Juvenile and a Parent or legal guardian Shall appear in Court as directed by the citation. 
(Ord. 0-04-98 § 4, 1998)  
Chapter 9.38 - POLICE SERVICES FEE FOR REPEAT MINOR CURFEW AND LOITERING VIOLATORS 
 
9.38.010 - Purpose. 
The City finds and determines that Minors that are repeatedly detained and supervised by Police Personnel for violating curfew and Daytime loitering Laws impose an extraordinary burden on the manpower and resources of the Police Department because Juveniles taken into custody by Police Personnel Must be supervised in an unsecured area of the Police Department until they are released to a Parent or guardian. Police Officers who supervise Minors who have been detained are then unavailable to carry out police duties in the Field and this decreases the level of police protection whereby decreasing public safety in the community. The purpose of this chapter is to defray the reasonable costs that the City incurs to provide extraordinary police services to respond to, detain and supervise repeat curfew and Daytime loitering violators. 
(Ord. 0-24-96 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.38.020 - Definitions. 
As Used in this chapter, the Following terms Shall have the Following meanings: 
"Repeat Curfew or Daytime Loitering Violator" means any Minor (1) who has been detained and taken into custody by City Police Personnel on more than one occasion in a twelve-Month period for violating Section 9.32.010 or Section 9.36.020 of this Code and (2) who has been reprimanded by the San Bernardino Juvenile Court because said Court found it to be true that the Minor violated Section 9.32.010 or Section 9.36.020 of this Code on more than one occasion in a twelve-Month period. 
"Responsible Party" means any Parent, legal guardian, or other Person in charge or control of repeat curfew violator. 
(Ord. 0-24-96 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.38.030 - Police service Fee established—Debt to City. 
A.  A Responsible Party Shall be liable for Police Services Fee whenever the City's Police Personnel respond to, detain and supervise a Repeat Curfew or Daytime Loitering Violator. The City Council Shall establish the amount of the Police Services Fee by Resolution. 
B.  The Police Services Fee charged to a Responsible Party Shall be a debt to the City by the Responsible Party. Any Responsible Party owing money to the City pursuant to this chapter Shall be liable in an Action brought by the City in its own name to recover such amount including reasonable Attorney's Fees. 
(Ord. 0-24-96 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.38.040 - Billing. 
The Chief of Police or his or her Designee Shall notify the Finance Department in writing of (A) the name and address of the Responsible Party; (B) the date and time of the initial Violation and the repeat Violation of Section 9.32.010 or Section 9.36.020 of this Code; (C) the names of the Police Personnel who responded to, detained and supervised the Repeat Curfew or Daytime Loitering Violator; and (D) the date that the repeat curfew or Daytime violator was reprimanded by the San Bernardino Juvenile Court for the repeat Violation. The Finance Department will bill the Responsible Party for the Police Services Fee established by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 0-24-96 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.38.050 - Appeal. 
Any Responsible Party who receives a bill from the Finance Department pursuant to this chapter May within fifteen Days after receiving such bill, file a Written request with the City Clerk Appealing the bill. The Written Appeal Shall state the grounds for such Appeal and the specific factual basis for the Appeal. The Responsible Party is deemed to have received the bill on the third Day Following the date that the Finance Department caused the bill to be placed in the United States mail. The City Manager or his or her Designee Shall review any Written Appeal filed with the City Clerk pursuant to this chapter and Shall prepare Written Decision on the Appeal within thirty Days from the date that the Written Appeal is received by the City Clerk. All Decisions by the City Manager or his or her Designee Shall be final. 
(Ord. 0-24-96 § 2 (part), 1996)  
VIII. - WEAPONS  
Chapter 9.40 - WEAPONS 
 
9.40.010 - Firearms—Use by authorized Persons only. 
It is unlawful for any Person, except one duly authorized and licensed by Federal, State, County or City government or governments to carry firearms, to Discharge any pistol, musket or instrument or firearm of any kind or description whatsoever, which throws or propels a bullet or a missile for any distance by means of gunpowder or any other explosive substance. 
(Ord. 1091 § 1 (part), 1961)  
9.40.020 - Firearms—Use Permitted in certain places. 
The prohibitions of Section 9.40.010 Shall not apply to a Person discharging such an instrument or firearm in a place or location expressly Used for that purpose and while said Person is lawfully on said Premises for the express purpose of so discharging the firearms or instrument. 
(Ord. 1091 § 1 (part), 1961)  
9.40.030 - Firearms—Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person violating any of the provisions of Sections 9.40.010 and 9.40.020 Shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the City Jail not exceeding ninety Days or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the Court. 
(Ord. 1091 § 2, 1961)  
9.40.040 - Slings, bows or spring gun Discharge. 
It is unlawful for any Person to shoot or Discharge any sling, bow or spring gun loaded or charged with any hard substance over or upon any Street or Public Place in the City or over or upon the Premises of any Person therein, without the consent of the Owner thereof. 
(Ord. 234 § 132, 1907)  
9.40.050 - Selling replica or facsimile of firearm—Violation—Penalty. 
A.  No Person Shall display for Sale or sell a replica or facsimile of a firearm within the City. 
B.  As Used in this chapter, the meaning of the term "firearm" Shall be the same as the meaning of that term under the "Dangerous Weapons' Control Law" located at Section 12000 et seq. of the Penal Code of the State of California. A "replica or facsimile of a firearm" means and includes any device or object made of plastic, wood, metal or any other Material, which can reasonably be perceived to be an Actual firearm, but is not an Actual firearm. Such term does not include any nonfiring replica of an antique firearm, the original of which was designed, manufactured and produced prior to 1898. 
C.  Any Person, corporation, firm or association of Persons who violates the provisions of this section Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in jail, not exceeding six Months, or by fine, not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by both. 
(Ord. 0-20-88 § 1, 1988)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC  
Chapter 10.04 - UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE* 
 
10.04.010 - Adoption. 
All of the provisions of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance 1960 Edition, adopted by the League of California Cities, except Sections 2 to 2.8 inclusive, Article II; Section 9.1, Article IX; Section 13a, 2 and 3, Article XIII; Sections 14.10a to F inclusive and Sections 16, 16.1, 16.2 and 16.3 of Article XVI, are adopted and made a Part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1074 § 1 (part), 1960)  
10.04.020 - Copies on file. 
Three copies of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance are on file for Use and examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 1074 § 1 (part), 1960)  
10.04.030 - Renumbering articles. 
Articles renumbered by virtue of the deletion of Article II of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance as numbered in said Ordinance after Article I Shall be changed to number one less than, as Designated e.g., Article III of the Ordinance Shall be renumbered Article II, etc. 
(Ord. 1074 § 2, 1960)  
10.04.040 - Article I—Modifications. 
Article I of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance is modified to read as follows: 
Section 1.20 Modifications. 
 1. In each instance where 9 A.M. is shown, to change the same to 8 A.M. o'clock. 
 2. In each instance where 7 A.M. is shown, to change the time to 8 A.M. o'clock. 
 3. In each instance in the Uniform Traffic Ordinance where the words "City Traffic Engineer" are Used, there Shall be and is hereby substituted in lieu thereof the Following: 
 "City Engineer" who Shall be one and the same Person as the duly qualified and Acting City Engineer for the City of Colton. 
 4. In each instance in the Uniform Traffic Ordinance, where the words "Central Traffic District" is Used, the same Shall be deleted and the context of the sentence or paragraph where said expression appears, read to exclude said words and other words having meaning only when applied to that expression. 
(Ord. 1074 § 4, 1960)  
10.04.050 - Section 2.9 of Article II amended—When Vehicles May be removed from Streets. 
Article II, subsection (a) of Section 2.9 is amended to read as follows: 
 Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations — Section 2.9. When Vehicles May be removed from Streets — Sub Section (a). 
 Any Vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a Street or Highway for 72 or more consecutive hours. 
(Ord. 1173, 1963)  
10.04.060 - Section 9.1 of Article VIII amended—Stopping, standing or parking—In Parkways—Prohibited. 
Article VIII, Section 9.1 of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance is amended to read as follows: 
 Section 9.1. Stopping or Standing in Parkways Prohibited. 
 No Person Shall Stop, stand, or park a Vehicle within any Parkway, provided, however at the locations hereinafter described 60 degree diagonal parking Shall be allowed between the Street side of the Sidewalk and the gutter lines: 
 1. Along the West side of 7th Street from the Curb return to a distance 80 feet north of the center line of "M" Street. 
 2. Along the north side of "M" Street from the Curb return to a distance of 120 feet East of the centerline of 8th Street. 
(Ord. 1239 § 1, 1965)  
10.04.070 - Section 9.2 of Article VIII adopted—Pedestrians to Use crosswalks in Business Districts. 
There is adopted a section to be numbered 9.2, Article VIII, which section is to be a Part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, hereof, to read as follows: 
 Section 9.2. No Pedestrian Shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk, in any Business District. 
(Ord. 1074 § 3(a), 1960)  
10.04.075 - Section 9.3 amended by adding subsections (k) through (n)—No parking areas. 
There is added to Section 9.3 "No Parking" area as follows: 
 (k) Within fifty feet of an intersection, except passenger cars. 
 (l) Parking a motor Vehicle, so as to be visible from the public Right-of-Way, is prohibited on the Front Yard or Side Yard of residential Property except as follows: (1) in a garage or Carport, (2) in the Driveway connecting a garage or Carport with the adjacent Street or public Right-of-Way, (3) on Property without Off-Street parking in a garage, Carport or Driveway that is less than thirty-two feet wide and where the residence fronts on a Street, in which case two Vehicles May be parked in or on such a garage, Carport or Driveway, (4) Recreational Vehicles, including motorhomes, pickups with Campers, May be parked in Side Yards. 
 (m) On private or publicly owned Property without the Permission, express or implied, of the Owner or Person in lawful possession of such Property or in a manner different or for a period of time longer than the Permission which was given. 
 (n) On Property owned or operated by the City and Designated or set apart for Vehicle parking purposes by Employees of the City without direct or implied consent of the City or its authorized agent. 
(Ord. 0-19-03 § 3, 2003: Ord. 0-3-91 § 1, 1991)  
10.04.080 - Section 9.11(a) of Article VIII amended—Vendors parking near Schools—Prohibitions. 
Section 9.11(a) of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance is amended to read as follows: 
 It Shall be unlawful for any Person, firm or corporation to sell items of confectionery, soft drinks, any type of food products or other Personal Property from any moveable or vehicular place of Business within 300 feet of any School in the City during any time when such School is in session or thirty (30) minutes thereafter. 
(Ord. 1232, 1965)  
10.04.090 - Section 10 of Article X amended—Stopping, standing or parking—On certain Streets—Prohibited. 
Article X, Section 10 of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance is amended to read as follows: 
 Article X, Stopping, Standing or Parking Restricted or Prohibited on Certain Streets. 
 Section 10. Twenty-four minute parking. Green Curb marking Shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than 24 minutes at any time, when authorized Signs, Parking Meters or Curb markings have been determined by the City Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving Notice thereof, no Operator of any Vehicle Shall Stop, stand or park said Vehicle adjacent to any such legible Curb marking or Sign or Parking Meter in Violation thereof. 
(Ord. 1239 § 2, 1965)  
10.04.100 - Section 10.2 of Article X amended—One hour parking. 
Section 10.2 of Article X of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance, adopted by the City Council on the fifteenth Day of November, 1960 is amended to read as follows: 
 Section 10.2 One Hour Parking . When authorized Signs, Parking Meters or Curb markings have been determined by the City Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving Notice thereof, no Operator of any Vehicle Shall Stop, stand or park said Vehicle between the hours of 8 A.M. and 6 P.M. or any shorter interval of time of any Day except Sundays and Holidays for a period of time longer than one hour. 
(Ord. 1100 § 1, 1961)  
10.04.103 - Section 10.6 of Article X amended—Regulation and authority of Off-Street parking. 
Article X, Section 10.6 of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance is amended to read as follows: 
 Section 10.6. Regulation and Authority of Off-Street Parking. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to install and maintain Parking Space markings and signage as Shall be Approved by the City Traffic Committee for Off-Street Parking Facilities owned or operated by the City. 
(Ord. 0-21-91 § 1, 1991)  
10.04.105 - Section 10.9 added to Article X—Parking in residence Districts. 
Section 10.9, "Stopping, standing or parking restricted or prohibited on certain Streets" is added to Article X as follows: 
Section 10.9 Parking in certain zones: 
 (a) Parking a trailer, or truck tractor with a trailer or semitrailer attached, or a truck with a load capacity of over one ton on a public street or the parking or standing, on any street, or portion thereof, of commercial vehicles having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more, including buses and recreational vehicles used for commercial purposes as defined in Section 260 of the California Vehicle Code or non-commercial recreational vehicles, in any nonresidential zone is prohibited. 
 (b) Parking a trailer, or truck tractor with a trailer or semitrailer attached, or a truck with a load capacity of over one ton on a public street or the parking or standing, on any street, or portion thereof, of commercial vehicles having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more, including buses and recreational vehicles used for commercial purposes as defined in Section 260 of the California Vehicle Code or non-commercial recreational vehicles, in a residential zone is prohibited. 
 (c) Notwithstanding subsection (b), the following shall be permitted in residential zones: 
 1. Any vehicle making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares or merchandise from or to any building or structure located on a restricted street, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon restricted streets for which a building permit has been previously obtained. 
 2. Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. 
 3. Any vehicle owned by the City, County or State or a licensed contractor on their behalf, engaged in the installation, maintenance or repair of any public property, utility or highway. 
 4. Any authorized emergency vehicle as defined by the California Vehicle Code. 
 (d) For purposes of this section, a commercial vehicle is defined as in Section 260 of the California Vehicle Code as a "motor vehicle of a type required to be registered under the vehicle code used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or profit or designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property." Section 260 further provides "passenger vehicles and house cars that are not used for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or profit are not a commercial vehicle." Moreover, Section 260 provides "any vanpool vehicle is not a commercial vehicle." 
 (e) For purposes of this section, non-commercial recreational vehicles shall be defined as a motorhome, travel trailer, truck camper, camping trailer, or other vehicle or trailer, with or without motive power, designed or altered for human habitation for recreational, emergency, or other human occupancy. "Recreational vehicle" specifically includes, but is not limited to: a "recreational vehicle" as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 18010; a "truck camper" as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 18013.4; a "camp trailer" as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 242; a "camper" as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 243; a "fifth-wheel travel trailer" as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 324; a "house car" as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 362; a "trailer coach" as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 635; a van camper; or a van conversion. 
(Ord. 0-23-99 § 1, 1999: Ord. 0-7-98 § 1, 1998; Ord. 0-2-88 § 2, 1988) 
(Ord. No. O-01-19, §2, 2-5-2019)  
10.04.107 - Section 12.3 of Article XII amended—Truck routes. 
Article XII, Section 12.3 of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance is amended to read as follows: 
 (a) Whenever any Ordinance of this City Designates and describes any Street or portion thereof as a Street the Use of which is Permitted by any Vehicle exceeding a maximum Gross Weight limit of three (3) tons, the City Engineer is hereby authorized to Designate by appropriate Signs, either the Streets affected by the Ordinance or the Streets not affected, as the City Engineer determines will best serve to give Notice of the truck routes Designated by the Ordinance. 
 (b) When any such truck route or routes are established and Designated by appropriate Signs, the Operator of any Vehicle exceeding a maximum Gross Weight limit of three (3) tons Shall drive on such route or routes and none other except that nothing in this section Shall prohibit the Operator of any Vehicle exceeding a maximum Gross Weight of three (3) tons coming from a "Truck Route" having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted Streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of Goods, wares and merchandise from or to any Building or Structure located on such restricted Streets or for the purpose of delivering Materials to be Used in the Actual and bona fide repair, Alteration remodeling or construction of any Building or Structure upon such restricted Streets for which a Building Permit has previously been obtained therefore. 
 (c) The provisions of this section Shall not apply to (1) passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, or to (2) any Vehicle owned by a public Utility while necessarily in Use in the construction, installation or repair of any public Utility. 
 (d) Those Streets and Parts of Streets established by Ordinance of the City Council are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of Vehicles exceeding a maximum Gross Weight of three (3) tons. 
(Ord. 0-23-99 § 2, 1999)  
10.04.109 - Section 12.4 of Article XII amended—Commercial Vehicles prohibited from using certain Streets. 
Article XII, Section 12.4 of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance is amended to read as follows: 
 Section 12.4 Commercial Vehicles prohibited from suing certain Streets. 
 (a) Whenever any Ordinance of this City Designates and describes any Street or portion thereof as a Street the Use of which is Permitted by any commercial Vehicle, the City Engineer is hereby authorized to Designate by appropriate Signs, either the Streets affected by the Ordinance or the Streets not affected, as the City Engineer determines will best serve to give Notice of the Ordinance. 
 (b) Those Streets and Parts of Streets established by Ordinance of the City Council are hereby declared to be Streets, the Use of which is prohibited by any commercial Vehicle. The provisions of this section Shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. 0-23-99 § 3, 1999)  
10.04.110 - Section 14.0 of Article XIII adopted—Parking Meter Zones. 
There is adopted a section numbered 14.0, Article XIII, which is to be a Part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010 hereof, the section to read as follows: 
 Section 14.0 Parking Meter Zones. Parking Meter Zones are those Streets or Parking areas established by Resolution of the Council as Zones within which the parking of Vehicles Shall be controlled, regulated and inspected with the aid of Parking Meters. 
(Ord. 1074 § 3(b), 1960)  
10.04.120 - Section 14.11(a) of Article XIII adopted—Parking Meter moneys disposition. 
There is adopted a section to be numbered 14.11(a), Article XIII. 
 Section 14.11a Use of Money Deposited in Parking Meters. All moneys collected from Parking Meters in this City Shall be placed in the General Fund of the City of Colton. 
(Ord. 1074 § 3(c), 1960)  
10.04.130 - Section 16.1 of Article XV adopted—Speed limits designated. 
There is adopted a section to be numbered Section 16.a. Article XV. 
 Section 16.a. Increasing State Speed Limit in Certain Zones. It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed limit permitted by State Law upon the following streets is less than is necessary for safe operation of vehicles thereon by reason of the designation and sign-posting of said streets as through highways and/or by reason of widely spaced intersections and it is hereby declared that the prima-facie speed limit shall be as hereinafter set forth on those streets or parts of streets herein designated when signs are erected giving notice thereof: 
Section 16A: The following Speed Limits are designated: 
1. 	Agua Mansa Road 
from Riverside Avenue to Rancho Avenue 	45 MPH 
2. 	Barton Road 
from Hilltop Drive to Washington Street 	50 MPH 
3. 	Barton Road 
from S. La Cadena Drive to E. City Limits (UP R/R) 	45 MPH 
4. 	"C" Street 
from N. Rancho Avenue to Colton Avenue 	30 MPH 
5. 	Colton Avenue 
from E. E Street to North City Limits 	40 MPH 
6. 	Center Street 
from S. Riverside Avenue/Main Street to S. City Limit 	40 MPH 
7. 	Cooley Drive 
from Cooley Lane to Washington Street 	35 MPH 
8. 	Cooley Drive 
from Mt. Vernon to Cooley Lane 	40 MPH 
9. 	Eucalyptus Avenue 
from San Bemardino Avenue to Randall Avenue 	30 MPH 
10. 	Fairway Drive 
from Mt Vernon to Auto Plaza Drive 	35 MPH 
11. 	Hunts Lane 
from Washington to Redlands Blvd. 	40 MPH 
12. 	La Cadena Drive 
from Mt. Vernon Avenue to 8th Street 	35 MPH 
13. 	La Cadena Drive 
from 8th Street to Valley Blvd. 	35 MPH 
14. 	La Cadena Drive 
from Valley Blvd. to Railroad overpass 	45 MPH 
15. 	La Cadena Drive 
from Railroad overpass to South City Limit 	50 MPH 
16. 	Laurel Street 
from Grand Avenue to Pennsylvania Avenue 	35 MPH 
17. 	Laurel Street 
from Pennsylvania Avenue to Mt. Vernon Avenue 	35 MPH 
18. 	"M" Street 
from La Cadena Drive to Fogg Street 	40 MPH 
19. 	Meridian Avenue 
from Valley Blvd. to Randall Avenue 	40 MPH 
20. 	Mill Street 
from Rancho Avenue to Railroad Overpass 	40 MPH 
21. 	Mt. Vernon Avenue 
from Grant Avenue/Citrus Street to Johnston Street 	25 MPH 
22. 	Mt. Vernon Avenue 
from Grant Street to Valley Street 	40 MPH 
23. 	Mt. Vernon Avenue 
from Valley Blvd. to Cooley Dr. 	35 MPH 
24. 	Mt. Vernon Avenue 
from Cooley Dr. to South City Limits 	35 MPH 
25. 	9th Street Ninth 
from Valley Blvd. to C Street 	30 MPH 
26. 	Olive Street 
from Meridian Avenue to Rancho Avenue 	30 MPH 
27. 	Olive Street 
from Rancho Avenue to La Cadena Avenue 	25 MPH 
28. 	Pennsylvania Avenue 
from Valley Blvd. to Mill Street 	35 MPH 
29. 	Pepper Avenue 
from Valley Blvd. to Randall Street 	45 MPH 
30. 	Rancho Avenue 
from Mill Street to North City Limits 	40 MPH 
31. 	Rancho Avenue 
from Valley Blvd. to Mill Street 	35 MPH 
32. 	Rancho Avenue 
from La Cadena Drive to Agua Mansa 	45 MPH 
33. 	Rancho Avenue 
from Agua Mansa to Valley Blvd. 	45 MPH 
34. 	Reche Canyon Road 
from South City Limits to Washington Street 	45 MPH 
35. 	Riverside Avenue 
from Agua Mansa Road to Placentia Lane 	50 MPH 
36. 	RV Center Drive 
from 600 E. Washington Street to 1000 E. Washington Street 	25 MPH 
37. 	San Bemardino Avenue 
from Pepper Avenue to Meridian Avenue 	35 MPH 
38. 	San Bemardino Avenue 
from Sycamore Avenue to Pepper Avenue 	40 MPH 
39. 	Valley Boulevard 
from West City Limits to Pepper Avenue 	45 MPH 
40. 	Valley Boulevard 
from Pepper Avenue to Rancho Avenue 	45 MPH 
41. 	Valley Boulevard 
from Rancho Avenue to Mt. Vernon Avenue 	35 MPH 
42. 	Washington Street 
from West End to Mt. Vernon Ave. 	35 MPH 
43. 	Washington Street 
from Mt Vernon Ave. to Reche Canyon Road 	40 MPH 
44. 	Washington Street 
from Reche Canyon Road to Waterman Ave. 	40 MPH 
 
(Ord. 0-20-03 § 1, 2003; Ord. 0-14-97 § 1, 1998: Ord. 0-19-88 § 1, 1988; Ord. 0-6-88 § 1, 1988; Ord. 0-18-86 § 1, 1986; Ord. 1636 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1547 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1544 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1532 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1529 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1518 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1504 § 1, 1976; Ord. 1489 § 1, 1976; Ord. 1376 § 1, 1970; Ord. 1339 § 1, 1968; Ord. 1322 § 1, 1968; Ord. 1316 § 1, 1968; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1965; Ord. 1197 § 1, 1964; Ord. 1074 § 3(d), 1960; Ord. No. O-05-14, § 1, 5-6-2014)  
10.04.140 - Section 16B of Article XV adopted—Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
There is adopted a section to be numbered 16B, Article XV. 
 Section 16B. Regulation of Speed by Traffic Signals. The City Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to Permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at Variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the District or at intersections and Shall erect appropriate Signs giving Notice thereof. 
(Ord. 1074 § 3(e), 1960)  
10.04.150 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and Shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six Months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 1074 § 5, 1960)  
Chapter 10.06 - BAIL PROCEDURE FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS 
 
10.06.010 - General provisions. 
The City elects to receive, deposit, accept forfeitures and otherwise process the posting of bail for parking Violations for which a Written Notice of parking Violation has been issued within the boundaries of the City. 
(Ord. 1652 § 1, 1983)  
10.06.020 - Contract authorized. 
The City Council is authorized by minute Action to contract with an authorized agency to provide for the receipt, deposit, acceptance and processing of bail for parking Violations. 
(Ord. 1652 § 2, 1983)  
10.06.030 - Bail schedule. 
The City Council is authorized to establish a bail schedule, for Violations of its Ordinances and for all parking Violations occurring within the City, by Resolution. 
(Ord. 1652 § 3, 1983)  
Chapter 10.08 - BLINKER LIGHTS ADJACENT TO STREETS 
 
10.08.010 - Definitions. 
The Following words and phrases Used in this chapter have the meanings herein ascribed to them: 
A.  "Blinker Light" means a light whether colored or uncolored which emits an intermittent light. 
B.  "Person" means every natural Person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation. 
C.  "Street" means every Public Street, Alley, lane, Court, place, drive, bridge, viaduct or trestle intended for Use or Used by the general public. 
(Ord. 406 § 1, 1924)  
10.08.020 - Erection Permit—Required. 
No Person Shall erect or maintain or cause or Permit to be erected or maintained any Blinker Light upon or adjacent to any Street within the City, whether on public or Private Property, which emits a light the same as or similar to Highway warning, danger or signal lights and which Blinker Light is so located as to be visible from any Public Street, unless under and in accordance with the terms of a Permit in writing first obtained from the City Council. 
(Ord. 406 § 2 (part), 1924)  
10.08.030 - Erection Permit—Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter Shall not apply to advertising Signs upon Private Property consisting of continuous or intermittent lights in the form of illuminated words, letters or figures or portraying any advertising scene, figure or emblem and so constructed, arranged and located as to be clearly distinguishable from a Highway warning, danger or signal light. Nor Shall this chapter apply to any government lighthouse nor to any warning, danger or signal light heretofore or hereafter erected or maintained as required by Law or under orders of any Board or Commission of the State. 
(Ord. 406 § 2 (part), 1924)  
10.08.040 - Erection Permit—Application. 
Any Person desiring to erect or maintain any Blinker Light or lights upon or adjacent to any Street so located as to be visible from any Street Shall first make Application in writing to do so to the City Council, which Application Shall state the proposed location of such light or lights, and a brief description of the proposed light or lights. The City Council Shall consider every such Application, and if it finds that the Blinker Light or lights proposed to be erected will serve as a warning to Persons using the Street and will tend to increase the safety of the traveling public Shall issue a Permit in writing authorizing the erection and maintenance of such Blinker Light or lights. Such Permit Shall be valid until revoked and no charge Shall be made for any such Permit. 
(Ord. 406 § 3, 1924)  
10.08.050 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction Shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the City or County Jail not exceeding thirty Days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 406 § 4, 1924)  
Chapter 10.10 - OFF-SITE PARKING OF NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES 
 
10.10.010 - Definitions. 
The Following words and phrases Used in this chapter have the meanings herein ascribed to them: 
"Nonmotorized Vehicle" means a Vehicle which is unable to move under its own power, including without limitation, truck trailers, trailers, Carts, wagons, Camper shells, boats and all other nonmotorized recreational, storage and service-type Vehicles whether for commercial, personal or private Use. Nonmotorized Vehicles include Vehicles which re-empty or are Used for storage of personal, recreational, professional or commercial equipment, merchandise, Goods, wares, products or services, which May or May not be Used for display, demonstration, distribution, consumption, Sale, other remuneration, or for the solicitation of Goods, services, and/or remuneration of any kind. 
"Off-Site" means City Streets, public roadways, Alleys, rights-of-way, and Highways. 
(Ord. 0-19-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
10.10.020 - Off-Site parking prohibited. 
A.  No Nonmotorized Vehicle Shall be parked Off-Site between the hours of six p.m. to six a.m. 
B.  Nonmotorized Vehicles when parked as Permitted by this chapter Shall be parked in a manner that is safe and that does not obstruct Driveways and intersections. 
C.  Disabled Nonmotorized Vehicles May be parked Off-Site for a maximum period of two hours during the hours of six p.m. to six a.m. to obtain towing or other assistance necessary to effect the removal. 
D.  Maintenance and repairs of Nonmotorized Vehicles Shall not be conducted Off-Site, with the exception of reinflating or changing a tire, which May be done Off-Site to facilitate the removal of the Vehicle. 
(Ord. 0-19-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
10.10.030 - Exemptions. 
Mail and Parcel delivery trucks, product delivery Vehicles, lawn and Yard care, pool care, air conditioning care and other Nonmotorized Vehicles associated with normal residential care, maintenance, repair and construction services, push Carts licensed by the City, Department of Motor Vehicle licensed horseless carriages, and historical Vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-19-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
10.10.040 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter Shall be administered and enforced by the Police Chief. 
(Ord. 0-19-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
10.10.050 - Violation—Penalties. 
Any Person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, Employee or otherwise, violating or causing the Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the City Jail or County Jail for a term not to exceed six Months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such Persons, firm or corporation Shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every Day during any portion which any Violation of this title is committed or continued by such Person, firm or corporation and Shall be punishable as herein provided. 
(Ord. 0-19-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
Chapter 10.12 - VEHICLES DRIVEN ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
10.12.010 - Permit required—Exceptions—Display. 
No Person Shall operate a motor-driven, i.e., internal combustion powered, Vehicle on Private Property in the City without the Written Permission of the Owner or his duly authorized agent, save and except Vehicles being driven pursuant to express lawful authority or in the event of an Emergency to save life or Property or prevent injury thereto. The Operator of such a motor Vehicle Must carry such Permit on his Person when so operating a motor Vehicle and display the Permit to a Police Officer or other Person authorized to inquire. 
(Ord. 1369 § 1, 1970)  
10.12.020 - Muffler required—Modifying prohibited. 
Any motor Vehicle operated pursuant to Section 10.12.010 of this chapter Shall be equipped with a standard factory installed muffler or its equivalent as prescribed by and in accordance with the specification of the Vehicle Code of the State. Without limitation upon the foregoing, the muffler Shall not have a cutoff, Bypass or similar device or any baffle plates removed therefrom, nor Shall the muffler be modified in any way so as to increase the Decibel level of the operation of the motor Vehicle from that resulting from standard factory installed equipments. 
(Ord. 1369 § 2, 1970)  
10.12.030 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, Shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail not exceeding six Months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 1369 § 3, 1970)  
Chapter 10.16 - SOUND VEHICLES 
 
10.16.010 - Definitions. 
"Person" as Used herein includes the singular and plural and also means and includes any Person, firm, corporation, association, club, partnership, society or any other form of association or organization. 
"Sound Vehicle" means any Vehicle which carries or is equipped with any instrument or device for the production or reproduction of music, spoken words or other sounds, or any loudspeaker or any other sound-amplifying device designed to enlarge the volume of sound produced by any instrument or by the human voice; which instrument or device is Used, or intended to be Used for the purpose of advertising or calling attention to any article, thing or event, or for the purpose of addressing the public or attracting the attention of the public, along or upon the Public Streets or ways along which such Vehicle travels. 
(Ord. 0-18-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
10.16.020 - Sound Vehicles—Definition exclusions and exceptions. 
The definition set forth in Section 10.16.010 of this chapter, "Sound Vehicle," Shall be deemed not to include: 
A.  Vehicles Used only in a Parade conducted pursuant to a Permit issued pursuant to Chapter 5.44 of this Code; 
B.  A Vehicle equipped with a siren or horn designed and Used for the purpose of warning traffic because of such equipment or Use, nor any Vehicle operated by any governmental agency within the course of its public functions; 
C.  Persons who are licensed by the City to sell Goods, wares and merchandise from Vehicles and whose Vehicles are equipped with sound apparatus emitting music only, providing the sound of said music does not exceed ninety Decibels measured at a distance of ten feet from the speaker of said apparatus. 
(Ord. 0-18-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
10.16.030 - Sound Vehicles—Where prohibited. 
No Person Shall drive, operate, propel or park any Sound Vehicle with the sound-making device, sound-amplifying device or loud speaker thereof in Use or operation: 
A.  Within three hundred feet of any Hospital, Place of Worship or School that is in session; 
B.  Upon any Public Street or way between the hours of eight p.m. and eight a.m. of the Following Day. 
(Ord. 0-18-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
10.16.040 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth by State Law and is subject to administrative penalties and fines as set forth in this Code. The City retains any and all civic remedies, including the right of civil injunction for the prevention of the Violations and for the recovery of money damages therefor. 
(Ord. 0-18-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 10.20 - TRAINS 
 
10.20.010 - Obstruction of City Streets prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any locomotive, engine, tender, car or train of cars, to be allowed to obstruct, for a period longer than five minutes, any Street or Highway within the City so as to prevent the passage of Persons, horses or wagons along such Street or Highway. 
(Ord. 234 § 59, 1907)  
10.20.020 - Speed limit in City. 
It is unlawful for any locomotive, engine, Railway train or car to be driven or propelled by steam at a greater rate of speed than ten miles per hour in the City. 
(Ord. 234 § 60, 1907)  
10.20.030 - Whistles and horns—Sounding within the City prohibited—Exceptions. 
It is unlawful for any Person, firm or corporation to sound or blow any whistle, horn or other sounding device or cause to sound or cause to blow any whistle, horn or other sounding device upon any Railroad locomotive or Railroad engine within the City limits of the City unless the same is absolutely necessary at the time as a danger signal to avoid an impending accident or other imminent danger. 
(Ord. 843 § 1, 1953)  
10.20.040 - Blow-off cock—Opening within the City prohibited—Exceptions. 
It is unlawful for any Person, firm or corporation to open or cause the opening of a blow-off cock or other device upon a Railroad locomotive or Railroad engine, thereby Permitting or allowing steam to escape therefrom so as to make loud and disturbing Noises in the vicinity thereof, unless same is absolutely necessary to avoid an accident or other imminent danger. 
(Ord. 843 § 2, 1953)  
Chapter 10.28 - BICYCLES 
 
10.28.010 - License—Required. 
It is unlawful for any Person to operate or Use a Bicycle not licensed by the State upon any of the Streets, Alleys or public Highways of the City without first obtaining from the Finance Department a license therefor. 
(Ord. 1431 § 1, 1973)  
10.28.020 - License—Issuance—Effective dates. 
The Finance Department is authorized and directed to issue upon Written Application, Bicycle licenses which Shall be effective in accordance with current Resolution of record. The licenses, when issued, Shall entitle the licensee to operate such Bicycle for which the license has been issued, upon all the Streets, Alleys and public Highways, exclusive of the Sidewalks thereof, in the City. 
(Ord. 1486 § 1, 1975: Ord. 1431 § 2, 1973)  
10.28.030 - Registration cards—License plates. 
The City Shall provide for each registration period, a license or supplementary device, together with registration cards, the license and registration cards having numbers stamped thereon in numerical order beginning with number "1," and indicating the Year for which the same are issued. Such license plates Shall be suitable for Attachment upon the frames of Bicycles, and it Shall be the duty of the Finance Department to Attach one such license to the frame of each Bicycle and to issue a corresponding registration card to the licensee upon the payment of the license Fee herein provided for, and to make any other markings or stampings necessary to carry out the purpose intended. Such license plate Shall remain Attached during the existence of such license. The Finance Department Shall also keep a record of the date of issue of each license, to whom issued and the number thereof. 
(Ord. 1486 § 2, 1975: Ord. 1431 § 3, 1973)  
10.28.040 - Report of Persons buying and selling Bicycles. 
All Persons engaged in the Business of buying secondhand Bicycles are required to make a daily report to the Police Department giving the name and address of the Person from whom each Bicycle is purchased, the description of each Bicycle purchased, the frame number thereof and the number of the metallic license plate found thereon, if any. All Persons engaged in the Business of selling new or secondhand Bicycles are required to make a daily report to the Police Department on each Day any such Sale is made giving a list of all Sales made by such dealers, which list Shall include the name and address of each Person to whom sold, the kind of Bicycle sold, together with a description and frame number thereof and the number of the license plate Attached thereto, if any. 
(Ord. 1431 § 4, 1973)  
10.28.050 - Report of Persons selling or transferring ownership of Bicycles. 
It Shall be the duty of every Person who sells or transfers ownership of any Bicycle to report such Sale or transfer by returning to the Finance Department the registration card issued to such Person as license thereof, together with the name and address of the Person to whom the Bicycle was sold or transferred, and such report Shall be made within five Days of the date of said Sale or transfer. It Shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such Bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration therefor within five Days of said Sale or transfer. 
(Ord. 1431 § 5, 1973)  
10.28.060 - Destroying frames, licenses or registration cards prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any Person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any Bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this chapter. It is also unlawful for any Person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license, seal or registration card during the time in which such license, seal or registration card is operative. 
(Ord. 1431 § 6, 1973)  
10.28.070 - License Fees. 
The license Fee to be paid for each Bicycle Shall be as determined by Resolution by the City Council and all such Fees Shall be paid into the General Fund of the City. 
(Ord. 1431 § 7, 1973)  
10.28.080 - Violation—Penalty—Impoundment. 
Every Person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of Sections 10.28.010 through 10.28.070 is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than three Months or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to the penalty hereinabove set forth, the Police Department of the City May impound and retain possession of any Bicycle operated in Violation of any of the provisions of Sections 10.28.010 through 10.28.070, and retain possession of the same until the license provided for herein is obtained by the Owner of the Bicycle or the same disposed of pursuant to the provisions of Law pertaining to disposition of Impounded Personal Property. 
(Ord. 1431 § 8, 1973)  
Chapter 10.30 - INTERSTATE TRUCKS 
 
10.30.010 - Definitions. 
A.  The Following words and phrases Shall have the meanings set forth, and if any word or phrase Used in this chapter is not defined in this section, it Shall have the meanings set forth in the California Vehicle Code; provided, that if any such word or phrase is not defined in the Vehicle Code, it Shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage. 
1.  "Terminal" means any Facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped or where full load consignments May be loaded and off loaded or at which the Vehicles are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured. 
2.  "Interstate Truck" means a truck tractor and semi-trailer or truck tractor, semi-trailer and trailer with unlimited length as regulated by the Vehicle Code. 
3.  "Transportation Engineer" means the City Engineer of the City or his authorized Representative. 
4.  "Caltrans" means the State of California Department of Transportation or its successor agency. 
B.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for Terminal Designation and truck route Designation to Terminals for Interstate Trucks operating on a Federally Designated Highway system and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 1675 (part), 1985)  
10.30.020 - Application. 
A.  Any interested Person requiring Terminal Access for Interstate Trucks from the Federally Designated Highway system Shall submit an Application, on a form provided by the City, together with such information as May be required by the Transportation Engineer and appropriate Fees to the City. 
B.  Upon receipt of the Application, the Transportation Engineer will cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether or not the proposed Terminal Facility meets the requirements for an Interstate Truck Terminal. Upon his Approval of that Designation, he will then determine the capability of the route requested and alternate routes, whether requested or not. Determination of route capability will include without limitation, a review of adequate turning radius and lane widths of ramps, intersections and Highways and general traffic conditions such as sight distance, speed and traffic volumes. No Access off a Federally Designated Highway system will be Approved without the Approval of Caltrans. 
C.  Should the requested route Pass Through the City to a Terminal located in another jurisdiction the Applicant Shall comply with that jurisdiction Application process. Coordination of the Approval of the route through the City will be the responsibility of the entity which controls the Terminal's land Use. Costs for trailblazer Signs Shall be as provided in Section 10.30.030B. 
(Ord. 1675 (part), 1985)  
10.30.030 - Fees and costs. 
A.  The Applicant Shall pay a nonrefundable Application Fee, as established by the City by Resolution, sufficient to pay the cost of the review of the Terminal Designation and the review of the route and alternate route. 
B.  Upon the Approval of the Terminal Designation and route by the City and by Caltrans, the Applicant Shall deposit with the City sufficient funds as estimated by the Transportation Engineer to pay for the purchase and installation of Terminal trailblazer Signs. Trailblazer Signs will be required at every Decision point in the City en route to the Terminal. Upon completion of the installation of the Signs, the Actual cost Shall be computed and any difference between the Actual and the estimated cost Shall be billed or refunded to the Applicant, whichever the case May be. No Terminal or route May be Used until such Signs as May be required are in place. Costs for trailblazer Signs May be proportioned in accordance with the procedures in Section 10.30.040C. 
(Ord. 1675 (part), 1985)  
10.30.040 - Retrofitting. 
A.  If all feasible routes to a requested Terminal are found unsatisfactory by the Transportation Engineer, the Applicant May request retrofitting the deficiencies. All cost of engineering, construction and inspection will be the responsibility of the Applicant. Except when the retrofitting of deficiencies is within the jurisdiction of Caltrans, the Actual construction will be done by the City or by a contractor acceptable to it. 
B.  When the work is to be done by the City, the Applicant Shall deposit with the City the estimated cost of retrofitting. Adjustments between the estimated and Actual cost Shall be made after completion of the work and any difference between the Actual and the estimated cost Shall be billed or refunded to the Applicant as the case May be. When the work is done by the Applicant, the Applicant May file with the Transportation Engineer, on a form satisfactory to the Transportation Engineer, a statement detailing the Actual costs of the retrofitting. 
C.  If at any time within five Years from the date of completion of the retrofitting by the Applicant, should any Applicant seek Terminal Approval which would Use the route upon which such retrofitting was accomplished, any such Applicants' Fee May include that Applicants proportionate share of the retrofitting, as determined by the Transportation Engineer, which Fee Shall be disbursed by the City to the Applicant who paid for the retrofitting as well as to any Applicant who contributed to the cost of retrofitting under this subsection. Nothing herein Shall require the payment of a proportionate Fee if the Applicant doing the work failed to file the report with the Transportation Engineer required by subsection B above. 
(Ord. 1675 (part), 1985)  
10.30.050 - Revocation of route. 
The Transportation Engineer May revoke any Approved Terminal or route if the Terminal or route becomes a safety hazard for vehicular traffic. A safety hazard includes the inability of Interstate Trucks to negotiate the route or said Vehicles causing unsafe driving conditions for other vehicular traffic or Pedestrians. 
(Ord. 1675 (part), 1985)  
10.30.060 - Appeal process. 
A.  If the Transportation Engineer denies Terminal Designation, route feasibility or revokes a previously Approved Terminal or route, the Applicant/Terminal Owner within ten Days Following the date of receipt of the Decision of the Transportation Engineer May Appeal said Decision to the City Council in writing. An Appeal Shall be made on a form prescribed by the Department of Community Services and Shall be filed with the City Clerk. The Appeal Shall state specifically there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Transportation Engineer or wherein his Decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. Within five Days of the filing of an Appeal, the Transportation Engineer Shall transmit to the City Clerk the Terminal Application, the sketches of the revoked route and all other data filed therewith, the report of the Transportation Engineer, the findings of the Transportation Engineer and his Decision on the Application. 
B.  The City Clerk Shall make copies of the data provided by the Transportation Engineer available to the Applicant and to the appellant (if the Applicant is not the appellant) for inspection and May give Notice to any other interested Party who requested Notice of the time when the Appeal will be considered by the City Council. 
C.  If Caltrans and not the Transportation Engineer denies or revokes Terminal Access from Federally Designated Highways, no Appeal May be made to the City Council, but Must be made to Caltrans as May be Permitted by Caltrans. 
(Ord. 1675 (part), 1985)  
10.30.070 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, such Decision Shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1675 (part), 1985)  
Chapter 10.40 - ROTATIONAL TOWING SERVICES* 
 
10.40.010 - Definitions. 
As Used in this chapter: 
"Business License" means a license issued by the City according to this chapter. 
"City" means the City of Colton. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Colton or his or her Designee. 
"Nonconsensual Towing Service" means towing services provided to the City's Police Department in situations where Vehicle Owners are unable to consent to having their Vehicle towed, such as in cases of severe accident, where a Vehicle is being towed for being illegally parked on Public Property or towed as a result of a police order. 
"Police Chief" means the Chief of Police of the City of Colton or his or her Designee. 
"Police Department" means the Colton Police Department. 
"Rotation List" means the City's list of eligible towing Carriers to be Used by the Police Department when assistance is needed to remove Abandoned, disabled or Impounded Vehicles. 
"Rules and Specifications" means the City's Rules and Specifications for towing services and Vehicle storage facilities promulgated by the Police Chief. 
"Tow Vehicle" means a motor Vehicle which has been altered or designed or equipped for and exclusively Used in the Business of towing Vehicles by means of a crane, tow bar, tow line, dolly or a roll-back Carrier or is otherwise Used to render Emergency assistance to disabled and other Vehicles. 
"Tow Vehicle Driver" means the Driver of an authorized Tow Vehicle Used for towing another motor Vehicle. 
"Towing Carrier or Towing Provider" means a towing company and the Owner(s) and/or managing Employee(s) of a towing company. 
(Ord. 0-25-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.40.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish towing regulations to govern the provision of Nonconsenual Towing Services to the City's Police Department, consistent with State and Federal Laws, as well as the public health, safety and welfare. A further purpose is to insure that the best possible towing services are selected to participate in the City's rotational tow program to assist the Police Department in conducting efficient police investigations and provide the citizens of Colton with prompt, safe and comprehensive towing services. 
These regulations are not intended to govern situations where towing has been requested by Vehicle Owners or Private Property Owners, except as May be Permitted by Law. Instead, these regulations, along with the Rules and Specifications to be promulgated by the Police Chief in conjunction with this chapter, are intended to provide a fair and objective method of selecting towing service providers from among qualified firms to insure that towing providers and Drivers selected provide the Police Department and the public with prompt, safe and comprehensive towing services using the latest in towing technology and Vehicle towing and storage safety. 
(Ord. 0-25-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.40.030 - Rules and Specifications. 
The Police Chief Shall promulgate Written Rules and Specifications for towing services, Drivers and Vehicle storage facilities. The Rules and Specifications May be modified from time to time as deemed appropriate by the Police Chief. Such Rules and Specifications Shall include reasonable provisions respecting the character, extent, quality and standards governing Nonconsenual Towing Services and tow storage Lots that are provided and Used by the Police Department. In addition, the Rules and Specifications Shall include such other Rules and Specifications as May be reasonably necessary to facilitate nonconsensual tow services in the best interests of the public, including, but not limited to, the Following specific provisions: 
A.  Provisions requiring that all selected towing Carriers obtain a City Business License; 
B.  Provisions requiring all selected towing Carriers and individual towing Vehicle Drivers to have a Permit issued by the Police Department; 
C.  A provision requiring all selected towing Carriers to enter into a towing services agreement with the City; 
D.  A provision requiring all selected towing Carriers to abide by the Police Department's Rotation List and the Rules and Specifications established by the Police Chief; 
E.  A provision requiring all selected towing Carriers to protect, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its elected officials, officers, Employees, agents and volunteers from all claims, demands or liabilities arising out of or encountered in connection with their agreement with the City or the performance of work or purchase of supplies, equipment and Materials in preparation for the towing operation, or claims, demands and liabilities occurring during the towing and subsequent storage and maintenance of Vehicles on behalf of the City, whether or not such claims, demands or liabilities are caused by the towing Carrier, its Employees or agents; 
F.  A provision requiring towing Carriers to provide proof and maintain general liability, automobile liability and workers' compensation insurance, in an amount and Insurance-Industry rating which meets the requirements of the City's Finance Department, names the City as an additional insured and is acceptable to the City Attorney; 
G.  A provision requiring inspections to be conducted at least once per Year of all towing Vehicles and all towing Lots and facilities Used in the performance of towing service on behalf of the City; and 
H.  A provision requiring all selected towing Carriers to pay the administrative Fees required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-25-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.40.040 - Towing Rotation List. 
Towing Carriers selected to provide towing services to the City, if more than one is selected, Shall abide by the towing rotation system established by the Police Chief in the Rules and Specifications. The Police Chief Shall develop a list of towing Carriers selected to provide towing services to the City. The towing Carrier at the top of the list Shall be on-call to provide towing service to the City in accordance with the rotation system established by the Police Chief. Once a tow truck Operator completes its Designated on-call service, the Operator's name Shall be moved to the bottom of the list and the Operator then at the top of the list Shall begin its Designated on-call service. The City May request services from a towing Carrier who is not on-call in situations wherein the City Manager, Police Chief or the Police Department watch commander deems an Emergency to exist such that additional towing services are necessary to adequately meet the needs of the City or Police Department. The towing Rotation List May be amended from time to time as Part of the Police Chief's promulgation or modification of the Rules and Specifications. 
(Ord. 0-25-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.40.050 - Selection of number of towing providers. 
The Police Chief Shall select towing providers according to the Rules and Specifications as these May be promulgated and/or amended. 
(Ord. 0-25-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.40.060 - Selection of towing providers. 
The criteria for selecting towing providers Shall be included in the Rules and Specifications as promulgated by the Police Chief and Shall be made available to all Applicants. 
(Ord. 0-25-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.40.070 - Permit required. 
No Person Shall engage in the Business of providing towing services to the City's Police Department without first obtaining a towing Carrier Permit from the Police Chief and then obtaining a Business License. Permits Shall be issued for a term of not less than three Years, as determined by the Police Chief and as authorized in the Rules and Specifications. 
(Ord. 0-25-04 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. O-06-2017, § 2, 6-20-2017)  
10.40.080 - Execution of agreements. 
All towing providers selected to provide service Shall enter into a towing service agreement with the City. The Written agreement Shall be in a form Approved by the City Attorney and Shall be executed within thirty Days after their selection as a towing provider. The Written agreement Shall provide that the terms and conditions of this chapter and the Rules and Specifications Shall be applicable for the entire term of the Permit. 
(Ord. 0-25-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.40.090 - Payment of administrative Fees to City. 
A.  All towing Carriers selected to participate in the City's towing rotation program Shall pay to the City the administrative Fees and charges per Vehicle towed as determined by separate Resolution of the City Council to cover the costs of the City's towing program. The towing service agreement entered into between the City and the towing provider Shall provide that any subsequent changes to the administrative Fees and charges Shall be applicable to the towing Carrier upon ten Days Written notification of such changes. 
B.  Payment of administrative Fees and charges by selected towing Carriers Shall be due in accordance with the payment schedule provided in the Rules and Specifications. 
C.  Any administrative Fees and charges which remain unpaid after the date specified in subsection B of this section Shall be delinquent and Shall result in a penalty equal to ten percent of the unpaid amount. Nonpayment of the administrative Fees and charges by any towing provider Shall be grounds for revocation of their participation in the City's towing rotation program. 
D.  Nothing contained in this chapter Shall prohibit or limit the City's ability to impose other Fees and charges, including, but not limited to, Franchise Fees, for the right to provide towing services to the City's Police Department, and Vehicle release Fees. Any such Fees Shall be established by separate Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 0-25-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.40.100 - Revocation and suspension of towing Carrier and Driver Permits. 
The Police Chief May revoke or suspend the towing services agreement for the reasons, and pursuant to the procedures, set forth in the terms of the towing services agreement entered into with each towing Carrier or for a Violation of the terms of this chapter or the Rules and Specifications as promulgated by the Police Chief. 
(Ord. 0-25-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.40.110 - Authority for City to maintain own towing operations and towing Yard. 
Nothing in this chapter Shall be construed to restrict or prohibit the City from conducting its own towing operations or maintaining its own towing storage Yard, either in lieu of, or in addition to any towing Carrier Permit that is awarded pursuant to this chapter or the Rules and Specifications. 
(Ord. 0-25-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.40.120 - Penalties. 
Any towing Carrier, Driver or towing company violating the provisions of this chapter Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition, any towing Carrier or towing company violating the provisions of the Rules and Specifications Shall be subject to the Permit revocation provisions contained in this chapter and in the Rules and Specifications. 
(Ord. 0-25-04 § 1 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 10.44 - PREFERENTIAL PARKING PROGRAM 
 
10.44.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words, terms and phrases Used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Adjacent Dwelling Unit" means a Residential Dwelling Unit fronting upon or having direct Access to a Street within a current or proposed Preferential Parking District by means of a front door, entry way or Driveway or any combination thereof. 
"Business Location" means any Building or portion thereof Actually Used for the conducting of any lawful Business, trade, occupation or any other non-residential Activity fronting upon or having direct Access to a Street within a current or proposed Preferential Parking District by means of a front door, entry way or Driveway or any combination thereof. 
"Guest" means any Person visiting a Resident in any established Permit Zone, but Shall not include any Person attending events scheduled by any public or private Educational Institution, including, but not limited to, classes, workshops, seminars, and sporting events. 
"Merchant" means an Owner, or if non-Owner occupied, an Occupant of a Business Location in a proposed or current Preferential Parking District. 
"Permit Zone" means any portion or portions of a Street or other connecting public rights of way Used for Vehicle traffic, in which a Permit or Permits issued pursuant to this chapter Shall exempt Vehicles properly displaying such Permits from certain prohibitions or restrictions established by this chapter and otherwise applicable to other Vehicles. 
"Preferential Parking District" means a District of certain Streets or portions thereof, which are Designated by the City Council as a Preferential Parking District in which Permit Zones May be established. 
"Resident" means a Person who lives in an Adjacent Dwelling Unit located in a proposed or current Preferential Parking District. 
(Ord. 0-12-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.44.020 - Designation of Preferential Parking Districts. 
The City Council is empowered to establish by resolution or Ordinance Preferential Parking Districts pursuant to this chapter. 
In order to reduce the secondary impacts of the Establishment of Preferential Parking Districts, the City Council May also expand the area of any established Preferential Parking District to encompass other adjacent Streets surrounding a District. 
(Ord. 0-12-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.44.030 - Establishment of Preferential Parking Districts and parking zones. 
A.  A Preferential Parking District May be established in any area of the City in which the City Council determines that the public health, safety, and welfare so requires or calls for such Establishment. 
B.  A Permit Zone May be established within any Preferential Parking District Designated by the City Council. In order to commence consideration of a Permit Zone, Residents or Merchants in the proposed Permit Zone Shall provide a Written petition signed by Residents or Merchants, or a combination thereof, representing at least seventy-five percent of Adjacent Dwelling Units or Business Locations, or a combination thereof, in the area proposed for Designation as a Permit Zone. Each Dwelling Unit Shall be entitled to one vote and each Business Location Shall be entitled to one vote. Petitions Shall contain all of the Following information: 
1.  Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of each Resident or Merchant representing each Adjacent Dwelling Unit or Business Location, respectively; 
2.  The name and telephone number of a spokesperson who Shall represent petitioners; 
3.  A statement that petitioners desire, agree, and request preferential parking privileges, that a shortage of reasonably available and convenient parking for adjacent Residents or Business Owners, or both exists, and that currently posted time limits are causing a Hardship to petitioners; and 
4.  The desired posted time limits, hours wherein a Permit would be required to be displayed, or other restrictions desired by the petitioners. 
C.  After a complete petition has been submitted, the Police Chief or Designee Shall, in consultation with City staff and petitioners as represented by their spokesperson, study the proposed Permit Zone and determine the reasonable availability of convenient Parking Space. City staff in every Department Shall assist in providing information and other assistance as required by the Police Chief. 
D.  At least thirty Days prior to the date on which the Police Chief or Designee will determine whether to grant or deny an Application for a Permit Zone, the Police Department Shall cause Notice to be provided by either: (1) mailing by first class mail, postage prepaid, one Written notification of the Application for the Permit Zone to each Adjacent Dwelling Unit and Business Location and each Property within five hundred feet of the proposed or current Permit Zone as identified by the County Assessor's Roll or otherwise known to the Police Department; or (2) posting a Notice of said hearing in a conspicuous place at least once every two hundred linear feet on each Street proposed to be included within the proposed or current Permit Zone and publishing a Notice of said hearing in a newspaper of general circulation for three consecutive Days. Said Notice Shall indicate the proposed location of the Permit Zone and a date on which the Police Chief or Designee will make a Decision on the Application. Failure of any Person including any Resident or Merchant to Actually receive such Notice Shall not invalidate any action taken pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  The Police Chief or Designee may, in consultation with City staff, from time to time promulgate rules and regulations, consistent with the purpose and provisions of this chapter to facilitate implementation of this chapter, which rules and regulations May include, but need not be limited to, procedures for the Application for and issuance and renewal of Permits hereunder, and adjustment of parking limitations described under Section 10.44.070. 
(Ord. 0-12-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.44.040 - Requested hearing and required findings. 
A.  If a Written request therefor is presented to the Police Department at least fifteen Days prior to the date on which the Police Chief or Designee determines whether to grant or deny an Application, the Police Chief or Designee Shall conduct an informal Public Hearing at which evidence and testimony Shall be admitted and findings required by subsection B of this section Shall be made. Formal rules of evidence Shall not apply to said hearing. At least ten Days prior to the hearing on the Establishment of a Permit Zone, the Police Department Shall cause Notice to be provided by either: (1) mailing by first class United States a Notice of said hearing to each Adjacent Dwelling Unit and Business Location and each Property within five hundred feet of the proposed or current Permit Zone as identified by the County Assessor's Roll or otherwise known to the Police Department; or (2) posting a Notice of said hearing in a conspicuous place at least once every two hundred linear feet on each Street proposed to be included within the proposed or current Permit Zone and publishing a Notice of said hearing in a newspaper of general circulation for three consecutive Days. Failure of any Person including any Resident or Merchant to actually receive such Notice Shall not invalidate any action taken pursuant to this chapter. In establishing Permit Zones, the Police Department Shall establish Permit Zone boundaries so as to not to unreasonably shift the unavailability of parking to adjacent Streets or neighborhoods. No Permit Zone including a Stopping or standing restriction or prohibition Shall be established without the prior concurrence of the Police Chief or Designee. 
B.  No Permit Zone Shall be formed unless both of the Following exist: 
1.  At least seventy-five percent of Adjacent Dwelling Units or Business Locations, or a combination thereof, as calculated by Section 10.44.030(B) in the area proposed for Designation as a Permit Zone have signed a Written petition requesting such Designation; and 
2.  Either: 
a.  At least eighty percent of the On-Street Parking Spaces on the Streets proposed to be included are occupied by Vehicles during the time requested in the Application for restriction or any other given time; or 
b.  The Police Chief or Designee has determined that the parking, Stopping or standing of Vehicles or any activities accompanying the same cause a Public Nuisance to the Residents or Merchants within the proposed Permit Zone. 
(Ord. 0-12-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.44.050 - Appeals. 
A.  Any interested Person aggrieved by the Decision to grant or deny Establishment of a Permit Zone, by the Police Chief or Designee, May Appeal said Decision to the City Manager by delivering Written Notice of such Appeal, including a short and concise description for the basis for such Appeal, to the City Manager's Office, within fifteen Days of the hearing required by Section 10.44.040. The City Manager Shall conduct a hearing at least three Days after providing Written Notice thereof to the appellant, which hearing Shall be held in accordance with Section 10.44.040(A) and at which the City Manager Shall make findings based on Section 10.44.040(B). The City Manager Shall uphold the Decision denying or granting the Establishment of Permit Zones unless there is no substantial evidence to support said Decision. The City Manager Shall provide a Written Decision to the appellant within five Days of said hearing by first class mail, postage prepaid, including a Copy of the affidavit or certificate of mailing, to the Party seeking the Appeal, the Police Department, and any other applicable City Departments. 
B.  Any interested Person aggrieved by the City Manager's Decision May Appeal to the City Council, or other hearing body chosen by the City Council, within the time and manner provided in subsection A. of this section. No Appeal May be made to the City Manager, City Council, other hearing body chosen by the City Council, or in a Court of Law to the extent any issues therein were not properly raised before the City Manager, and as applicable, the City Council or other hearing body chosen by the City Council. 
C.  Judicial review of any Decision of the City Council Shall be had pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure, but only if the petition for writ of mandate is filed not later than the ninetieth Day Following the date on which the Decision becomes final. The Decision of the City Council is final for purposes of Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 upon the date it is mailed by first-class mail, postage prepaid, including a Copy of the affidavit or certificate of mailing, to the Party seeking the writ. Subdivision (a) of Section 1013 of the Code of Civil Procedure does not apply to extend the time, Following deposit in the mail of the Decision or findings, within which a petition Shall be filed. 
(Ord. 0-12-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.44.060 - Identification required. 
After exhaustion of any administrative Appeal(s) or judicial action, the Police Department Shall Designate established Permit Zones by placing and maintaining appropriate Signs, Curb markings or other such markings indicating applicable provisions, including, without limitation, that the parking of Vehicles which do not display a Permit issued for such Permit Zone is prohibited, the time limit for parking of Vehicles without a Permit, and the hours and Days when such parking is prohibited. 
(Ord. 0-12-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.44.070 - Violations. 
The Police Department May establish Permit Zones with parking limitations, including the Following restrictions: 
A.  Time Limit. During the hours and on the Days Designated on such Signs, it Shall be unlawful for the Operator of any Vehicle to park such Vehicle on any Street in a Permit Zone for more than a certain number of hours or portions thereof unless there is properly displayed in such Vehicle a valid Permit issued for such Permit Zone or such Vehicle is otherwise exempt. 
B.  Flat Prohibition. During the hours and on the Days Designated on such Signs, it Shall be unlawful for the Operator of any Vehicle to park such Vehicle on any Street in a Permit Zone unless there is properly displayed in such Vehicle a valid Permit issued for such Permit Zone or such Vehicle is otherwise exempt. 
On any twenty-four hour period, successive Acts of parking, Stopping or standing within a distance of three hundred feet Shall be deemed a single Act of parking, Stopping or standing within the meaning of this section, with the longest parking limitation applicable to the portion of such Street or Part thereof lying between the two parking places so Used being applicable. 
When any Street or portion thereof is posted as provided in this chapter and the Signs or markings also give adequate Notice that Vehicles parked thereupon in Violation of this chapter will be towed away, and such Signs or markings are erected or placed upon the Street at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal, any duly authorized personnel May remove or cause to be removed any Vehicle parked, Stopped or left standing upon such Streets so posted. 
(Ord. 0-12-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.44.080 - Issuance of Permits. 
A.  Residential Permits. Upon the submittal of a complete Application and payment of a Permit Fee, the Police Chief or Designee Shall issue up to two preferential parking Permits and one Guest parking Permit to each Resident per Adjacent Dwelling Unit granting preferential parking privileges. The Applicant Shall provide the Following information: name, address, telephone number, Vehicle registration, and a Utility bill or Property tax bill evidencing place of residence. An Application May be submitted by either the Owner of the Residential Dwelling Unit for which a Permit is sought or the Tenant of such Residential Dwelling Unit, but in the case of Applications submitted by Tenants, the Owner of the Residential Dwelling Unit Shall also be required to Sign the Application form, attesting to the fact that the Tenant resides at the Residential Dwelling Unit. Two preferential parking Permits and one Guest parking Permit per Resident, per Residential Dwelling Unit within any Permit Zone Shall be issued. 
B.  Merchant Permits. Upon the submittal of a complete Application and payment of a Permit Fee, the Police Chief or Designee Shall issue up to two preferential parking Permits to each Business Location granting preferential parking privileges. In addition, the Police Chief or Designee Shall issue one Guest parking Permit for each Employee or contractor proved to be working at such Business Location. The Applicant Shall provide the Following information: name, address, telephone number, Vehicle registration, and a Business License, Utility bill or Property tax bill evidencing place of Business Location, and evidence of current employment at the Business Location for Employees. Two preferential parking Permits per Business Location Shall be granted within any Permit Zone. 
C.  Any Permit issued pursuant to this chapter Shall neither guarantee nor reserve to the holder thereof any particular On-Street Parking Space. 
D.  The Police Chief or Designee May issue a replacement of any Permit if the Police Chief or Designee has received satisfactory evidence that the original Permit being replaced has been lost or mutilated. 
(Ord. 0-12-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.44.090 - Exemption of certain Vehicles—Display. 
A.  No Person Shall, without a valid Permit, park, Stop or leave standing any Vehicle or trailer in a Permit Zone in excess of the parking restrictions authorized pursuant to this title and posted therein, except for otherwise lawfully located repair, service, maintenance, Refuse, Utility, fuel, commercial, delivery, City Vehicles conducting Business or Emergency Vehicles doing Business in the Permit Zone or new Vehicles for which the Department of Motor Vehicles has not issued license plates. 
B.  No preferential parking Permit Shall be valid if not permanently affixed to the rear, Driver side window of a Vehicle so as to be readily visible to a Person approaching the Vehicle from the rear thereof or on the rear left side of any Vehicle without a rear window so as to be readily visible to a Person approaching the Vehicle from the rear thereof. No Guest parking, temporary Guest parking or special temporary Guest parking Permit Shall be deemed valid if not placed on the rear view mirror of a Vehicle or otherwise displayed face-up on the dashboard of Vehicles without rear view mirrors so as to be readily visible to a Person approaching the Vehicle from the front thereof. 
(Ord. 0-12-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.44.100 - Permit Fee. 
Prior to issuance of any Permit, the Applicant Shall pay a Fee, which Fee Shall cover the cost of administering the preferential parking program. Such Fees Shall be in amounts established by Resolution of the City Council, after a review and recommendation by the Police Department to the City Council. The schedule for such Fees Shall remain on file in the offices of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 0-12-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.44.110 - Temporary Guest parking Permits. 
A.  The Police Chief or Designee may, upon request of a Resident or Merchant possessing preferential parking Permits, approve and issue temporary Guest parking Permits whenever more than two Guest parking Permits are required for Special Events. Residents or Merchants seeking temporary Guest parking Permits Must contact the Police Chief or Designee at least two Business Days prior to the Special Event. In issuing temporary Guest parking Permits, the Police Chief or Designee Shall ensure that the public health, safety, welfare, and parking needs of Adjacent Dwelling Units are not adversely affected. 
B.  The Police Chief or Designee Shall also have the sole discretion to issue additional special temporary Guest parking Permits to Residents or Merchants for Use by needed health care providers. A Resident or Merchant requesting such Permit Shall submit a verified statement under penalty of perjury to the Police Chief or Designee indicating the medical necessity of such special temporary Guest parking Permit(s) and the approximate period of time for which the Permit(s) would be needed. Other supporting Materials May be requested to substantiate the need for special temporary Guest parking Permits. 
C.  In addition to the remedies provided herein, any Permit May be revoked by the Police Chief or Designee upon a five-Day Written Notice sent by United States first class mail, postage prepaid, where it is determined that the Permittee, Guest or both, have violated any requirement established herein by this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-12-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.44.120 - Termination of Permit Zones. 
A.  The City Council is empowered to terminate or alter a Preferential Parking District by Resolution upon finding that the public health, safety, and welfare requires or calls for such termination or Alteration. 
B.  The Police Department, in consultation with other City Departments, May terminate or alter a Permit Zone or the parking regulations thereof upon finding that the public health, safety, and welfare requires or calls for such termination or Alteration. 
C.  Residents or Merchants, or a combination thereof May also request termination or Alteration of a Permit Zone by submitting a petition containing signatures of Residents or Merchants, or any combination thereof representing at least seventy-five percent of the Adjacent Dwelling Units or Business Locations, or combination thereof as calculated pursuant to Section 10.44.030(B), the reason for requesting termination or Alteration, the name, address, and telephone number of each Person representing each Dwelling Unit or Business Location; and the name and telephone number of a spokesperson who Shall represent petitioners. Proceedings to terminate or amend the area of any established Permit Zone Shall otherwise comply with the Notice and, as applicable, hearing, findings, and Appeal requirements of this chapter; provided however, that the findings required to be made Shall be limited to a finding of whether or not circumstances have changed such that the public health, welfare, and safety no longer require the Permit Zone in its current form. 
(Ord. 0-12-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.44.130 - Penalties and revocation of preferential parking Permits. 
Each of the Following Violations Shall constitute an unlawful Act: 
A.  Parking on a Street Designated within a Permit Zone in Violation of the identified restrictions thereon without properly displaying a valid Permit for that portion of the Permit Zone; 
B.  Copying, producing, creating or displaying a facsimile or a counterfeit preferential parking Permit; 
C.  Falsely representing one's self as eligible for a parking Permit or willfully furnishing false information in an Application therefor; 
D.  Using a revoked Permit; 
E.  Using any Permit by a non-eligible Vehicle or Person; and 
F.  Selling, Renting, leasing, or transferring to another any Permit. 
(Ord. 0-12-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.44.140 - Permit—Exemption from other Laws. 
Any Permit issued pursuant to this chapter Shall not exempt the Vehicle from any other parking restrictions, regulations or Laws. 
(Ord. 0-12-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 10.50 - TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE 
 
10.50.010 - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as the Traffic Safety Committee. The City of Colton hereinafter shall be called "City." This Chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the City. 
(Ord. No. O-18-16, § 1, 10-18-2016)  
10.50.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the City of Colton Traffic Safety Committee ("the Committee") is to provide the City Council with recommendations on policy related to traffic safety and operational issues based on sound technical and practical criteria and to act as a sounding board for citizens' concerns. 
(Ord. No. O-18-16, § 1, 10-18-2016)  
10.50.030 - Functions of the committee. 
The Committee shall have the following functions: 
A.  To adopt a comprehensive set of traffic safety guidelines for recommendation to the City Council, which shall apply to all items reviewed by the Committee; 
B.  To study and make recommendations to the City Council on matters related to traffic safety; 
C.  The Traffic Safety Committee shall conduct investigations and reports on traffic safety issues requested by appropriate public agencies, Committee members, private citizens and private organizations. Examples of traffic safety items include: 
1.  Parking Issues 
2.  Speeding and Speed Enforcement Issues 
3.  Sight Distance Issues 
4.  School Safety Issues 
5.  Traffic Control Requests 
(Ord. No. O-18-16, § 1, 10-18-16)  
10.50.040 - Membership qualifications and appointment. 
A.  The Committee shall consist of seven members, with the following membership: The Police Chief or his/her representative, the Public Works Director or his/her representative, the Fire Chief or his/her representative, the City Engineer or his/her representative, the Development Services Director or his/her representative, a representative of the Local Business community, and one appointed Representative of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. O-18-16, § 1, 10-18-2016)  
10.50.050 - Meetings. 
A.  Regular meetings of the Committee shall be held at City of Colton Council Chambers, 650 N. La Cadena Drive, Colton, California 92324. Regular meetings shall be held on a day and time established by the Committee. There shall be no minimum number of meetings per year. 
B.  Regular and Special meetings shall be called in the manner specified by applicable state law. 
C.  Four members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum. When there is no quorum at a regular meeting, the chairperson, or any member of such body, shall adjourn such meeting until the next regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. O-18-16, § 1, 10-18-2016)  
Chapter 10.60 - DESIGNATED TRUCK ROUTES 
 
10.60.010 - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as the Truck Route. The City of Colton hereinafter shall be called "City." This Chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the City. 
(Ord. No. O-20-16, § 1, 10-18-2016)  
10.60.020 - Designated. 
A.  The use of all streets within the City by any vehicle exceeding a gross weight of six thousand pounds, except upon the Truck Routes specified in Section 10.60.020(B) is prohibited. A vehicle in excess of six thousand pounds up to a maximum of fourteen thousand pounds, including its load, may utilize the streets and portions of streets designated as Truck Routes. Except as otherwise provided in Section 21101 et seq. and Section 35701 et seq. of the California Vehicle Code, no vehicle in excess of fourteen thousand pounds, including its load, shall utilize the streets and portions of streets designated as Truck Routes. 
B.  The specified portions of the following public streets are hereby designated as "Truck Routes." 
1.  Mt. Vernon Avenue (Washington Street to North City Limits) 
2.  Laurel Street (Pennsylvania Avenue to La Cadena Drive) 
3.  La Cadena Drive (Laurel Street to Mt. Vernon Avenue) 
4.  Colton Avenue (Mt. Vernon Avenue to East City Limits) 
5.  Fairway Drive (Mt. Vernon Avenue to East City Limits) 
6.  Valley Boulevard (within Colton City Limits) 
7.  Pepper Avenue (within Colton City Limits) 
8.  La Cadena Drive (Valley Boulevard to South City Limits) 
9.  Agua Mansa Road (West City limits to Rancho Avenue) 
10.  Riverside Avenue (within Colton City Limits) 
11.  Iowa Avenue (La Cadena Drive to South City Limits) 
12.  M Street (La Cadena Drive to Mt. Vernon Avenue) 
13.  Barton Road (within Colton City Limits) 
14.  Washington Street (Mt. Vernon Avenue to East City Limits) 
15.  Hunts Lane (Washington Street to North City Limits) 
16.  Rancho Avenue (La Cadena Drive to Agua Mansa Road) 
C.  The following street segment is proposed for restrictions to allow only trucks with a kingpin-to-rear-axle (KPRA) length of twenty-six feet or less: 
1.  Rancho Avenue (Valley Boulevard to Agua Mansa Road) 
(Ord. No. O-20-16, § 1, 10-18-2016)  
APPENDIX UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE 
Published by the 
League of California Cities 
1960 
Adopted by the City of Colton by 
Ordinance No. 1074 
November 15, 1960 
UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
	Section 		Page 	

Article I 
DEFINITIONS 

	1. 	Definitions of words and phrases ..... 	178-9 	
	1.1 	Motor Vehicle Code definitions to be Used ..... 	178-9 	
	1.2 	Bicycle ..... 	178-9 	
	1.3 	Central Traffic District ..... 	178-9 	
	1.4 	Coach ..... 	178-9 	
	1.5 	Council ..... 	178-9 	
	1.6 	Curb ..... 	178-9 	
	1.7 	Divisional Island ..... 	178-10 	
	1.8 	Holidays ..... 	178-10 	
	1.9 	Loading Zone ..... 	178-10 	
	1.10 	Official Time Standard ..... 	178-10 	
	1.11 	Park ..... 	178-10 	
	1.12 	Parkway ..... 	178-10 	
	1.13 	Parking Meter ..... 	178-10 	
	1.14 	Passenger Loading Zone ..... 	178-11 	
	1.15 	Pedestrian ..... 	178-11 	
	1.16 	Police Officer ..... 	178-11 	
	1.17 	Stop ..... 	178-11 	
	1.18 	Stop or Stand ..... 	178-11 	
	1.19 	Vehicle Code ..... 	178-11 	

ARTICLE II 
	ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 	

	2. 	Authority of police and Fire Department officials ..... 	178-11 	
	2.1 	Persons other than officials Shall not direct traffic ..... 	178-12 	
	2.2 	Obedience to police or authorized officers ..... 	178-12 	
	2.3 	Required obedience to traffic Ordinance ..... 	178-12 	
	2.4 	Traffic regulations apply to Persons riding Bicycles or animals ..... 	178-12 	
	2.5 	Obstruction or Interference with police or authorized officers ..... 	178-12 	
	2.6. 	Public Employees to obey traffic regulations ..... 	178-13 	
	2.7 	Exemption of certain Vehicles ..... 	178-13 	
	2.8 	Report of damage to certain Property ..... 	178-13 	
	2.9 	When Vehicles May be removed from Streets ..... 	178-14 	

ARTICLE III 
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

	3. 	Authority to install traffic control devices ..... 	178-15 	
	3.1 	Traffic control Signs required for enforcement purposes ..... 	178-15 	
	3.2 	Obedience to traffic control devices ..... 	178-15 	
	3.3 	Installation of traffic signals ..... 	178-15 	
	3.4 	Lane marking ..... 	178-16 	
	3.5 	Distinctive roadway markings ..... 	178-16 	
	3.6 	Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue traffic control devices ..... 	178-16 	
	3.7 	Traffic control devices: hours of operation ..... 	178-17 	
	3.8 	Unauthorized painting of Curbs ..... 	178-17 	

ARTICLE IV 
TURNING MOVEMENTS 

	4. 	Authority to place and obedience to turning markers—intersections—multiple lanes ..... 	178-17 	
	4.1 	Authority to place restricted turn Signs ..... 	178-17 	
	4.2 	Obedience to No-turn Signs ..... 	178-18 	
	4.3 	Signal controlled intersections—right turns ..... 	178-18 	

ARTICLE V 
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 

	5. 	The City Engineer to Sign one-way Streets and Alleys ..... 	178-18 	

ARTICLE VI 
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED 

	6. 	The City Engineer to erect Stop Signs ..... 	178-18 	
	6.1 	Stop at through Street or Stop Sign ..... 	178-19 	
	6.2 	Emerging from Alley, Driveway or Building ..... 	178-19 	

ARTICLE VII 
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 

	7. 	Driving through funeral procession ..... 	178-19 	
	7.1 	Clinging to Moving Vehicle ..... 	178-19 	
	7.2 	Commercial Vehicles Using Private Driveways ..... 	178-20 	
	7.3 	Riding or Driving on Sidewalk ..... 	178-20 	
	7.4 	New Pavement and Markings ..... 	178-20 	
	7.5 	Limited Access ..... 	178-20 	
	7.6 	Restrictions on Use of Freeways ..... 	178-20 	
	7.7 	Obedience to barriers and Signs ..... 	178-21 	
	7.8 	No entrance into intersection that would obstruct traffic ..... 	178-21 	

ARTICLE VIII 
PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS 

	8. 	City Engineer to establish marked crosswalks ..... 	178-21 	
	8.1 	When Pedestrian Must Use crosswalks ..... 	178-22 	
	8.2 	When Pedestrian Must Use crosswalks—amended by Ordinance No.1074 ..... 	178-22 	

ARTICLE IX 
	STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES OR IN CERTAIN PLACES 	

	9. 	Application of regulations ..... 	178-22 	
	9.1 	Stopping or standing in Parkways prohibited ..... 	178-22 	
	9.2 	City Engineer to maintain no Stopping zones and no parking areas ..... 	178-22 	
	9.3 	No parking areas ..... 	178-23 	
	9.4 	Use of Streets for storage of Vehicles prohibited ..... 	178-24 	
	9.5 	Parking for demonstration ..... 	178-24 	
	9.6 	Repairing or greasing Vehicles on Public Streets ..... 	178-24 	
	9.7 	Washing or polishing Vehicles ..... 	178-24 	
	9.8 	Parking adjacent to Schools ..... 	178-25 	
	9.9 	Parking prohibited on narrow Streets ..... 	178-25 	
	9.10 	Parking on Grades ..... 	178-25 	
	9.11 	Unlawful parking—peddlers, vendors ..... 	178-25 	
	9.12 	Emergency parking Signs ..... 	178-26 	
	9.13 	Display of warning devices when commercial Vehicle disabled ..... 	178-27 	

ARTICLE X 
	STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS 	

	10. 	Twenty-four minute parking ..... 	178-27 	
	10.1 	Forty minute parking ..... 	178-28 	
	10.2 	One-hour parking ..... 	178-28 	
	10.3 	Two-hour parking ..... 	178-28 	
	10.4 	Parking parallel on one-way Streets ..... 	178-28 	
	10.5 	Diagonal parking ..... 	178-29 	
	10.6 	Parking Space markings ..... 	178-29 	
	10.7 	No-stopping zones ..... 	178-29 	
	10.8 	All Night parking prohibited ..... 	178-30 	

ARTICLE XI 
STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY 

	11. 	Authority to establish Loading Zones ..... 	178-30 	
	11.1 	Curb markings to indicate no Stopping and parking regulations ..... 	178-30 	
	11.2 	Effect of Permission to load or unload ..... 	178-31 	
	11.3 	Standing for loading or unloading only ..... 	178-32 	
	11.4 	Standing in Passenger Loading Zone ..... 	178-32 	
	11.5 	Standing in any Alley ..... 	178-32 	
	11.6 	Coach zones to be established ..... 	178-32 	

ARTICLE XII 
RESTRICTED Use OF CERTAIN STREETS 

	12. 	Certain Vehicles prohibited in Central Traffic District ..... 	178-33 	
	12.1 	Advertising Vehicles ..... 	178-33 	
	12.2 	Horse-drawn Vehicles ..... 	178-33 	
	12.3 	Truck routes ..... 	178-33 	
	12.4 	Commercial Vehicles ..... 	178-34 	

ARTICLE XIII 
PARKING METERS 

	13. 	Parking Meter zones ..... 	178-35 	
	13.0 	Parking Meter zones—amended by Ordinance No. 1074 ..... 	178-35 	
	13.1 	Manner of installation ..... 	178-35 	
	13.2 	Time of operation of Parking Meters ..... 	178-35 	
	13.3 	Operational procedure to be followed ..... 	178-36 	
	13.4 	Unlawful to park after meter time has expired ..... 	178-36 	
	13.5 	Unlawful to extend time beyond limit ..... 	178-36 	
	13.6 	Improper Use of meter ..... 	178-36 	
	13.7 	Deposit of coins in meter by unauthorized Person ..... 	178-36 	
	13.8 	Parking Meters and Parking Meter standards not to be Used for certain purposes ..... 	178-36 	
	13.9 	Rule of evidence ..... 	178-37 	
	13.10 	Use of money deposited in Parking Meters ..... 	178-37 	
	13.11 	Application of other articles ..... 	178-37 	

ARTICLE XIV 
TRAINS 

	14. 	Railway Gates ..... 	178-38 	
	14.1 	Trains not to Block crossings ..... 	178-38 	

ARTICLE XV 
SPECIAL SPEED ZONES 

	15. 	Increasing State speed limit in certain zones ..... 	178-38 	
	15.a 	Increasing State speed limit in certain zones—amended by Ordinance No. 1074 ..... 	178-39 	
	15.1 	Regulation of speed by traffic signals ..... 	178-39 	
	15.b 	Regulation of speed by traffic signals— amended by Ordinance1074 ..... 	178-39 	
  
UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE - CITY OF COLTON  
ARTICLE I - DEFINITIONS 
 
Section 1. - Definitions of Words and Phrases. 
The Following words and phrases when Used in this Ordinance Shall for the purpose of this Ordinance have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this article.  
Section 1.1. - Motor Vehicle Code Definitions to be Used. 
Whenever any words or phrases Used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California and amendments thereto, such definitions Shall apply.  
Section 1.2. - Bicycle. 
A light Vehicle without a motor, having two wheels, handle bars and a seat or seats, and propelled by the Operator.  
Section 1.3. - Central Traffic District. 
All Streets and portions of Streets within the area described as follows: All that area bounded by _______.  
Section 1.4. - Coach. 
Any motor bus, motor Coach, trackless trolley, or passenger stage Used as a common Carrier of passengers.  
Section 1.5. - Council. 
The Council of the City of Colton.  
Section 1.6. - Curb. 
The lateral boundary of the roadway whether such Curb be marked by Curbing construction, or not so marked; the word "Curb" as herein Used Shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a Street from parking strips in the center of a Street, not from tracks or rights of way of public Utility companies.  
Section 1.7. - Divisional Island. 
A raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic.  
Section 1.8. - Holidays. 
Within the meaning of this Ordinance, Holidays are the first Day of January, the twelfth Day of February, the twenty-second Day of February, the thirtieth Day of May, the fourth Day of July, the first Monday in September, the ninth Day of September, the twelfth Day of October, the eleventh Day of November, the twenty-fifth Day of December and Thanksgiving Day. If the first Day of January, twelfth Day of February, twenty-second Day of February, the thirtieth Day of May, the fourth Day of July, the ninth Day of September, the twelfth Day of October, the eleventh Day of November or the twenty-fifth Day of December falls upon a Sunday, the Monday Following is a Holiday.  
Section 1.9. - Loading Zone. 
The space adjacent to a Curb reserved for the exclusive Use of Vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or Materials.  
Section 1.10. - Official Time Standard. 
Whenever certain hours are named herein, they Shall mean standard time or Daylight saving time as May be in current Use in this City.  
Section 1.11. - Park. 
To stand or leave standing any Vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passenger or Materials.  
Section 1.12. - Parkway. 
That portion of a Street other than a roadway or a Sidewalk.  
Section 1.13. - Parking Meter. 
A mechanical device installed within or upon the Curb or Sidewalk area, immediately adjacent to a Parking Space, for the purpose of controlling the period of time Occupancy of such Parking Meter space by any Vehicle.  
Section 1.14. - Passenger Loading Zone. 
The space adjacent to a Curb reserved for the exclusive Use of Vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.  
Section 1.15. - Pedestrian. 
Any Person afoot.  
Section 1.16. - Police Officer. 
Every officer of the Police Department of this City or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for Violations of traffic regulations.  
Section 1.17. - Stop. 
When required, means complete cessation of movement.  
Section 1.18. - Stop or Stand. 
When prohibited means any Stopping or standing of a Vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or official traffic control device.  
Section 1.19. - Vehicle Code. 
The Vehicle Code of the State of California.  
ARTICLE II - ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
 
Section 2. - Authority of Police and Fire Department Officials. 
Officers of the Police Department and such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic Laws, except that in the event of a fire or other Emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard Pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department May direct traffic as conditions May require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this Ordinance or the Vehicle Code.  
Section 2.1. - Persons Other Than Officials Shall not Direct Traffic. 
No Person other than an officer of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department or a Person authorized by the Chief of Police or a Person authorized by Law Shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that Persons May operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the City Engineer .  
Section 2.2. - Obedience to Police or Authorized Officers. 
No Person Shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any Act forbidden by any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or Police Officer, or a member of the Fire Department, or a Person authorized by the Chief of Police or by Law.  
Section 2.3. - Required Obedience to Traffic Ordinance. 
It is a misdemeanor for any Person driving any Vehicle or other conveyance upon any Street or any Pedestrian, to do any Act forbidden, or fail to perform any Act required as applicable to any such Person under this Ordinance.  
Section 2.4. - Traffic Regulations Apply to Persons Riding Bicycles or Animals. 
Every Person riding a Bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a Highway Shall be granted all of the rights and Shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the Driver of a Vehicle by this Ordinance, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no Application.  
Section 2.5. - Obstruction or Interference with Police or Authorized Officers. 
No Person Shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any Police Officer or other officer or Employee of this City in their enforcement of this Ordinance. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark Used by any Police Officer or other Employee or officer of this City in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this Ordinance Shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this Ordinance, constitute such Interference or Obstruction.  
Section 2.6. - Public Employees to Obey Traffic Regulations. 
The provisions of this Ordinance Shall apply to the Operator of any Vehicle owned by or Used in the service of the United States Government, this State, any County or City, and it Shall be unlawful for any said Operator to violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance except as otherwise Permitted in this Ordinance or by the Vehicle Code.  
Section 2.7. - Exemption of Certain Vehicles. 
(a)  The provisions of this Ordinance regulating the operation, parking and standing of Vehicles Shall not apply to Vehicles operated by the Police or Fire Department, any public Ambulance or any public Utility Vehicle or any private Ambulance, which public Utility Vehicle or private Ambulance has qualified as an authorized Emergency Vehicle, when any Vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an Emergency Call. 
(b)  The foregoing exemptions Shall not, however, relieve the Operator of any such Vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his willful disregard of the safety of others. 
(c)  The provisions of this Ordinance regulating the parking or standing of Vehicles Shall not apply to any Vehicle of a City Department or public Utility while necessarily in Use for construction or repair work or any Vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in Use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail.  
Section 2.8. - Report of Damage to Certain Property. 
(a)  The Operator of a Vehicle or the Person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any Property publicly owned or owned by a public Utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, Parking Meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage, to any tree, traffic control device or other Property of a like nature located in or along any Street, Shall within twenty-four (24) hours after such accident make a Written report of such accident to the Police Department of this City. 
(b)  Every such report Shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the Person owning and of the Person operating or in charge of such Vehicle or animal, the license number of every such Vehicle, and Shall briefly describe the Property damage in such accident. 
(c)  The Operator of any Vehicle involved in an accident Shall not be subject, to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he Shall make a report as required in Subdivision (a) within 24 hours after regaining ability to make such report.  
Section 2.9. - When Vehicles May be Removed From Streets. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the Police Department of this City May remove or cause to be removed: 
(a)  Any Vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a Street or Highway for 120 or more consecutive hours. 
(b)  Any Vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a Street or Highway between the hours of eight a.m. and seven p.m., when such parking or standing is prohibited by Ordinance or resolution of this City and Signs are posted giving Notice of such removal. 
(c)  Any Vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a Street or Highway where the Use of such Street or Highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of this Street or Highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the Use of the Street or Highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the Use of the Street or Highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or Structures of unusual size, and the parking of such Vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such Use or movement; provided that Signs giving Notice that such Vehicle May be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal.  
ARTICLE III - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
 
Section 3. - Authority to Install Traffic Control Devices. 
(a)  The City Engineer Shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give Notice to the public of the Application of such Law the City Engineer is hereby authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the Law applicable thereto. 
(c)  The City Engineer May also place and maintain or cause to place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he May deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he Shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as May be set forth in this Ordinance or as May be determined by Ordinance or resolution of the Council.  
Section 3.1. - Traffic Control Signs Required for Enforcement Purposes. 
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this Ordinance for which Signs are required Shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible Signs are in place giving Notice of such provisions of the traffic Laws.  
Section 3.2. - Obedience to Traffic Control Devices. 
The Operator of any Vehicle or train Shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with this Ordinance unless otherwise directed by a Police Officer or other authorized Person subject to the exceptions granted the Operator of an authorized Emergency Vehicle when responding to Emergency Calls.  
Section 3.3. - Installation of Traffic Signals. 
(a)  The City Engineer is hereby directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or Property from exceptional hazard. 
(b)  The City Engineer Shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by Field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as May be pertinent and his determinations therefrom Shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the Division of Highways of the State Department of Public Works. 
(c)  Whenever the City Engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he Shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection Street name Signs visible to the principal flow of traffic unless such Street name Signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any said intersection.  
Section 3.4. - Lane Marking. 
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to mark centerlines and the lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by Vehicles and May place Signs temporarily Designating lanes to be Used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the Highway.  
Section 3.5. - Distinctive Roadway Markings. 
The City Engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those Streets or parks of Streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it Hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or Signs and markings. Such marking or Signs and marking Shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Public Works pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code.  
Section 3.6. - Authority to Remove, Relocate and Discontinue Traffic Control Devices. 
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this Ordinance whenever he Shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or obtain.  
Section 3.7. - Traffic Control Devices: Hours of Operation. 
The City Engineer Shall determine the hours and Days during which any traffic control device Shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or Days are specified in this Ordinance.  
Section 3.8. - Unauthorized Painting of Curbs. 
No Person, unless authorized by this City, Shall paint any Street or Curb surface; provided, however, that this section Shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a Curb surface by any Person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or Ordinance of this City pertaining thereto.  
ARTICLE IV - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
Section 4. - Authority to Place and Obedience to Turning Markers, Intersections, Multiple Lanes. 
(a)  The City Engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons, or Signs within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by Vehicles turning at such intersections, and the City Engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which Drivers of Vehicles May make right or left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated May conform to or be other than as prescribed by Law or Ordinance. 
(b)  When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by Vehicles turning thereat, no Driver of a Vehicle Shall disobey the directions of such indications.  
Section 4.1. - Authority to Place Restricted Turn Signs. 
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which Drivers of Vehicles Shall not make a right, left, or U turn, and Shall place proper Signs at such intersections. The making of such turns May be prohibited between certain hours of any Day and Permitted at other hours, in which event the same Shall be plainly indicated on the Signs or they May be removed when such turns are Permitted.  
Section 4.2. - Obedience to No-Turn Signs. 
Whenever authorized Signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is Permitted, no Driver of a Vehicle Shall disobey the directions of any such Sign.  
Section 4.3. - Signal Controlled Intersections—Right Turns. 
(a)  No Driver of a Vehicle Shall make a right turn against a red or Stop signal at any intersection which is Sign-posted giving Notice of such restriction as hereinafter provided in this section. 
(b)  The City Engineer Shall post appropriate Signs giving effect to this section where he determines that the making of right turns against a traffic signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic.  
ARTICLE V - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
 
Section 5. - The City Engineer to Sign One-Way Streets and Alleys. 
Whenever any Ordinance or resolution of this City Designates any one-way Street or Alley, the City Engineer Shall place and maintain Signs giving Notice thereof, and no such regulations Shall be effective unless such Signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement Shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.  
ARTICLE VI - SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED 
 
Section 6. - The City Engineer to Erect Stop Signs. 
Whenever any Ordinance or resolution of this City Designates and describes any Street or portion thereof as a through Street, or any intersection at which Vehicles are required to Stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any Railroad Grade crossing at which Vehicles are required to Stop, the City Engineer Shall erect and maintain Stop Signs as follows: 
A Stop Sign Shall be erected on each and every Street intersecting such through Street or portion thereof so Designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a Stop is required and at any Railroad Grade crossing so Designated. Every such Sign Shall conform with and Shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code.  
Section 6.1. - Stop at Through Street or Stop Sign. 
(a)  Those Streets and Parts of Streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be through Streets for the purposes of this section. 
(b)  The provisions of this section Shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the Council. 
(c)  The provisions of this section Shall apply at those Highway Railway Grade crossings as established by resolution of the Council.  
Section 6.2. - Emerging from Alley, Driveway or Building. 
The Driver of a Vehicle emerging from an Alley, Driveway or Building Shall Stop such Vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a Sidewalk or into the Sidewalk area extending across any Alley way or Driveway.  
ARTICLE VII - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
 
Section 7. - Driving Through Funeral Procession. 
No Operator of any Vehicle Shall drive between the Vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a Parade, provided that such Vehicles are conspicuously so Designated. The directing of all Vehicles and traffic on any Street over which such funeral procession or Parade wishes to pass Shall be subject to the orders of the Police Department.  
Section 7.1. - Clinging to Moving Vehicle. 
No Person Shall Attach himself with his hands, or to catch on, or hold on to with his hands or by other means, to any moving Vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom.  
Section 7.2. - Commercial Vehicles Using Private Driveways. 
No Person Shall operate or drive a commercial Vehicle in, on or across any private Driveway approach or Sidewalk area or the Driveway itself without the consent of the Owner or Occupant of the Property, if a Sign or markings are in place indicating that the Use of such Driveway is prohibited. 
For the purpose of this section a commercial Vehicle Shall mean a Vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton.  
Section 7.3. - Riding or Driving on Sidewalk. 
No Person Shall ride, drive, propel, or cause to be propelled any Vehicle or animal across or upon any Sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed Driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded Vehicle across a Sidewalk; provided further, that said Sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and Written Permission be previously obtained from the City Engineer . Such wooden planks Shall not be Permitted to remain upon such Sidewalk area during the hours from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.  
Section 7.4. - New Pavement and Markings. 
No Person Shall ride or drive any animal or any Vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any Street when a barrier Sign, conemarker or other warning device is in place warning Persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the Street or any portion thereof is closed.  
Section 7.5. - Limited Access. 
No Person Shall drive a Vehicle onto or from any limited Access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established.  
Section 7.6. - Restrictions on Use of Freeways. 
No Person Shall drive or operate any Bicycle, motor driven cycle, or any Vehicle which is not drawn by a motor Vehicle upon any Street established as a Freeway, as defined by State Law, nor Shall any Pedestrian walk across or along any such Street so Designated and described except in space set aside for the Use of Pedestrians, provided official Signs are in place giving Notice of such restrictions.  
Section 7.7. - Obedience to Barriers and Signs. 
No Person, public Utility or Department in the City Shall erect or place any barrier or Sign on any Street unless of a type Approved by the City Engineer or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or Sign lawfully placed on any Street by any Person, public Utility or by any Department of this City.  
Section 7.8. - No Entrance Into Intersection That Would Obstruct Traffic. 
No Operator of any Vehicle Shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the Vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other Vehicles or Pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal, indication to proceed.  
ARTICLE VIII - PEDESTRIANS REGULATIONS 
 
Section 8. - City Engineer to Establish Marked Crosswalks. 
(a)  The City Engineer Shall establish, Designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows: 
Crosswalks Shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the Central Traffic District and at such intersections outside such District, and at other places within or outside said District where the City Engineer determines that there is particular hazard to Pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in (b) of this section. 
(b)  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalks Shall be established in any Block which is less than four hundred (400) feet in length and such crosswalk Shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-Block. 
(c)  The City Engineer May place Signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that Pedestrians Shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated.  
Section 8.1. - When Pedestrians Must Use Crosswalks. 
No Pedestrian Shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the Central Traffic District or in any Business District. 
Amended by Ordinance No. 1074 to read as follows:  
Section 8.2. -   
No Pedestrian Shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in any Business District.  
ARTICLE IX - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES OR IN CERTAIN PLACES 
 
Section 9. - Application of Regulations. 
(a)  The provisions of this Ordinance prohibiting the Stopping, standing or parking of a Vehicle Shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to Stop a Vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or official traffic control device. 
(b)  The provisions of this Ordinance imposing a time limit on standing or parking Shall not relieve any Person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the Ordinances of this City prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of Vehicles in specified places or at specified times.  
Section 9.1. - Stopping or Standing in Parkways Prohibited. 
No Person Shall Stop, stand or park a Vehicle within any Parkway.  
Section 9.2. - City Engineer to Maintain No Stopping Zones and No Parking Areas. 
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to maintain, by appropriate Signs or by paint upon the Curb surface, all no Stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this Ordinance. 
When said Curb markings or Signs are in place no Operator of any Vehicle Shall Stop, stand or park such Vehicle adjacent to any such legible Curb marking or Sign in Violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance.  
Section 9.3. - No Parking Areas. 
No Operator of any Vehicle Shall Stop, stand, park, or leave standing such Vehicle in any of the Following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a Police Officer or other authorized officer, of traffic Sign or signal: 
(a)  Within any Divisional Island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate Signs or markings. 
(b)  On either side of any Street between the Projected Property lines of any public walk, public steps, Street, or thoroughfare terminating at such Street, when such area is indicated by appropriate Signs or by red paint upon the Curb surface. 
(c)  In any area where the City Engineer determines that the parking or Stopping of a Vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or Property, when such area is indicated by appropriate Signs or by red paint upon the Curb surface. 
(d)  In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate Signs or by red paint upon the Curb surface. 
(e)  Upon, along or across any Railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track. 
(f)  In any area where the parking or Stopping of any Vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or Property. 
(g)  On any Street or Highway where the Use of such Street or Highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the Street or Highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the Use of the Street or Highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the Use of the Street or Highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or Structures of unusual size, and the parking of such Vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such Use or movement; provided that Signs giving Notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the effective time of such no parking. 
(h)  At any place within twenty (20) feet of a point on the Curb immediately opposite the mid-Block and of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate Signs or by red paint upon the Curb surface. 
(i)  At any place within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection (in the Central Traffic District or) in any Business District when such place is indicated by appropriate Signs or by red paint upon the Curb surface except that a bus May Stop at a Designated bus Stop. 
(j)  Within twenty (20) feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard Stop Sign, or official electric flashing device.  
Section 9.4. - Use of Streets for Storage of Vehicles Prohibited. 
No Person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any Vehicle Shall park such Vehicle upon any Street or Alley for more than a consecutive period of 120 hours.  
Section 9.5. - Parking for Demonstration. 
No Operator of any Vehicle Shall park said Vehicle upon any Street in this City for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for Sale, unless authorized by resolution of the Council.  
Section 9.6. - Repairing or Greasing Vehicles on Public Streets. 
No Person Shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, Grease or cause to be Greased any Vehicle or any Part thereof upon any Public Street in this City. Temporary Emergency repairs May be made upon a Public Street.  
Section 9.7. - Washing or Polishing Vehicles. 
No Person Shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any Vehicle or any Part thereof upon any Public Street in this City, when a charge is made for such service.  
Section 9.8. - Parking Adjacent to Schools. 
(a)  The City Engineer is hereby authorized to erect Signs indicating no parking upon that side of any Street adjacent to any School Property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a Hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official Signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a Street adjacent to any School Property, no Person Shall park a Vehicle in any such Designated place.  
Section 9.9. - Parking Prohibited on Narrow Streets. 
(a)  The City Engineer is hereby authorized to place Signs or markings indicating no parking upon any Street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a Street as indicated by such Signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official Signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow Streets as authorized herein, no Person Shall park a Vehicle upon any such Street in Violation of any such Sign or marking.  
Section 9.10. - Parking on Grades. 
No Person Shall park or leave standing any Vehicle unattended on a Highway when upon any Grade exceeding 3% (within any Business or residence District) without Blocking the wheels of said Vehicle by turning them against the Curb or by other means.  
Section 9.11. - Unlawful Parking—Peddlers, Vendors. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section no Person Shall stand or park any Vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which Goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, or food stuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for Sale or bartered or exchanged or any lunch wagon or eating car or Vehicle, on any portion of any Street within this City except that such Vehicles, wagons or pushcarts May stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection Shall not apply to Persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of Business or distribution. 
(b)  No Person Shall park or stand on any Street, any lunch wagon, eating Cart or Vehicle, or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy or other articles of food are sold or offered for Sale without first obtaining a Written Permit to do so from the City Engineer , which Shall Designate the specific location in which such Cart Shall stand. 
(c)  No Person Shall park or stand any Vehicle or wagon Used or intended to be Used in the transportation of Property for hire on any Street while awaiting patronage for such Vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a Written Permit to do so from the City Engineer which Shall Designate the specific location where such Vehicle May stand. 
(d)  Whenever any Permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no Person Shall park or stand any Vehicle, wagon, or pushcart on any location other than as Designated in such Permit. In the event that the holder of any such Permit is convicted in any Court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such Permit Shall be forthwith revoked by the City Engineer upon the filing of the record of such conviction with such officer and no Permit Shall thereafter be issued to such Person until six (6) Months have elapsed from the date of such revocation.  
Section 9.12. - Emergency Parking Signs. 
(a)  Whenever the City Engineer Shall determine that an Emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the City Engineer Shall have power and authority to order temporary Signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of Vehicles is prohibited on such Streets and Alleys as the City Engineer Shall direct during the time such temporary Signs are in place. Such Signs Shall remain in place only during the existence of such Emergency and the City Engineer Shall cause such Signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
(b)  When Signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving Notice thereof, no Person Shall operate, park or stand any Vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such Signs.  
Section 9.13. - Display of Warning Devices When Commercial Vehicle Disabled. 
Every motor truck having an unladen weight of 4,000 pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any Street or Highway during darkness Shall be equipped with and carry at least two flares or two red lanterns or two warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors Shall be of a type Approved by the Department of California Highway Patrol. When any Vehicle above mentioned or any trailer or semi-trailer is disabled upon Streets or Highways outside of any Business or residence District within this City and upon which Street or Highway there is insufficient Street lighting to reveal a Vehicle at a distance of 200 feet during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above Shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately 100 feet in advance of, and 100 feet to the rear of such disabled Vehicle by the Driver thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four Approved class A-Type I turn signal lamps, at least two toward the front and at least two toward the rear of the Vehicle, Shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the devices mentioned above can be placed on the required locations. The warning signals herein mentioned Shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such Vehicle remains disabled upon such a Street or Highway.  
ARTICLE X - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS 
 
Section 10. - Twenty-four Minute Parking. 
Green Curb marking Shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than 24 minutes at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any Day except Sundays and Holidays. 
When authorized Signs, Parking Meters or Curb markings have been determined by the City Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving Notice thereof, no Operator of any Vehicle Shall Stop, stand or park said Vehicle adjacent to any such legible Curb marking or Sign or Parking Meter in Violation thereof.  
Section 10.1. - Forty Minute Parking. 
When authorized Signs, Parking Meters or Curb markings have been determined by the City Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving Notice thereof, no Operator of any Vehicle Shall Stop, stand or park said Vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any Day except Sundays and Holidays, for a period of time longer than 40 minutes.  
Section 10.2. - One Hour Parking. 
When authorized Signs, Parking Meters or Curb markings have been determined by the City Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving Notice thereof, no Operator of any Vehicle Shall Stop, stand or park said Vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any Day except Sundays and Holidays for a period of time longer than one hour.  
Section 10.3. - Two Hour Parking. 
When authorized Signs, Parking Meters or Curb markings have been determined by the City Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving Notice thereof, no Operator of any Vehicle Shall Stop, stand or park said Vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any Day except Sundays and Holidays for a period of time longer than two hours.  
Section 10.4. - Parking Parallel on One-Way Streets. 
(a)  Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a Vehicle May be Stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand Curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way Street unless Signs are in place prohibiting such Stopping or standing. 
(b)  In the event a Highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no Person Shall stand or park a Vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless Signs are in place Permitting such standing or parking. 
(c)  The City Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking Shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way Street or when standing or parking May be Permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a Highway having two or more separate roadways and Shall erect Signs giving Notice thereof. 
(d)  The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section Shall not apply in the event any commercial Vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or Goods, in which case such Vehicle May be backed up to the Curb, provided that such Vehicle does not extend beyond the center line of the Street and does not Block traffic thereby.  
Section 10.5. - Diagonal Parking. 
On any of the Streets or portions of Streets established by resolution of the Council as diagonal parking zones, when Signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it Shall be unlawful for the Operator of any Vehicle to park said Vehicle except: 
(a)  At the angle to the Curb indicated by Signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked Vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space; 
(b)  With the front wheel nearest the Curb within six (6) inches of said Curb. 
The provisions of this section Shall not apply when such Vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or Goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 11.4 of this Ordinance Shall be complied with.  
Section 10.6. - Parking Space Markings. 
The City Engineer is authorized to install and maintain Parking Space markings to indicate Parking Spaces adjacent to Curbs where authorized parking is Permitted. 
When such Parking Space markings are placed on the Highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no Vehicle Shall be Stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such Vehicle makes compliance impossible.  
Section 10.7. - No Stopping Zones. 
The City Engineer Shall Designate established no Stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate Signs indicating that Stopping of Vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and Day when Stopping is prohibited. 
During the hours and on the Days Designated on the Signs, it Shall be unlawful for the Operator of any Vehicle to Stop said Vehicle on any of the Streets or Parts of Streets established by resolution of the Council as no Stopping zones.  
Section 10.8. - All Night Parking Prohibited. 
No Person Shall Stop, stand or park a Vehicle on any Street for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. of any Day, provided that this section Shall not apply to a Vehicle of any regularly licensed physician when actually engaged in making professional calls.  
ARTICLE XI - STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY 
 
Section 11. - Authority to Establish Loading Zones. 
(a)  The City Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and to mark Loading Zones and Passenger Loading Zones as follows: 
1.  At any place in the Central Traffic District or any Business District. 
2.  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of Business or in front of any hall or place Used for the purpose of public assembly. 
(b)  In no event Shall more than one-half of the total Curb length in any Block be reserved for Loading Zone purposes. 
(c)  Loading Zones Shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all Curbs within such zones. 
(d)  Passenger Loading Zones Shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all Curbs in said zones.  
Section 11.1. - Curb Markings to Indicate No Stopping and Parking Regulations. 
(a)  The City Engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this Ordinance, to place, and when required herein Shall place, the Following Curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations and said Curb markings Shall have the meanings as herein set forth. 
1.  Red Shall mean no Stopping, standing or parking at any time except as Permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus May Stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
2.  Yellow Shall mean no Stopping, standing or parking at any time between 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. of any Day except Sunday(s and Holidays) for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or Materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers Shall not consume more than three (3) minutes nor the loading or unloading of Materials more than twenty (20) minutes. 
3.  White Shall mean no Stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which Shall not exceed three (3) minutes and such restrictions Shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any Day except Sunday(s and Holidays) and except as follows: 
A.  When such zone is in front of a Hotel or in front of a mailbox the restrictions Shall apply at all times. 
B.  When such zone is in front of a theatre the restrictions Shall apply at all times except when such theatre is closed. 
4.  When the City Engineer as authorized under this Ordinance has caused Curb markings to be placed, no Person Shall Stop, stand or park a Vehicle adjacent to any such legible Curb marking in Violation of any of the provisions of this section.  
Section 11.2. - Effects of Permission to Load or Unload. 
(a)  Permission herein granted to Stop or Stand a Vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of Materials Shall apply only to commercial Vehicles and Shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes. 
(b)  The loading or unloading of Materials Shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and Parcel post packages and United States mail. 
(c)  Permission herein granted to Stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers Shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but Shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three (3) minutes. 
(d)  Within the total time limits above specified the provisions of this section Shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without Permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted.  
Section 11.3. - Standing for Loading or Unloading Only. 
No Person Shall Stop, stand or park a Vehicle in any yellow Loading Zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or Materials for such time as is Permitted in Section 11.2.  
Section 11.4. - Standing in Passenger Loading Zone. 
No Person Shall Stop, stand or park a Vehicle in any Passenger Loading Zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 11.2.  
Section 11.5. - Standing in Any Alley. 
No Person Shall Stop, stand or park a Vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of Persons or Materials in any Alley.  
Section 11.6. - Coach Zones to be Established. 
(a)  The City Engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus zones opposite Curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common Carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof. 
(b)  Coach zones Shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection.  
ARTICLE XII - RESTRICTED Use OF CERTAIN STREETS 
 
Section 12. - Certain Vehicles Prohibited in Central Traffic District. 
(a)  No Person Shall operate any of the Following Vehicles in the Central Traffic District between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any Day: 
1.  Any freight Vehicle more than eight and one half (8½) feet in width, with load, or any freight Vehicle so loaded that any Part of its load extends more than twenty (20) feet to the front or rear of said Vehicle; 
2.  Any Vehicle carrying Building Material that has not been loaded, or is not to be unloaded, at some point within the Central Traffic District; 
3.  Any Vehicle conveying Refuse, Rubbish, Garbage or dirt. 
(b)  Provided that the City Engineer May by Written Permit authorize the operation of any such Vehicle for the purpose of making necessary Emergency deliveries to or from points within the Central Traffic District.  
Section 12.1. - Advertising Vehicles. 
No Person Shall operate or drive any Vehicle Used for advertising purposes or any advertising Vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loud-speaking device upon any Street or Alley at any time within the Central Traffic District.  
Section 12.2. - Horse-drawn Vehicles. 
No Person Shall drive any animal-drawn Vehicle into or within the Central Traffic District between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any Day.  
Section 12.3. - Truck Routes. 
(a)  Whenever any resolution of this City Designates and describes any Street or portion thereof as a Street the Use of which is Permitted by any Vehicle exceeding a maximum Gross Weight limit of three tons, the City Engineer is hereby authorized to Designate such Street or Streets by appropriate Signs as "Truck Routes" for the movement of Vehicles exceeding a maximum Gross Weight limit of three tons. 
(b)  When any such truck route or routes are established and Designated by appropriate Signs the Operator of any Vehicle exceeding a maximum Gross Weight limit of three tons Shall drive on such route or routes and none other except that nothing in this section Shall prohibit the Operator of any Vehicle exceeding a maximum Gross Weight of three tons coming from a "Truck Route" having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted Streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of Goods, wares and merchandise from or to any Building or Structure located on such restricted Streets or for the purpose of delivering Materials to be Used in the actual and bona fide repair, Alteration, remodeling or construction of any Building or Structure upon such restricted Streets for which a Building Permit has previously been obtained therefor. 
(c)  The provisions of this section Shall not apply to (1) passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, or to (2) any Vehicle owned by a public Utility while necessarily in Use in the construction, installation or repair of any public Utility. 
(d)  Those Streets and Parts of Streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of Vehicles exceeding a maximum Gross Weight of three tons.  
Section 12.4. - Commercial Vehicles Prohibited from Using Certain Streets. 
(a)  Whenever any resolution of this City Designates and describes any Street or portion thereof as a Street the Use of which is prohibited by any commercial Vehicle, the City Engineer Shall erect and maintain appropriate Signs on those Streets affected by such Ordinance. 
(b)  Those Streets and Parts of Streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be Streets, the Use of which is prohibited by any commercial Vehicle. The provisions of this section Shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission.  
ARTICLE XIII - PARKING METERS 
 
Section 13. - Parking Meter Zones. 
Parking Meter zones are those Streets or portions of Streets established by resolution of the Council as zones within which the parking of Vehicles Shall be controlled, regulated and inspected with the aid of Parking Meters. 
Amended by 13.0  
Section 13.0. - Parking Meter Zones. 
Parking Meter zones are those Streets or parking areas established by resolution of the Council as zones within which the parking of Vehicles Shall be controlled, regulated and inspected with the aid of Parking Meters. 
The City Engineer Shall cause Parking Meters to be installed and maintained in all Parking Meter zones.  
Section 13.1. - Manner of Installation. 
Parking meters Shall be installed upon the Curb or Sidewalk area immediately adjacent to each Parking Space. Each meter Shall be placed in such manner as to show or display by a Sign or signal that the Parking Space adjacent thereto is or is not legally in Use. 
Each Parking Meter Shall be set to display, after the operational procedure has been completed, a Sign or signal indicating legal parkings for that period of time conforming to the limit of parking time for the zone in which said Parking Meter is installed and Shall continue to operate from the time of the completion of the operational procedure until the expiration of the time fixed as the parking limit or a portion thereof for the Part of the Street upon which said meter is placed. Each said meter Shall also be so arranged that upon the expiration of said legal parking time it will indicate by a mechanical operation and by proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired.  
Section 13.2. - Time of Operation of Parking Meters. 
The provisions of this Ordinance relating to the operation of Parking Meters Shall be effective between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on every Day except Sunday(s and Holidays)  
Section 13.3. - Operational Procedure to be Followed. 
Immediately after Occupancy of a Parking Meter space, the Operator of a Vehicle Shall deposit a coin of the United States in said Parking Meter and if necessary turn a crank, knob, or handle in accordance with the instructions posted on the face of the Parking Meter.  
Section 13.4. - Unlawful to Park After Meter Time Has Expired. 
No Operator of any Vehicle Shall Permit said Vehicle to remain parked in any Parking Space during any time that the meter is showing a signal indicating that such space is illegally in Use other than such time immediately after the original Occupancy as is necessary to operate the meter to show legal parking.  
Section 13.5. - Unlawful to Extend Time Beyond Limit. 
No Person Shall follow the operational procedures or any Part of the operational procedure for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any Vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been established for the Parking Space adjacent to which said Parking Meter is placed.  
Section 13.6. - Improper Use of Meter. 
No Person Shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any Parking Meter any defaced or bent coin, or any slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States, or deface, injure, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy or impair the Usefulness of any Parking Meter.  
Section 13.7. - Deposit of Coins in Meter by Unauthorized Person. 
No Person, other than the Owner or Operator of a Vehicle, Shall deposit any coin in any Parking Meter without the knowledge or consent of said Owner or Operator of the Vehicle using the Parking Space immediately adjacent to said meter.  
Section 13.8. - Parking Meters and Parking Meter Standards Not to be Used for Certain Purposes. 
No Person Shall Attach anything to or allow a Bicycle, newsrack or any other article or thing to lean against a Parking Meter or a Parking Meter standard.  
Section 13.9. - Rule of Evidence. 
The parking or standing of any motor Vehicle in a Parking Space, at which space the Parking Meter displays the Sign or signal indicating illegal parking, Shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the Vehicle has been parked or allowed to stand in such space for a period longer than Permitted by this Ordinance.  
Section 13.10. - Use of Money Deposited in Parking Meters. 
All moneys collected from Parking Meters in this City Shall be placed in a special fund, which fund Shall be devoted exclusively to the Following purposes: 
(a)  For the purchasing, leasing, installing, repairing, maintaining, operating, removing, regulating and policing of Parking Meters in this City and for the payment of any and all expenses relating or Incidental thereto. 
(b)  For the purchasing, leasing, acquiring, improving, operating and maintaining of Off-Street Parking Facilities in this City. 
(c)  For the installation and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals. 
(d)  For the painting and marking of Streets and Curbs required for the direction of traffic and parking of motor Vehicles. 
(e)  For the proper regulation, control and inspection of parking and traffic upon the Public Streets. 
(f)  To be pledged as security for the payment of principal of an interest on Off-Street parking revenue bonds issued by this City, or any parking District organized within this City.  
Section 13.11. - Application of Other Articles. 
No section of this Article Shall be construed as Permitting any parking in Violation of any other provision of this Ordinance. 
Amended by Section 13.11a.  
Section 13.11(a) -   
Use of money deposited in Parking Meters in this City Shall be placed in the General Fund of the City of Colton.  
ARTICLE XIV - TRAINS 
 
Section 14. - Railway Gates. 
No Person Shall drive any Vehicle through, around, or under any crossing Gate or barrier at a Railroad Grade crossing while such Gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.  
Section 14.1. - Trains Not to Block Crossings. 
No Person Shall cause or Permit any Railway train or Railway cars or similar Vehicle on Rails to Stop or Stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the Use of any Street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes, except that this provision Shall not apply to Railway trains, cars or similar Vehicles on Rails while Blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the Operator of the train, car or similar Vehicle on Rails to Stop at or near the scene of the accident.  
ARTICLE XV - SPECIAL SPEED ZONES 
 
Section 15. - Increasing State Speed Limit in Certain Zones. 
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed Permitted by State Law upon the Following Streets is less than is necessary for safe operation of Vehicles thereon by reason of the Designation and signposting of said Streets as through Highways and/or by reason of widely spaced intersections, and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit Shall be as hereinafter set forth on those Streets or Parts of Streets herein Designated when Signs are erected giving Notice thereof: 
Name of Street or Portion Affected 	Declared Prima Facie Speed Limit 
 
Amended by Ordinance No. 1074.  
Section 15.a. - Increasing State Speed Limit in Certain Zones. 
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed Permitted by State Law upon the Following Streets is less than is necessary for safe operation of Vehicles thereon by reason of the Designation and Sign-posting of said Streets as through Highways and/or by reason of widely spaced intersections and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit Shall be as hereinafter set forth on those Streets or Parts of Streets or Parts of Streets herein Designated when Signs are erected giving Notice thereof: 
Name of Street or Portion Affected 	Declared Prima Facie Speed Limit 
"I" Street from 10th to Mt. Vernon 	35 MPH 
Mt. Vernon from Colton Avenue to "I" Street 	35 MPH 
North La Cadena from Mt. Vernon to 8th Street 	35 MPH 
Colton Avenue from 10th to Fairview 	35 MPH 
  
Section 15.1. - Regulation of Speed by Traffic Signals. 
The City Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to Permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at Variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the District or at intersections, and Shall erect appropriate Signs giving Notice thereof. 
Amended by Ordinance No. 1074.  
Section 15.b. - Regulation of Speed by Traffic Signals. 
The City Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals as to Permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at Variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the District at intersections and Shall erect appropriate Signs giving Notice thereof. 

APPENDIX UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE 
Published by the 
League of California Cities 
1960 
Adopted by the City of Colton by 
Ordinance No. 1074 
November 15, 1960 
UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
	Section 		Page 	

Article I 
DEFINITIONS 

	1. 	Definitions of words and phrases ..... 	178-9 	
	1.1 	Motor Vehicle Code definitions to be Used ..... 	178-9 	
	1.2 	Bicycle ..... 	178-9 	
	1.3 	Central Traffic District ..... 	178-9 	
	1.4 	Coach ..... 	178-9 	
	1.5 	Council ..... 	178-9 	
	1.6 	Curb ..... 	178-9 	
	1.7 	Divisional Island ..... 	178-10 	
	1.8 	Holidays ..... 	178-10 	
	1.9 	Loading Zone ..... 	178-10 	
	1.10 	Official Time Standard ..... 	178-10 	
	1.11 	Park ..... 	178-10 	
	1.12 	Parkway ..... 	178-10 	
	1.13 	Parking Meter ..... 	178-10 	
	1.14 	Passenger Loading Zone ..... 	178-11 	
	1.15 	Pedestrian ..... 	178-11 	
	1.16 	Police Officer ..... 	178-11 	
	1.17 	Stop ..... 	178-11 	
	1.18 	Stop or Stand ..... 	178-11 	
	1.19 	Vehicle Code ..... 	178-11 	

ARTICLE II 
	ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 	

	2. 	Authority of police and Fire Department officials ..... 	178-11 	
	2.1 	Persons other than officials Shall not direct traffic ..... 	178-12 	
	2.2 	Obedience to police or authorized officers ..... 	178-12 	
	2.3 	Required obedience to traffic Ordinance ..... 	178-12 	
	2.4 	Traffic regulations apply to Persons riding Bicycles or animals ..... 	178-12 	
	2.5 	Obstruction or Interference with police or authorized officers ..... 	178-12 	
	2.6. 	Public Employees to obey traffic regulations ..... 	178-13 	
	2.7 	Exemption of certain Vehicles ..... 	178-13 	
	2.8 	Report of damage to certain Property ..... 	178-13 	
	2.9 	When Vehicles May be removed from Streets ..... 	178-14 	

ARTICLE III 
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

	3. 	Authority to install traffic control devices ..... 	178-15 	
	3.1 	Traffic control Signs required for enforcement purposes ..... 	178-15 	
	3.2 	Obedience to traffic control devices ..... 	178-15 	
	3.3 	Installation of traffic signals ..... 	178-15 	
	3.4 	Lane marking ..... 	178-16 	
	3.5 	Distinctive roadway markings ..... 	178-16 	
	3.6 	Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue traffic control devices ..... 	178-16 	
	3.7 	Traffic control devices: hours of operation ..... 	178-17 	
	3.8 	Unauthorized painting of Curbs ..... 	178-17 	

ARTICLE IV 
TURNING MOVEMENTS 

	4. 	Authority to place and obedience to turning markers—intersections—multiple lanes ..... 	178-17 	
	4.1 	Authority to place restricted turn Signs ..... 	178-17 	
	4.2 	Obedience to No-turn Signs ..... 	178-18 	
	4.3 	Signal controlled intersections—right turns ..... 	178-18 	

ARTICLE V 
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 

	5. 	The City Engineer to Sign one-way Streets and Alleys ..... 	178-18 	

ARTICLE VI 
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED 

	6. 	The City Engineer to erect Stop Signs ..... 	178-18 	
	6.1 	Stop at through Street or Stop Sign ..... 	178-19 	
	6.2 	Emerging from Alley, Driveway or Building ..... 	178-19 	

ARTICLE VII 
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 

	7. 	Driving through funeral procession ..... 	178-19 	
	7.1 	Clinging to Moving Vehicle ..... 	178-19 	
	7.2 	Commercial Vehicles Using Private Driveways ..... 	178-20 	
	7.3 	Riding or Driving on Sidewalk ..... 	178-20 	
	7.4 	New Pavement and Markings ..... 	178-20 	
	7.5 	Limited Access ..... 	178-20 	
	7.6 	Restrictions on Use of Freeways ..... 	178-20 	
	7.7 	Obedience to barriers and Signs ..... 	178-21 	
	7.8 	No entrance into intersection that would obstruct traffic ..... 	178-21 	

ARTICLE VIII 
PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS 

	8. 	City Engineer to establish marked crosswalks ..... 	178-21 	
	8.1 	When Pedestrian Must Use crosswalks ..... 	178-22 	
	8.2 	When Pedestrian Must Use crosswalks—amended by Ordinance No.1074 ..... 	178-22 	

ARTICLE IX 
	STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES OR IN CERTAIN PLACES 	

	9. 	Application of regulations ..... 	178-22 	
	9.1 	Stopping or standing in Parkways prohibited ..... 	178-22 	
	9.2 	City Engineer to maintain no Stopping zones and no parking areas ..... 	178-22 	
	9.3 	No parking areas ..... 	178-23 	
	9.4 	Use of Streets for storage of Vehicles prohibited ..... 	178-24 	
	9.5 	Parking for demonstration ..... 	178-24 	
	9.6 	Repairing or greasing Vehicles on Public Streets ..... 	178-24 	
	9.7 	Washing or polishing Vehicles ..... 	178-24 	
	9.8 	Parking adjacent to Schools ..... 	178-25 	
	9.9 	Parking prohibited on narrow Streets ..... 	178-25 	
	9.10 	Parking on Grades ..... 	178-25 	
	9.11 	Unlawful parking—peddlers, vendors ..... 	178-25 	
	9.12 	Emergency parking Signs ..... 	178-26 	
	9.13 	Display of warning devices when commercial Vehicle disabled ..... 	178-27 	

ARTICLE X 
	STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS 	

	10. 	Twenty-four minute parking ..... 	178-27 	
	10.1 	Forty minute parking ..... 	178-28 	
	10.2 	One-hour parking ..... 	178-28 	
	10.3 	Two-hour parking ..... 	178-28 	
	10.4 	Parking parallel on one-way Streets ..... 	178-28 	
	10.5 	Diagonal parking ..... 	178-29 	
	10.6 	Parking Space markings ..... 	178-29 	
	10.7 	No-stopping zones ..... 	178-29 	
	10.8 	All Night parking prohibited ..... 	178-30 	

ARTICLE XI 
STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY 

	11. 	Authority to establish Loading Zones ..... 	178-30 	
	11.1 	Curb markings to indicate no Stopping and parking regulations ..... 	178-30 	
	11.2 	Effect of Permission to load or unload ..... 	178-31 	
	11.3 	Standing for loading or unloading only ..... 	178-32 	
	11.4 	Standing in Passenger Loading Zone ..... 	178-32 	
	11.5 	Standing in any Alley ..... 	178-32 	
	11.6 	Coach zones to be established ..... 	178-32 	

ARTICLE XII 
RESTRICTED Use OF CERTAIN STREETS 

	12. 	Certain Vehicles prohibited in Central Traffic District ..... 	178-33 	
	12.1 	Advertising Vehicles ..... 	178-33 	
	12.2 	Horse-drawn Vehicles ..... 	178-33 	
	12.3 	Truck routes ..... 	178-33 	
	12.4 	Commercial Vehicles ..... 	178-34 	

ARTICLE XIII 
PARKING METERS 

	13. 	Parking Meter zones ..... 	178-35 	
	13.0 	Parking Meter zones—amended by Ordinance No. 1074 ..... 	178-35 	
	13.1 	Manner of installation ..... 	178-35 	
	13.2 	Time of operation of Parking Meters ..... 	178-35 	
	13.3 	Operational procedure to be followed ..... 	178-36 	
	13.4 	Unlawful to park after meter time has expired ..... 	178-36 	
	13.5 	Unlawful to extend time beyond limit ..... 	178-36 	
	13.6 	Improper Use of meter ..... 	178-36 	
	13.7 	Deposit of coins in meter by unauthorized Person ..... 	178-36 	
	13.8 	Parking Meters and Parking Meter standards not to be Used for certain purposes ..... 	178-36 	
	13.9 	Rule of evidence ..... 	178-37 	
	13.10 	Use of money deposited in Parking Meters ..... 	178-37 	
	13.11 	Application of other articles ..... 	178-37 	

ARTICLE XIV 
TRAINS 

	14. 	Railway Gates ..... 	178-38 	
	14.1 	Trains not to Block crossings ..... 	178-38 	

ARTICLE XV 
SPECIAL SPEED ZONES 

	15. 	Increasing State speed limit in certain zones ..... 	178-38 	
	15.a 	Increasing State speed limit in certain zones—amended by Ordinance No. 1074 ..... 	178-39 	
	15.1 	Regulation of speed by traffic signals ..... 	178-39 	
	15.b 	Regulation of speed by traffic signals— amended by Ordinance1074 ..... 	178-39 	
  
UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE - CITY OF COLTON  
ARTICLE I - DEFINITIONS 
 
Section 1. - Definitions of Words and Phrases. 
The Following words and phrases when Used in this Ordinance Shall for the purpose of this Ordinance have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this article.  
Section 1.1. - Motor Vehicle Code Definitions to be Used. 
Whenever any words or phrases Used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California and amendments thereto, such definitions Shall apply.  
Section 1.2. - Bicycle. 
A light Vehicle without a motor, having two wheels, handle bars and a seat or seats, and propelled by the Operator.  
Section 1.3. - Central Traffic District. 
All Streets and portions of Streets within the area described as follows: All that area bounded by _______.  
Section 1.4. - Coach. 
Any motor bus, motor Coach, trackless trolley, or passenger stage Used as a common Carrier of passengers.  
Section 1.5. - Council. 
The Council of the City of Colton.  
Section 1.6. - Curb. 
The lateral boundary of the roadway whether such Curb be marked by Curbing construction, or not so marked; the word "Curb" as herein Used Shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a Street from parking strips in the center of a Street, not from tracks or rights of way of public Utility companies.  
Section 1.7. - Divisional Island. 
A raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic.  
Section 1.8. - Holidays. 
Within the meaning of this Ordinance, Holidays are the first Day of January, the twelfth Day of February, the twenty-second Day of February, the thirtieth Day of May, the fourth Day of July, the first Monday in September, the ninth Day of September, the twelfth Day of October, the eleventh Day of November, the twenty-fifth Day of December and Thanksgiving Day. If the first Day of January, twelfth Day of February, twenty-second Day of February, the thirtieth Day of May, the fourth Day of July, the ninth Day of September, the twelfth Day of October, the eleventh Day of November or the twenty-fifth Day of December falls upon a Sunday, the Monday Following is a Holiday.  
Section 1.9. - Loading Zone. 
The space adjacent to a Curb reserved for the exclusive Use of Vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or Materials.  
Section 1.10. - Official Time Standard. 
Whenever certain hours are named herein, they Shall mean standard time or Daylight saving time as May be in current Use in this City.  
Section 1.11. - Park. 
To stand or leave standing any Vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passenger or Materials.  
Section 1.12. - Parkway. 
That portion of a Street other than a roadway or a Sidewalk.  
Section 1.13. - Parking Meter. 
A mechanical device installed within or upon the Curb or Sidewalk area, immediately adjacent to a Parking Space, for the purpose of controlling the period of time Occupancy of such Parking Meter space by any Vehicle.  
Section 1.14. - Passenger Loading Zone. 
The space adjacent to a Curb reserved for the exclusive Use of Vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.  
Section 1.15. - Pedestrian. 
Any Person afoot.  
Section 1.16. - Police Officer. 
Every officer of the Police Department of this City or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for Violations of traffic regulations.  
Section 1.17. - Stop. 
When required, means complete cessation of movement.  
Section 1.18. - Stop or Stand. 
When prohibited means any Stopping or standing of a Vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or official traffic control device.  
Section 1.19. - Vehicle Code. 
The Vehicle Code of the State of California.  
ARTICLE II - ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
 
Section 2. - Authority of Police and Fire Department Officials. 
Officers of the Police Department and such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic Laws, except that in the event of a fire or other Emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard Pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department May direct traffic as conditions May require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this Ordinance or the Vehicle Code.  
Section 2.1. - Persons Other Than Officials Shall not Direct Traffic. 
No Person other than an officer of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department or a Person authorized by the Chief of Police or a Person authorized by Law Shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that Persons May operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the City Engineer .  
Section 2.2. - Obedience to Police or Authorized Officers. 
No Person Shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any Act forbidden by any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or Police Officer, or a member of the Fire Department, or a Person authorized by the Chief of Police or by Law.  
Section 2.3. - Required Obedience to Traffic Ordinance. 
It is a misdemeanor for any Person driving any Vehicle or other conveyance upon any Street or any Pedestrian, to do any Act forbidden, or fail to perform any Act required as applicable to any such Person under this Ordinance.  
Section 2.4. - Traffic Regulations Apply to Persons Riding Bicycles or Animals. 
Every Person riding a Bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a Highway Shall be granted all of the rights and Shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the Driver of a Vehicle by this Ordinance, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no Application.  
Section 2.5. - Obstruction or Interference with Police or Authorized Officers. 
No Person Shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any Police Officer or other officer or Employee of this City in their enforcement of this Ordinance. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark Used by any Police Officer or other Employee or officer of this City in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this Ordinance Shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this Ordinance, constitute such Interference or Obstruction.  
Section 2.6. - Public Employees to Obey Traffic Regulations. 
The provisions of this Ordinance Shall apply to the Operator of any Vehicle owned by or Used in the service of the United States Government, this State, any County or City, and it Shall be unlawful for any said Operator to violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance except as otherwise Permitted in this Ordinance or by the Vehicle Code.  
Section 2.7. - Exemption of Certain Vehicles. 
(a)  The provisions of this Ordinance regulating the operation, parking and standing of Vehicles Shall not apply to Vehicles operated by the Police or Fire Department, any public Ambulance or any public Utility Vehicle or any private Ambulance, which public Utility Vehicle or private Ambulance has qualified as an authorized Emergency Vehicle, when any Vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an Emergency Call. 
(b)  The foregoing exemptions Shall not, however, relieve the Operator of any such Vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his willful disregard of the safety of others. 
(c)  The provisions of this Ordinance regulating the parking or standing of Vehicles Shall not apply to any Vehicle of a City Department or public Utility while necessarily in Use for construction or repair work or any Vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in Use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail.  
Section 2.8. - Report of Damage to Certain Property. 
(a)  The Operator of a Vehicle or the Person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any Property publicly owned or owned by a public Utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, Parking Meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage, to any tree, traffic control device or other Property of a like nature located in or along any Street, Shall within twenty-four (24) hours after such accident make a Written report of such accident to the Police Department of this City. 
(b)  Every such report Shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the Person owning and of the Person operating or in charge of such Vehicle or animal, the license number of every such Vehicle, and Shall briefly describe the Property damage in such accident. 
(c)  The Operator of any Vehicle involved in an accident Shall not be subject, to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he Shall make a report as required in Subdivision (a) within 24 hours after regaining ability to make such report.  
Section 2.9. - When Vehicles May be Removed From Streets. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the Police Department of this City May remove or cause to be removed: 
(a)  Any Vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a Street or Highway for 120 or more consecutive hours. 
(b)  Any Vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a Street or Highway between the hours of eight a.m. and seven p.m., when such parking or standing is prohibited by Ordinance or resolution of this City and Signs are posted giving Notice of such removal. 
(c)  Any Vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a Street or Highway where the Use of such Street or Highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of this Street or Highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the Use of the Street or Highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the Use of the Street or Highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or Structures of unusual size, and the parking of such Vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such Use or movement; provided that Signs giving Notice that such Vehicle May be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal.  
ARTICLE III - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
 
Section 3. - Authority to Install Traffic Control Devices. 
(a)  The City Engineer Shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give Notice to the public of the Application of such Law the City Engineer is hereby authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the Law applicable thereto. 
(c)  The City Engineer May also place and maintain or cause to place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he May deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he Shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as May be set forth in this Ordinance or as May be determined by Ordinance or resolution of the Council.  
Section 3.1. - Traffic Control Signs Required for Enforcement Purposes. 
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this Ordinance for which Signs are required Shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible Signs are in place giving Notice of such provisions of the traffic Laws.  
Section 3.2. - Obedience to Traffic Control Devices. 
The Operator of any Vehicle or train Shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with this Ordinance unless otherwise directed by a Police Officer or other authorized Person subject to the exceptions granted the Operator of an authorized Emergency Vehicle when responding to Emergency Calls.  
Section 3.3. - Installation of Traffic Signals. 
(a)  The City Engineer is hereby directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or Property from exceptional hazard. 
(b)  The City Engineer Shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by Field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as May be pertinent and his determinations therefrom Shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the Division of Highways of the State Department of Public Works. 
(c)  Whenever the City Engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he Shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection Street name Signs visible to the principal flow of traffic unless such Street name Signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any said intersection.  
Section 3.4. - Lane Marking. 
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to mark centerlines and the lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by Vehicles and May place Signs temporarily Designating lanes to be Used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the Highway.  
Section 3.5. - Distinctive Roadway Markings. 
The City Engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those Streets or parks of Streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it Hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or Signs and markings. Such marking or Signs and marking Shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Public Works pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code.  
Section 3.6. - Authority to Remove, Relocate and Discontinue Traffic Control Devices. 
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this Ordinance whenever he Shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or obtain.  
Section 3.7. - Traffic Control Devices: Hours of Operation. 
The City Engineer Shall determine the hours and Days during which any traffic control device Shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or Days are specified in this Ordinance.  
Section 3.8. - Unauthorized Painting of Curbs. 
No Person, unless authorized by this City, Shall paint any Street or Curb surface; provided, however, that this section Shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a Curb surface by any Person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or Ordinance of this City pertaining thereto.  
ARTICLE IV - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
Section 4. - Authority to Place and Obedience to Turning Markers, Intersections, Multiple Lanes. 
(a)  The City Engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons, or Signs within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by Vehicles turning at such intersections, and the City Engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which Drivers of Vehicles May make right or left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated May conform to or be other than as prescribed by Law or Ordinance. 
(b)  When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by Vehicles turning thereat, no Driver of a Vehicle Shall disobey the directions of such indications.  
Section 4.1. - Authority to Place Restricted Turn Signs. 
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which Drivers of Vehicles Shall not make a right, left, or U turn, and Shall place proper Signs at such intersections. The making of such turns May be prohibited between certain hours of any Day and Permitted at other hours, in which event the same Shall be plainly indicated on the Signs or they May be removed when such turns are Permitted.  
Section 4.2. - Obedience to No-Turn Signs. 
Whenever authorized Signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is Permitted, no Driver of a Vehicle Shall disobey the directions of any such Sign.  
Section 4.3. - Signal Controlled Intersections—Right Turns. 
(a)  No Driver of a Vehicle Shall make a right turn against a red or Stop signal at any intersection which is Sign-posted giving Notice of such restriction as hereinafter provided in this section. 
(b)  The City Engineer Shall post appropriate Signs giving effect to this section where he determines that the making of right turns against a traffic signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic.  
ARTICLE V - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
 
Section 5. - The City Engineer to Sign One-Way Streets and Alleys. 
Whenever any Ordinance or resolution of this City Designates any one-way Street or Alley, the City Engineer Shall place and maintain Signs giving Notice thereof, and no such regulations Shall be effective unless such Signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement Shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.  
ARTICLE VI - SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED 
 
Section 6. - The City Engineer to Erect Stop Signs. 
Whenever any Ordinance or resolution of this City Designates and describes any Street or portion thereof as a through Street, or any intersection at which Vehicles are required to Stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any Railroad Grade crossing at which Vehicles are required to Stop, the City Engineer Shall erect and maintain Stop Signs as follows: 
A Stop Sign Shall be erected on each and every Street intersecting such through Street or portion thereof so Designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a Stop is required and at any Railroad Grade crossing so Designated. Every such Sign Shall conform with and Shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code.  
Section 6.1. - Stop at Through Street or Stop Sign. 
(a)  Those Streets and Parts of Streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be through Streets for the purposes of this section. 
(b)  The provisions of this section Shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the Council. 
(c)  The provisions of this section Shall apply at those Highway Railway Grade crossings as established by resolution of the Council.  
Section 6.2. - Emerging from Alley, Driveway or Building. 
The Driver of a Vehicle emerging from an Alley, Driveway or Building Shall Stop such Vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a Sidewalk or into the Sidewalk area extending across any Alley way or Driveway.  
ARTICLE VII - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
 
Section 7. - Driving Through Funeral Procession. 
No Operator of any Vehicle Shall drive between the Vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a Parade, provided that such Vehicles are conspicuously so Designated. The directing of all Vehicles and traffic on any Street over which such funeral procession or Parade wishes to pass Shall be subject to the orders of the Police Department.  
Section 7.1. - Clinging to Moving Vehicle. 
No Person Shall Attach himself with his hands, or to catch on, or hold on to with his hands or by other means, to any moving Vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom.  
Section 7.2. - Commercial Vehicles Using Private Driveways. 
No Person Shall operate or drive a commercial Vehicle in, on or across any private Driveway approach or Sidewalk area or the Driveway itself without the consent of the Owner or Occupant of the Property, if a Sign or markings are in place indicating that the Use of such Driveway is prohibited. 
For the purpose of this section a commercial Vehicle Shall mean a Vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton.  
Section 7.3. - Riding or Driving on Sidewalk. 
No Person Shall ride, drive, propel, or cause to be propelled any Vehicle or animal across or upon any Sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed Driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded Vehicle across a Sidewalk; provided further, that said Sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and Written Permission be previously obtained from the City Engineer . Such wooden planks Shall not be Permitted to remain upon such Sidewalk area during the hours from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.  
Section 7.4. - New Pavement and Markings. 
No Person Shall ride or drive any animal or any Vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any Street when a barrier Sign, conemarker or other warning device is in place warning Persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the Street or any portion thereof is closed.  
Section 7.5. - Limited Access. 
No Person Shall drive a Vehicle onto or from any limited Access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established.  
Section 7.6. - Restrictions on Use of Freeways. 
No Person Shall drive or operate any Bicycle, motor driven cycle, or any Vehicle which is not drawn by a motor Vehicle upon any Street established as a Freeway, as defined by State Law, nor Shall any Pedestrian walk across or along any such Street so Designated and described except in space set aside for the Use of Pedestrians, provided official Signs are in place giving Notice of such restrictions.  
Section 7.7. - Obedience to Barriers and Signs. 
No Person, public Utility or Department in the City Shall erect or place any barrier or Sign on any Street unless of a type Approved by the City Engineer or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or Sign lawfully placed on any Street by any Person, public Utility or by any Department of this City.  
Section 7.8. - No Entrance Into Intersection That Would Obstruct Traffic. 
No Operator of any Vehicle Shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the Vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other Vehicles or Pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal, indication to proceed.  
ARTICLE VIII - PEDESTRIANS REGULATIONS 
 
Section 8. - City Engineer to Establish Marked Crosswalks. 
(a)  The City Engineer Shall establish, Designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows: 
Crosswalks Shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the Central Traffic District and at such intersections outside such District, and at other places within or outside said District where the City Engineer determines that there is particular hazard to Pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in (b) of this section. 
(b)  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalks Shall be established in any Block which is less than four hundred (400) feet in length and such crosswalk Shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-Block. 
(c)  The City Engineer May place Signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that Pedestrians Shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated.  
Section 8.1. - When Pedestrians Must Use Crosswalks. 
No Pedestrian Shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the Central Traffic District or in any Business District. 
Amended by Ordinance No. 1074 to read as follows:  
Section 8.2. -   
No Pedestrian Shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in any Business District.  
ARTICLE IX - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES OR IN CERTAIN PLACES 
 
Section 9. - Application of Regulations. 
(a)  The provisions of this Ordinance prohibiting the Stopping, standing or parking of a Vehicle Shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to Stop a Vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or official traffic control device. 
(b)  The provisions of this Ordinance imposing a time limit on standing or parking Shall not relieve any Person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the Ordinances of this City prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of Vehicles in specified places or at specified times.  
Section 9.1. - Stopping or Standing in Parkways Prohibited. 
No Person Shall Stop, stand or park a Vehicle within any Parkway.  
Section 9.2. - City Engineer to Maintain No Stopping Zones and No Parking Areas. 
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to maintain, by appropriate Signs or by paint upon the Curb surface, all no Stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this Ordinance. 
When said Curb markings or Signs are in place no Operator of any Vehicle Shall Stop, stand or park such Vehicle adjacent to any such legible Curb marking or Sign in Violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance.  
Section 9.3. - No Parking Areas. 
No Operator of any Vehicle Shall Stop, stand, park, or leave standing such Vehicle in any of the Following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a Police Officer or other authorized officer, of traffic Sign or signal: 
(a)  Within any Divisional Island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate Signs or markings. 
(b)  On either side of any Street between the Projected Property lines of any public walk, public steps, Street, or thoroughfare terminating at such Street, when such area is indicated by appropriate Signs or by red paint upon the Curb surface. 
(c)  In any area where the City Engineer determines that the parking or Stopping of a Vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or Property, when such area is indicated by appropriate Signs or by red paint upon the Curb surface. 
(d)  In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate Signs or by red paint upon the Curb surface. 
(e)  Upon, along or across any Railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track. 
(f)  In any area where the parking or Stopping of any Vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or Property. 
(g)  On any Street or Highway where the Use of such Street or Highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the Street or Highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the Use of the Street or Highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the Use of the Street or Highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or Structures of unusual size, and the parking of such Vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such Use or movement; provided that Signs giving Notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the effective time of such no parking. 
(h)  At any place within twenty (20) feet of a point on the Curb immediately opposite the mid-Block and of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate Signs or by red paint upon the Curb surface. 
(i)  At any place within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection (in the Central Traffic District or) in any Business District when such place is indicated by appropriate Signs or by red paint upon the Curb surface except that a bus May Stop at a Designated bus Stop. 
(j)  Within twenty (20) feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard Stop Sign, or official electric flashing device.  
Section 9.4. - Use of Streets for Storage of Vehicles Prohibited. 
No Person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any Vehicle Shall park such Vehicle upon any Street or Alley for more than a consecutive period of 120 hours.  
Section 9.5. - Parking for Demonstration. 
No Operator of any Vehicle Shall park said Vehicle upon any Street in this City for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for Sale, unless authorized by resolution of the Council.  
Section 9.6. - Repairing or Greasing Vehicles on Public Streets. 
No Person Shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, Grease or cause to be Greased any Vehicle or any Part thereof upon any Public Street in this City. Temporary Emergency repairs May be made upon a Public Street.  
Section 9.7. - Washing or Polishing Vehicles. 
No Person Shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any Vehicle or any Part thereof upon any Public Street in this City, when a charge is made for such service.  
Section 9.8. - Parking Adjacent to Schools. 
(a)  The City Engineer is hereby authorized to erect Signs indicating no parking upon that side of any Street adjacent to any School Property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a Hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official Signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a Street adjacent to any School Property, no Person Shall park a Vehicle in any such Designated place.  
Section 9.9. - Parking Prohibited on Narrow Streets. 
(a)  The City Engineer is hereby authorized to place Signs or markings indicating no parking upon any Street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a Street as indicated by such Signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official Signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow Streets as authorized herein, no Person Shall park a Vehicle upon any such Street in Violation of any such Sign or marking.  
Section 9.10. - Parking on Grades. 
No Person Shall park or leave standing any Vehicle unattended on a Highway when upon any Grade exceeding 3% (within any Business or residence District) without Blocking the wheels of said Vehicle by turning them against the Curb or by other means.  
Section 9.11. - Unlawful Parking—Peddlers, Vendors. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section no Person Shall stand or park any Vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which Goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, or food stuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for Sale or bartered or exchanged or any lunch wagon or eating car or Vehicle, on any portion of any Street within this City except that such Vehicles, wagons or pushcarts May stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection Shall not apply to Persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of Business or distribution. 
(b)  No Person Shall park or stand on any Street, any lunch wagon, eating Cart or Vehicle, or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy or other articles of food are sold or offered for Sale without first obtaining a Written Permit to do so from the City Engineer , which Shall Designate the specific location in which such Cart Shall stand. 
(c)  No Person Shall park or stand any Vehicle or wagon Used or intended to be Used in the transportation of Property for hire on any Street while awaiting patronage for such Vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a Written Permit to do so from the City Engineer which Shall Designate the specific location where such Vehicle May stand. 
(d)  Whenever any Permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no Person Shall park or stand any Vehicle, wagon, or pushcart on any location other than as Designated in such Permit. In the event that the holder of any such Permit is convicted in any Court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such Permit Shall be forthwith revoked by the City Engineer upon the filing of the record of such conviction with such officer and no Permit Shall thereafter be issued to such Person until six (6) Months have elapsed from the date of such revocation.  
Section 9.12. - Emergency Parking Signs. 
(a)  Whenever the City Engineer Shall determine that an Emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the City Engineer Shall have power and authority to order temporary Signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of Vehicles is prohibited on such Streets and Alleys as the City Engineer Shall direct during the time such temporary Signs are in place. Such Signs Shall remain in place only during the existence of such Emergency and the City Engineer Shall cause such Signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
(b)  When Signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving Notice thereof, no Person Shall operate, park or stand any Vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such Signs.  
Section 9.13. - Display of Warning Devices When Commercial Vehicle Disabled. 
Every motor truck having an unladen weight of 4,000 pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any Street or Highway during darkness Shall be equipped with and carry at least two flares or two red lanterns or two warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors Shall be of a type Approved by the Department of California Highway Patrol. When any Vehicle above mentioned or any trailer or semi-trailer is disabled upon Streets or Highways outside of any Business or residence District within this City and upon which Street or Highway there is insufficient Street lighting to reveal a Vehicle at a distance of 200 feet during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above Shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately 100 feet in advance of, and 100 feet to the rear of such disabled Vehicle by the Driver thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four Approved class A-Type I turn signal lamps, at least two toward the front and at least two toward the rear of the Vehicle, Shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the devices mentioned above can be placed on the required locations. The warning signals herein mentioned Shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such Vehicle remains disabled upon such a Street or Highway.  
ARTICLE X - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS 
 
Section 10. - Twenty-four Minute Parking. 
Green Curb marking Shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than 24 minutes at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any Day except Sundays and Holidays. 
When authorized Signs, Parking Meters or Curb markings have been determined by the City Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving Notice thereof, no Operator of any Vehicle Shall Stop, stand or park said Vehicle adjacent to any such legible Curb marking or Sign or Parking Meter in Violation thereof.  
Section 10.1. - Forty Minute Parking. 
When authorized Signs, Parking Meters or Curb markings have been determined by the City Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving Notice thereof, no Operator of any Vehicle Shall Stop, stand or park said Vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any Day except Sundays and Holidays, for a period of time longer than 40 minutes.  
Section 10.2. - One Hour Parking. 
When authorized Signs, Parking Meters or Curb markings have been determined by the City Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving Notice thereof, no Operator of any Vehicle Shall Stop, stand or park said Vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any Day except Sundays and Holidays for a period of time longer than one hour.  
Section 10.3. - Two Hour Parking. 
When authorized Signs, Parking Meters or Curb markings have been determined by the City Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving Notice thereof, no Operator of any Vehicle Shall Stop, stand or park said Vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any Day except Sundays and Holidays for a period of time longer than two hours.  
Section 10.4. - Parking Parallel on One-Way Streets. 
(a)  Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a Vehicle May be Stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand Curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way Street unless Signs are in place prohibiting such Stopping or standing. 
(b)  In the event a Highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no Person Shall stand or park a Vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless Signs are in place Permitting such standing or parking. 
(c)  The City Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking Shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way Street or when standing or parking May be Permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a Highway having two or more separate roadways and Shall erect Signs giving Notice thereof. 
(d)  The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section Shall not apply in the event any commercial Vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or Goods, in which case such Vehicle May be backed up to the Curb, provided that such Vehicle does not extend beyond the center line of the Street and does not Block traffic thereby.  
Section 10.5. - Diagonal Parking. 
On any of the Streets or portions of Streets established by resolution of the Council as diagonal parking zones, when Signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it Shall be unlawful for the Operator of any Vehicle to park said Vehicle except: 
(a)  At the angle to the Curb indicated by Signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked Vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space; 
(b)  With the front wheel nearest the Curb within six (6) inches of said Curb. 
The provisions of this section Shall not apply when such Vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or Goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 11.4 of this Ordinance Shall be complied with.  
Section 10.6. - Parking Space Markings. 
The City Engineer is authorized to install and maintain Parking Space markings to indicate Parking Spaces adjacent to Curbs where authorized parking is Permitted. 
When such Parking Space markings are placed on the Highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no Vehicle Shall be Stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such Vehicle makes compliance impossible.  
Section 10.7. - No Stopping Zones. 
The City Engineer Shall Designate established no Stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate Signs indicating that Stopping of Vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and Day when Stopping is prohibited. 
During the hours and on the Days Designated on the Signs, it Shall be unlawful for the Operator of any Vehicle to Stop said Vehicle on any of the Streets or Parts of Streets established by resolution of the Council as no Stopping zones.  
Section 10.8. - All Night Parking Prohibited. 
No Person Shall Stop, stand or park a Vehicle on any Street for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. of any Day, provided that this section Shall not apply to a Vehicle of any regularly licensed physician when actually engaged in making professional calls.  
ARTICLE XI - STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY 
 
Section 11. - Authority to Establish Loading Zones. 
(a)  The City Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and to mark Loading Zones and Passenger Loading Zones as follows: 
1.  At any place in the Central Traffic District or any Business District. 
2.  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of Business or in front of any hall or place Used for the purpose of public assembly. 
(b)  In no event Shall more than one-half of the total Curb length in any Block be reserved for Loading Zone purposes. 
(c)  Loading Zones Shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all Curbs within such zones. 
(d)  Passenger Loading Zones Shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all Curbs in said zones.  
Section 11.1. - Curb Markings to Indicate No Stopping and Parking Regulations. 
(a)  The City Engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this Ordinance, to place, and when required herein Shall place, the Following Curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations and said Curb markings Shall have the meanings as herein set forth. 
1.  Red Shall mean no Stopping, standing or parking at any time except as Permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus May Stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
2.  Yellow Shall mean no Stopping, standing or parking at any time between 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. of any Day except Sunday(s and Holidays) for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or Materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers Shall not consume more than three (3) minutes nor the loading or unloading of Materials more than twenty (20) minutes. 
3.  White Shall mean no Stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which Shall not exceed three (3) minutes and such restrictions Shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any Day except Sunday(s and Holidays) and except as follows: 
A.  When such zone is in front of a Hotel or in front of a mailbox the restrictions Shall apply at all times. 
B.  When such zone is in front of a theatre the restrictions Shall apply at all times except when such theatre is closed. 
4.  When the City Engineer as authorized under this Ordinance has caused Curb markings to be placed, no Person Shall Stop, stand or park a Vehicle adjacent to any such legible Curb marking in Violation of any of the provisions of this section.  
Section 11.2. - Effects of Permission to Load or Unload. 
(a)  Permission herein granted to Stop or Stand a Vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of Materials Shall apply only to commercial Vehicles and Shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes. 
(b)  The loading or unloading of Materials Shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and Parcel post packages and United States mail. 
(c)  Permission herein granted to Stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers Shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but Shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three (3) minutes. 
(d)  Within the total time limits above specified the provisions of this section Shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without Permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted.  
Section 11.3. - Standing for Loading or Unloading Only. 
No Person Shall Stop, stand or park a Vehicle in any yellow Loading Zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or Materials for such time as is Permitted in Section 11.2.  
Section 11.4. - Standing in Passenger Loading Zone. 
No Person Shall Stop, stand or park a Vehicle in any Passenger Loading Zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 11.2.  
Section 11.5. - Standing in Any Alley. 
No Person Shall Stop, stand or park a Vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of Persons or Materials in any Alley.  
Section 11.6. - Coach Zones to be Established. 
(a)  The City Engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus zones opposite Curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common Carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof. 
(b)  Coach zones Shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection.  
ARTICLE XII - RESTRICTED Use OF CERTAIN STREETS 
 
Section 12. - Certain Vehicles Prohibited in Central Traffic District. 
(a)  No Person Shall operate any of the Following Vehicles in the Central Traffic District between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any Day: 
1.  Any freight Vehicle more than eight and one half (8½) feet in width, with load, or any freight Vehicle so loaded that any Part of its load extends more than twenty (20) feet to the front or rear of said Vehicle; 
2.  Any Vehicle carrying Building Material that has not been loaded, or is not to be unloaded, at some point within the Central Traffic District; 
3.  Any Vehicle conveying Refuse, Rubbish, Garbage or dirt. 
(b)  Provided that the City Engineer May by Written Permit authorize the operation of any such Vehicle for the purpose of making necessary Emergency deliveries to or from points within the Central Traffic District.  
Section 12.1. - Advertising Vehicles. 
No Person Shall operate or drive any Vehicle Used for advertising purposes or any advertising Vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loud-speaking device upon any Street or Alley at any time within the Central Traffic District.  
Section 12.2. - Horse-drawn Vehicles. 
No Person Shall drive any animal-drawn Vehicle into or within the Central Traffic District between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any Day.  
Section 12.3. - Truck Routes. 
(a)  Whenever any resolution of this City Designates and describes any Street or portion thereof as a Street the Use of which is Permitted by any Vehicle exceeding a maximum Gross Weight limit of three tons, the City Engineer is hereby authorized to Designate such Street or Streets by appropriate Signs as "Truck Routes" for the movement of Vehicles exceeding a maximum Gross Weight limit of three tons. 
(b)  When any such truck route or routes are established and Designated by appropriate Signs the Operator of any Vehicle exceeding a maximum Gross Weight limit of three tons Shall drive on such route or routes and none other except that nothing in this section Shall prohibit the Operator of any Vehicle exceeding a maximum Gross Weight of three tons coming from a "Truck Route" having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted Streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of Goods, wares and merchandise from or to any Building or Structure located on such restricted Streets or for the purpose of delivering Materials to be Used in the actual and bona fide repair, Alteration, remodeling or construction of any Building or Structure upon such restricted Streets for which a Building Permit has previously been obtained therefor. 
(c)  The provisions of this section Shall not apply to (1) passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, or to (2) any Vehicle owned by a public Utility while necessarily in Use in the construction, installation or repair of any public Utility. 
(d)  Those Streets and Parts of Streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of Vehicles exceeding a maximum Gross Weight of three tons.  
Section 12.4. - Commercial Vehicles Prohibited from Using Certain Streets. 
(a)  Whenever any resolution of this City Designates and describes any Street or portion thereof as a Street the Use of which is prohibited by any commercial Vehicle, the City Engineer Shall erect and maintain appropriate Signs on those Streets affected by such Ordinance. 
(b)  Those Streets and Parts of Streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be Streets, the Use of which is prohibited by any commercial Vehicle. The provisions of this section Shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission.  
ARTICLE XIII - PARKING METERS 
 
Section 13. - Parking Meter Zones. 
Parking Meter zones are those Streets or portions of Streets established by resolution of the Council as zones within which the parking of Vehicles Shall be controlled, regulated and inspected with the aid of Parking Meters. 
Amended by 13.0  
Section 13.0. - Parking Meter Zones. 
Parking Meter zones are those Streets or parking areas established by resolution of the Council as zones within which the parking of Vehicles Shall be controlled, regulated and inspected with the aid of Parking Meters. 
The City Engineer Shall cause Parking Meters to be installed and maintained in all Parking Meter zones.  
Section 13.1. - Manner of Installation. 
Parking meters Shall be installed upon the Curb or Sidewalk area immediately adjacent to each Parking Space. Each meter Shall be placed in such manner as to show or display by a Sign or signal that the Parking Space adjacent thereto is or is not legally in Use. 
Each Parking Meter Shall be set to display, after the operational procedure has been completed, a Sign or signal indicating legal parkings for that period of time conforming to the limit of parking time for the zone in which said Parking Meter is installed and Shall continue to operate from the time of the completion of the operational procedure until the expiration of the time fixed as the parking limit or a portion thereof for the Part of the Street upon which said meter is placed. Each said meter Shall also be so arranged that upon the expiration of said legal parking time it will indicate by a mechanical operation and by proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired.  
Section 13.2. - Time of Operation of Parking Meters. 
The provisions of this Ordinance relating to the operation of Parking Meters Shall be effective between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on every Day except Sunday(s and Holidays)  
Section 13.3. - Operational Procedure to be Followed. 
Immediately after Occupancy of a Parking Meter space, the Operator of a Vehicle Shall deposit a coin of the United States in said Parking Meter and if necessary turn a crank, knob, or handle in accordance with the instructions posted on the face of the Parking Meter.  
Section 13.4. - Unlawful to Park After Meter Time Has Expired. 
No Operator of any Vehicle Shall Permit said Vehicle to remain parked in any Parking Space during any time that the meter is showing a signal indicating that such space is illegally in Use other than such time immediately after the original Occupancy as is necessary to operate the meter to show legal parking.  
Section 13.5. - Unlawful to Extend Time Beyond Limit. 
No Person Shall follow the operational procedures or any Part of the operational procedure for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any Vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been established for the Parking Space adjacent to which said Parking Meter is placed.  
Section 13.6. - Improper Use of Meter. 
No Person Shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any Parking Meter any defaced or bent coin, or any slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States, or deface, injure, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy or impair the Usefulness of any Parking Meter.  
Section 13.7. - Deposit of Coins in Meter by Unauthorized Person. 
No Person, other than the Owner or Operator of a Vehicle, Shall deposit any coin in any Parking Meter without the knowledge or consent of said Owner or Operator of the Vehicle using the Parking Space immediately adjacent to said meter.  
Section 13.8. - Parking Meters and Parking Meter Standards Not to be Used for Certain Purposes. 
No Person Shall Attach anything to or allow a Bicycle, newsrack or any other article or thing to lean against a Parking Meter or a Parking Meter standard.  
Section 13.9. - Rule of Evidence. 
The parking or standing of any motor Vehicle in a Parking Space, at which space the Parking Meter displays the Sign or signal indicating illegal parking, Shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the Vehicle has been parked or allowed to stand in such space for a period longer than Permitted by this Ordinance.  
Section 13.10. - Use of Money Deposited in Parking Meters. 
All moneys collected from Parking Meters in this City Shall be placed in a special fund, which fund Shall be devoted exclusively to the Following purposes: 
(a)  For the purchasing, leasing, installing, repairing, maintaining, operating, removing, regulating and policing of Parking Meters in this City and for the payment of any and all expenses relating or Incidental thereto. 
(b)  For the purchasing, leasing, acquiring, improving, operating and maintaining of Off-Street Parking Facilities in this City. 
(c)  For the installation and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals. 
(d)  For the painting and marking of Streets and Curbs required for the direction of traffic and parking of motor Vehicles. 
(e)  For the proper regulation, control and inspection of parking and traffic upon the Public Streets. 
(f)  To be pledged as security for the payment of principal of an interest on Off-Street parking revenue bonds issued by this City, or any parking District organized within this City.  
Section 13.11. - Application of Other Articles. 
No section of this Article Shall be construed as Permitting any parking in Violation of any other provision of this Ordinance. 
Amended by Section 13.11a.  
Section 13.11(a) -   
Use of money deposited in Parking Meters in this City Shall be placed in the General Fund of the City of Colton.  
ARTICLE XIV - TRAINS 
 
Section 14. - Railway Gates. 
No Person Shall drive any Vehicle through, around, or under any crossing Gate or barrier at a Railroad Grade crossing while such Gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.  
Section 14.1. - Trains Not to Block Crossings. 
No Person Shall cause or Permit any Railway train or Railway cars or similar Vehicle on Rails to Stop or Stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the Use of any Street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes, except that this provision Shall not apply to Railway trains, cars or similar Vehicles on Rails while Blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the Operator of the train, car or similar Vehicle on Rails to Stop at or near the scene of the accident.  
ARTICLE XV - SPECIAL SPEED ZONES 
 
Section 15. - Increasing State Speed Limit in Certain Zones. 
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed Permitted by State Law upon the Following Streets is less than is necessary for safe operation of Vehicles thereon by reason of the Designation and signposting of said Streets as through Highways and/or by reason of widely spaced intersections, and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit Shall be as hereinafter set forth on those Streets or Parts of Streets herein Designated when Signs are erected giving Notice thereof: 
Name of Street or Portion Affected 	Declared Prima Facie Speed Limit 
 
Amended by Ordinance No. 1074.  
Section 15.a. - Increasing State Speed Limit in Certain Zones. 
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed Permitted by State Law upon the Following Streets is less than is necessary for safe operation of Vehicles thereon by reason of the Designation and Sign-posting of said Streets as through Highways and/or by reason of widely spaced intersections and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit Shall be as hereinafter set forth on those Streets or Parts of Streets or Parts of Streets herein Designated when Signs are erected giving Notice thereof: 
Name of Street or Portion Affected 	Declared Prima Facie Speed Limit 
"I" Street from 10th to Mt. Vernon 	35 MPH 
Mt. Vernon from Colton Avenue to "I" Street 	35 MPH 
North La Cadena from Mt. Vernon to 8th Street 	35 MPH 
Colton Avenue from 10th to Fairview 	35 MPH 
  
Section 15.1. - Regulation of Speed by Traffic Signals. 
The City Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to Permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at Variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the District or at intersections, and Shall erect appropriate Signs giving Notice thereof. 
Amended by Ordinance No. 1074.  
Section 15.b. - Regulation of Speed by Traffic Signals. 
The City Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals as to Permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at Variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the District at intersections and Shall erect appropriate Signs giving Notice thereof.  
Title 12 - STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES  
Chapter 12.08 - REMOVAL OF PROPERTY—EXCAVATIONS 
 
12.08.010 - Property in Public Places—Notice to Owner to relocate. 
Whenever the Street superintendent of the City determines that it is reasonable and necessary that any Property located in, upon or under any Public Street or Public Place in this City, which is owned, maintained or controlled by any Person, firm or corporation, needs to be temporarily or permanently disconnected and/or moved from any Public Street or other Public Place, in order that the City or other governmental agency or instrumentality, within its governmental authority, May install, construct, build, repair, remodel, remove, change, or erect any public Improvement or works within the municipal limits, the Street superintendent Shall give Written Notice to the Person, firm or corporation owning, maintaining or controlling such Property by mail postpaid to their last known address notifying them to temporarily or permanently move, relocate and/or disconnect the same as May be deemed necessary; and such Notice Shall identify and Designate the Property to be so moved, relocated or disconnected and Shall Designate the new location if deemed necessary to which any such Property May be moved or relocated. 
(Ord. 875 § 1, 1955)  
12.08.020 - Property in Public Places—Owner's duty to remove—Failure—Liability of Owner. 
It Shall be the duty of any such Person, firm or corporation within sixty Days from the date of mailing such Notice to commence, as soon as reasonably possible, the removal, relocating or disconnecting of said Property and to thereafter continuously and diligently perform such work in order that the same May be completed in the shortest possible and reasonable time; and should the same not be commenced or not performed or not completed as stated in Section 12.08.010, then and in that event the superintendent of Streets Shall be and is authorized and empowered to do the same or so much thereof as May be necessary to accomplish the desired purpose and charge the cost thereof to the Owner thereof or such other Person, firm or corporation who May be responsible or liable therefor; provided, however, the superintendent of Streets prior to performing such work Shall give Written Notice by mail post-paid as stated in Section 12.08.010 addressed to the last known address of such Person, firm or corporation prior to commencing any such work if reasonably practicable; provided further, however, in case of any Emergency or other unusual circumstances which makes the Notices mentioned in Section 12.08.010, or either of them, impossible or impracticable, then and in that event the Notices or Notice need not be given and the work May be done in the most reasonable manner under the circumstances that May then exist without any such Notice being given prior thereto. 
(Ord. 875 § 2, 1955)  
12.08.030 - Excavation—Permits—Required. 
No Person, firm or corporation other than an authorized official or Employee of the City or other authorized governmental official, Shall make an excavation, cut or fill in or upon a Street or Highway including the Sidewalks thereof, for the installation, repair or removal of any pipe, conduit, duct or tunnel or for any other purpose whatsoever other than the normal planting of grass, trees or shrubs or the normal installation of poles and anchors serving overhead-Utility lines, unless and until a Permit Shall first have been issued to such Person, firm or corporation by the superintendent of Streets authorizing the same; provided, however, public Utility corporation operating within the limits of the City may, in case of an Emergency, make any such necessary excavation, cut or fill, provided an Application for a Permit Shall be made within twenty-four hours thereafter, and provided such work is in compliance with all Law in effect at the time in reference to same. 
(Ord. 875 § 3, 1955)  
12.08.040 - Excavation—Permit—Application—Form—Fee. 
All Applications for Permits mentioned in Section 12.08.030 Shall be filed with the superintendent of Streets on the authorized and Approved forms relating thereto together with the required filing Fee therefor as provided by rules and regulations adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 875 § 4, 1955)  
12.08.050 - Excavation—Permit—Application—Plans required. 
Except in excavations, cuts or fills to be made to service connections and locating or repairing existing underground installations, there Shall be filed with each Application a plan in duplicate, on a sheet eleven inches by seventeen inches, with drawing using a minimum scale of one hundred feet to an inch, showing the location, dimensions and such other complete details of such contemplated excavation, cut or fill as May be deemed necessary by the superintendent of Streets. 
(Ord. 875 § 5, 1955)  
12.08.060 - Excavation—Permit—Application—Evidence of authority. 
There Shall also be filed with each such Application such evidence as May be deemed necessary by the superintendent of Streets to satisfy the official that the Party making the Application has the right, authority and qualifications to file the same and to make the excavation, cut or fill as requested. 
(Ord. 875 § 6, 1955)  
12.08.070 - Excavation—Guarantee of work required—Types Designated. 
Upon the Approval of any such Application for Permit as stated in Sections 12.08.030 through 12.08.060, the superintendent of Streets Shall, prior to the issuance of any Permit therefor, require any such Applicant to deposit with the City: 
A.  Cash, certified check, cashier's check or a surety bond Approved by the City, in favor of the City, in an amount equal to the cost as estimated by the Superintendent of Streets to cover the cost of repairing and restoring the Street or Highway in such manner as to place the same as near as possible to its condition as existing immediately prior to such excavation cut, and said deposit Shall be considered as a guarantee that such work will be properly completed and Shall be retained by the City and not returned unless the work Shall be completed as provided herein and if not so completed the City May and is authorized to Use same or any Part thereof to complete said work and charge the entire cost thereof against the deposit and/or the bond and/or the Applicant; 
B.  A general liability insurance policy in the form of an original certificate of insurance, issued by a reliable insurance company Approved by the City, with minimum liability limits of one million dollars for each occurrence and naming the City as "additional insured," to cover such liability and to insure the City from any and all liability of every nature whatsoever connected directly or indirectly with any such work. 
(Ord. 0-03-03, 2003; Ord. 875 § 7 (part), (a), (b), 1955)  
12.08.080 - Excavation—Exemptions from guarantee. 
Should the Applicant be a regular licensed public Utility company operating within the City limits or such other financially reliable Person, firm or corporation whom the superintendent of Streets May determine, upon investigation, to have sufficient clear assets within the City to be more than sufficient to cover the deposits, bonds and guarantees provided for herein; then and in that event, the superintendent of Streets May waive all or Part of any such requirement as provided herein upon such terms and conditions as May be reasonably provided; however, any such waiver Shall not release any such Party from any or all liability upon any of the obligations provided herein. 
(Ord. 875 § 7(c), 1955)  
12.08.090 - Excavation—Permit—Issuance. 
Upon complying with all of the requirements stated herein the superintendent of Streets Shall thereupon issue to the Applicant a Permit to proceed with the work as requested in the Application and said work Shall be done exactly in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Approved Application and Permit. 
(Ord. 875 § 8, 1955)  
12.08.100 - Excavation—Refilling. 
After any excavation or cut has been accomplished for the purpose intended, the work of refilling the same Shall be completed as soon as reasonably possible and Shall be done so as to obstruct the Street, Highway and Sidewalk as little as possible. 
(Ord. 875 § 9, 1955)  
12.08.110 - Rules and regulations adoption. 
Inasmuch as the work provided to be done in this entire chapter is to be done upon Public Streets and Highways, and thereby May endanger the health and safety of Persons and Property, the City Council Shall adopt from time to time pertinent rules and regulations relating to such work. All such work done under any Permit so issued or work done after Notice given or otherwise as provided herein Shall be done in accordance with any and all such rules and regulations relating thereto. Copies of all such rules and regulations Shall be on file with the superintendent of Streets and a Copy of same Shall be delivered with any and all such Permits upon request. There Shall be included in any and all such regulations a schedule of filing Fees or other Fees and charges for items mentioned herein. 
(Ord. 875 § 10, 1955)  
12.08.120 - Superintendent of Streets—Authority. 
If at any time during the progress of any work as provided in this chapter, the same is not being done in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth herein or in accordance with the rules and regulations relating thereto adopted by the City Council for the health and safety of Persons and Property using the public Highways of this City, or if the same is being done without a valid existing Permit therefor, the superintendent of Streets Shall be and is authorized to immediately Stop any and all such work and to require the same to be done properly and if the Person, firm or corporation responsible therefor fails or refuses to immediately correct the same, the superintendent of Streets Shall be and is empowered and authorized to Stop the work permanently or to take over under the circumstances and either proceed to do the work or have the same done with qualified Persons all at the cost of the Party responsible. 
(Ord. 875 § 11, 1955)  
12.08.130 - Excavation—Permit—Termination and extension. 
All Permits issued under provisions of this chapter Shall become null and void unless the work to be done thereunder is done as soon as reasonably possible after the issuance thereof and has been completely finished within sixty Days from the issuance thereof; provided, however, the superintendent of Streets May extend the time thereof in writing should extraordinary or Emergency conditions occur which prevented the work being done in the time stated herein. 
(Ord. 875 § 12, 1955)  
12.08.140 - Excavation—Backfill maintenance. 
The Permittee Shall maintain the surface of any and all backfills resulting from any excavations referred to herein in a safe and efficient manner to properly accommodate any and all traffic that May Use the same until such time as the superintendent of Streets, after inspection at the expense of the Permittee, Shall accept and approve the completion of the entire Project and the Approval Shall be given, if the work has been done properly within thirty Days, if reasonably possible, after such temporary surface has been completed and the superintendent of Streets so notified. 
(Ord. 875 § 13, 1955)  
12.08.150 - Excavation—Safety requirements—Failure to install—Action. 
No Person, firm or corporation Shall make any excavation in any Street or Sidewalk without maintaining safe crossings for Vehicle traffic at all Street intersections, Alleys and private Driveways, and safe crossings for Pedestrians at intervals of not more than three hundred feet, and in any event at least one safe crossing Shall be maintained at all times for Vehicles and Pedestrians; and 
A.  Shall further provide and maintain at all times free Access to all fire hydrants and water Gates; and 
B.  Shall place and maintain at each end of such excavation, and at distances of not more than fifty feet apart along the line thereof and at such other places as the superintendent of Streets May deem necessary, warning Signs, lights and barricades Approved by the superintendent of Streets, and any such lights Shall be kept lighted from sunset each Day until sunrise the Following Day; together with such other additional warning Signs, barricades, temporary bridges, watchmen, or any of the foregoing as the superintendent of Streets May deem necessary and order to be installed, kept and maintained at such places to safeguard the public, all of which Shall be maintained until the excavation is entirely refilled and resurfaced to the satisfaction of the superintendent. 
In the event any of the foregoing safety measures are not installed or maintained by the Permittee, when required by the superintendent of Streets, or in any event if required by an Emergency, the superintendent is authorized to install any, or all, of the aforementioned warning Signs, barricades, lights, bridges, etc., and charge the Permittee for such installation. 
(Ord. 875 § 14, 1955)  
12.08.160 - Excavation—City nonliability. 
Any Person, firm or corporation being issued a Permit to do work under provisions of this chapter Shall hold the City free and harmless from any and all liability of every nature whatsoever connected directly or indirectly with any said work and Shall complete all such work including filling to the satisfaction and without cost to the City and the deposits and bonds to guarantee completion of the work and the liability policy or cash in lieu thereof as provided herein Shall be issued to guarantee the City against any such loss or liability and if the deposits or policies are not sufficient in amount to protect the City therefrom, the Party responsible Shall reimburse the City immediately upon demand therefor for any and all other loss including Attorney Fees incurred that it May suffer by reason thereof in excess of such guarantees, and the City Shall be and is authorized to proceed directly against any Party responsible therefor without the necessity of first proceeding against any such guaranty bond, surety or deposit. 
(Ord. 875 § 15, 1955)  
12.08.170 - Map showing underground pipes and Improvements required. 
Every Person owning, controlling or having an interest in any pipe, conduit, duct, or tunnel under the surface of any Street or Sidewalk, for supplying or conveying Gas, electricity, telephone lines, water steam, ammonia, or oil in, to, or from this City, or from its inhabitants, or for any other purpose Shall file in the office of the City Engineer, within sixty Days hereafter or within sixty Days after the completed installation of any pipe, conduit, duct, main, manhole, hand hole, chamber, or other appliance, except a service, or service pipe installed beneath the surface of the Street or Sidewalk, a corrected set of maps or atlas sheets, as drawn to a minimum scale of one hundred feet to one inch showing the complete installation of all such underground pipes and other such underground Improvements. 
(Ord. 875 § 16(a), 1955)  
12.08.180 - Map showing Abandoned pipes and Structures required. 
Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, or tunnel or other Structure, or the Use thereof, is Abandoned, except service, or service pipes, located under the surface of any Street, or Sidewalk, the Person owning, using, controlling, or having an interest therein, Shall within sixty Days, file in the office of the City Engineer a map giving in detail the location of such pipes, conduit, duct, or tunnel, or other Structure so Abandoned or removed. 
(Ord. 875 § 16(b), 1955)  
12.08.190 - Manholes—Signs required—Conformance to manual requirements. 
No Person Shall open or remove the cover of any manhole, vault, or Structure in any City Street, Alley, Sidewalk or Public Place, or allow any manhole to remain open in, or upon any City Street, Alley, Sidewalk or Public Place without first placing, and at all times maintaining, immediately adjacent to the opening of any manhole, and while such manhole remains open, at least two red flags, or two danger Signs, between one-half hour before sunrise and one-half hour after sundown, and at least two red lights between one-half hour after sundown and one-half hour before sunrise. All flags, lights and danger Signs Shall conform to the requirements outlined in the current and hereafter amended "Manual of Warning Signs, Lights, and Devices for Use in Performance of Work Upon Highways" issued by the Department of Public Works of the State, a Copy of which is on file with the superintendent of Streets and available for public inspection. 
(Ord. 875 § 17(a), 1955)  
12.08.200 - Manholes—Conformance to existing Street Elevation required. 
The Owners of any manholes or other Structures located in or upon any City Street, Alley, Sidewalk or other Public Place, Shall within thirty Days after the date of receiving Notice from the superintendent of Streets that a change has been made in the Elevation of the Street surface wherein their manhole or Structure is located, either raise or lower said manhole or Structure to conform to the latest existing Elevation of the Street surface at their own expense. 
(Ord. 875 § 17(b), 1955)  
12.08.210 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, Shall be punished by fine not to exceed three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail not to exceed ninety Days or by both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the Court. 
(Ord. 875 § 18(a), 1955)  
12.08.220 - Remedies cumulative. 
The punishment for Violation of the penal provisions of this chapter are cumulative, and in addition to any other remedies set up in this chapter and the enforcement of the penal provisions of this chapter, Shall not constitute a bar to the exercise by the City of all other powers conferred upon it by this chapter; nor Shall the exercise by the City of the powers herein conferred upon it by this chapter constitute a bar to criminal prosecution for the Violation of the penal provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 875 § 18(b), 1955)  
Chapter 12.12 - STREET IMPROVEMENTS 
 
12.12.010 - Permit—Required. 
No Person, firm or corporation Shall make, place or construct Improvements upon, under, over or within a Public Street unless and until a Permit Shall be issued therefor as provided hereinafter; however, this section Shall not apply to public officials or Employees authorized by the City. 
(Ord. 974 § 1, 1957)  
12.12.020 - Permit—Application. 
All Applications for Permits mentioned in Section 12.12.010 Shall be filed with the City Engineer on a form authorized and Approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 974 § 2, 1957)  
12.12.030 - Rules and regulations adoption. 
Inasmuch as the work provided to be done in this entire chapter is to be done upon Public Streets and Highways and thereby May endanger the health and safety of Persons and Property thereupon, the City Council Shall adopt from time to time pertinent rules and regulations relating to such work and all such work done under any Permit so issued or work done after Notice given or otherwise as provided herein Shall be done in accordance with any and all such rules and regulations relating thereto and copies of all such rules and regulations Shall be on file with the City Engineer and a Copy of same Shall be delivered with any and all such Permits upon request, and there Shall be included in any and all such regulations a schedule of Permit Fees, inspection Fees and other Fees and charges for items mentioned herein. 
(Ord. 974 § 3, 1957)  
12.12.040 - Improvements defined. 
"Improvements," as Used in this chapter includes, but is not limited to making, constructing, replacing and repairing Sidewalks, Curbs, gutters, cross-gutters, Driveways, sewers, storm drains, manholes, catchbasins, paving and concrete Structures. 
(Ord. 978 § 1, 1957: Ord. 974 § 4, 1957)  
12.12.050 - Conformance to standard drawings and specifications—Inspection of work. 
Work performed under Permits authorized by this chapter Shall conform to such standard drawings and specifications as May be adopted by the City and a Copy of such drawings and specifications Shall be on file at all times in the office of the City Engineer and in any event all work performed Shall be inspected and Approved by the City Engineer or his authorized Representative; and before final Approval thereto Shall be obtained, the Party doing the work Shall notify the office of the City Engineer at least twenty-four hours prior to the time when the work is ready for final inspection by the City Engineer, and if this Notice is not given, the City Engineer may, for good cause, make such reasonable conditions as he deems necessary before final acceptance of the work. 
(Ord. 974 § 5, 1957)  
12.12.060 - Permit Application Approval—Issuance. 
The City Engineer is authorized for good cause to reject or issue, subject to the performance of such conditions as he May deem to be reasonably necessary, all Applications or Permits for Improvements over, under, upon or within the Public Streets of the City. However, before any such Permit is issued, all Permit Fees and inspection Fees and other deposits mentioned herein, Shall be paid in cash in a sum as estimated by the City Engineer and in accordance with the rules and regulations as mentioned herein or in lieu thereof as bond or other security acceptable to the City Engineer in an equivalent amount. 
(Ord. 974 § 6, 1957)  
12.12.070 - Liability policies. 
Upon the Approval of any such Application for Permit as stated in Section 12.12.060, the Applicant Shall be required to furnish and deposit with the City: 
A.  A public liability insurance policy issued by a reliable insurance company, Approved by the City, with at least five thousand dollars/ten thousand dollars personal and one thousand dollars Property damage limits; or 
B.  Equivalent cash, certified check or cashier's check in favor of the City to cover such liability and to insure the City from any and all liability of every nature whatsoever. 
(Ord. 974 § 7, 1957)  
12.12.080 - Securities deposit. 
The City, when it deems the same necessary, May require the Applicant prior to issuing a Permit mentioned herein to make a cash deposit or a bond or other security satisfactory to the City in an equivalent amount for the benefit of the City or such other Property Owner as May be affected to cover the cost of possible damage that May occur to the Public Streets or the existing Improvements therein in the performance of the work covered by a Permit herein. 
(Ord. 974 § 8, 1957)  
12.12.090 - Authority of City Engineer. 
If at any time during the progress of any work as provided in this chapter the same is not being done in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth herein or in accordance with the rules and regulations relating thereto adopted by the City Council for the health and safety of Persons and Property using the public Highways of this City; or if the same is being done without a valid existing Permit therefor, the City Engineer Shall be and is authorized to immediately Stop any and all such work and to require the same to be done properly and if the Person, firm or corporation responsible therefor Shall fail or refuse to immediately correct the same; the City Engineer Shall be and is empowered and authorized to Stop the work permanently or to take over under the circumstances and either proceed to do the work or have the same done with qualified Persons all at the cost of the Party responsible. The City May Use a cash deposit or security in its possession for such purpose without Notice of any kind in completing any such work should the City desire to do so, or in lieu thereof, or in addition thereto, take advantage of the provisions of a bond deposit for such purpose. 
(Ord. 974 § 9, 1957)  
12.12.100 - Public convenience and safety requirements—Manual. 
A.  No Person, firm or corporation Shall make any Improvement over, upon and in a Public Street without maintaining safe crossings for which traffic can cross at all Street intersections, Alleys and private Driveways and safe passage for Pedestrians through the work and Shall further provide and maintain at all times free Access to all fire hydrants and water valves. 
B.  Any Person, firm or corporation doing work under a Permit as hereinbefore mentioned Shall provide and place, as the City Engineer May deem necessary, warning Signs, lights and barricades Approved by the City Engineer, and any such lights Shall be kept lighted from sunset each Day until sunrise the Following Day; together with such other additional warning Signs, barricades, temporary bridges, watchmen, or any of the foregoing as the City Engineer May deem necessary and order to be installed, kept, and maintained at such places to safeguard the public; all of which Shall be maintained until the work is entirely completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
C.  In the event any of the foregoing safety measures are not installed or maintained by the Permittee, when required by the City Engineer, or in any event if required by an Emergency, the City Engineer is authorized to install any, or all, of the aforementioned warning Signs, barricades, lights, bridges, or similar type items, and charge the Permittee for such installation. 
D.  All flags, lights and danger Signs Shall conform to the requirements outlined in the current, and hereafter amended "Manual of Warning Signs, Lights, and Devices for Use in Performance of Work upon Highways" issued by the Department of Public Works of the State, a Copy of which is on file with the City Engineer and available for public inspection. 
(Ord. 974 § 10, 1957)  
12.12.110 - Nonliability of City. 
Any Person, firm or corporation being issued a Permit to do work under provisions of this chapter Shall hold the City free and harmless from any and all liability of every nature whatsoever connected directly or indirectly with any said work and Shall complete all such work without cost and to the satisfaction of the City. Deposits and bonds to guarantee completion of the work and the liability policy or cash in lieu thereof as provided herein Shall be issued to guarantee the City against any such loss or liability and if the deposits or policies are not sufficient in amount to protect the City therefrom, the Party responsible Shall reimburse the City immediately upon demand therefor for any and all other loss including Attorney Fees incurred that it May suffer by reason thereof in excess of such guarantees, and the City Shall be and is authorized to proceed directly against any Party responsible therefor without the necessity of first proceedings against any such guaranty bond, surety or deposit. 
(Ord. 974 § 11, 1957)  
12.12.120 - Penalty for Violation. 
Any Person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, Shall be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail not to exceed ninety Days or by both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the Court. 
(Ord. 974 § 12(A), 1957)  
12.12.130 - Remedies cumulative. 
The punishment for Violation of the penal provision of this chapter is cumulative, and in addition to any other remedies set up in this chapter, and the enforcement of the penal provisions of this chapter, Shall not constitute a bar to the exercise by the City of all other powers conferred upon it by this chapter; nor Shall the exercise by the City of the powers herein conferred upon it by this chapter constitute a bar to criminal prosecution for Violation of the penal provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 974 § 12(B), 1957)  
Chapter 12.16 - SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION 
 
12.16.010 - Inadequate or dirt Sidewalks, Curbs and gutters declared dangerous. 
The existence of dirt Sidewalks and dirt Curbs or gutters adjoining Dwellings and Buildings within the City, or conversely, the lack of adequate Curb and gutter and Sidewalks, is found and declared to be dangerous to the public health and safety of the inhabitants of the City. 
(Ord. 952 § 1, 1957)  
12.16.020 - Specifications generally. 
Any Person, firm or corporation as, or acting for and on behalf of the Owner, who Shall construct or arrange for the construction of any Improvement, Building or Dwelling, or Shall move in any prior constructed Improvement, Building or Dwelling, or make an addition equal to or more than six hundred square feet upon any Lot or Lots in the City Shall also construct and install Portland cement Curbs, gutters and Sidewalks in accordance with City specifications (unless adequate Curbs, gutters and Sidewalks already exist) along all Street Frontage abutting said Lot or Lots; provided, however, that in areas not subdivided or Parceled into one-half acre or smaller Lots, Curbs, gutters and Sidewalks need not be installed for a greater distance than the minimum Lot Width required by Zoning Ordinance No. 964 codified in Chapters 18.02 through 18.52 for the zone in which said area is located. 
(Ord. 1196 § 1, 1964: Ord. 990 § 1, 1958: Ord. 952 § 2, 1957)  
12.16.030 - Sidewalks required where. 
Sidewalks Shall be required on both sides of all major, secondary and Collector Streets; on both sides of a Local Street if either side is already fully or partially improved with Sidewalks and along both sides of any Local Street on which a School, public or semipublic Building, or Properties zoned for commercial Uses are located. 
(Ord. 990 § 2 (part), 1958: Ord. 952 § 2-a, 1957)  
12.16.040 - Conformance with standard specifications required. 
All Curbs, gutters and Sidewalks required to be constructed by the provisions of Sections 12.16.010 through 12.16.080, Shall be constructed in accordance with the standard specifications in reference thereto as adopted by the City which Shall be on file for public inspection in the office of the City Engineer, City Hall. 
(Ord. 990 § 2 (part), 1958: Ord. 952 § 2-b, 1957)  
12.16.050 - Reduction of minimum construction requirements—When. 
Where it would create an undue Hardship, in the opinion of the City Council to require construction of Curbs, gutters and Sidewalks along both sides of any corner Parcel or a Parcel having more than one Street Frontage, the City Council May upon Application made to it, reduce the minimum requirements as to Curbs and gutters as provided in Sections 12.16.010 through 12.16.080, along the Street Frontage on any Street in addition to the main Street Frontage of any such Parcel and whenever and wherever in the opinion of the City Council it is deemed necessary or advisable for the protection of the health, safety or general welfare of the City to limit, restrict or reduce the requirements as to installation of Curbs, gutters and Sidewalks as stated herein; in any particular special situation the City Council May order such restrictions or limitations as it May deem to be proper to accomplish the same notwithstanding the provisions contained herein to the contrary. 
(Ord. 990 § 2 (part), 1958: Ord. 952 § 2-c, 1957)  
12.16.060 - Subdivision provisions not affected. 
The provisions of Sections 12.16.030 through 12.16.050 Shall not be deemed to change or restrict in any manner any provisions of Ordinance 851 or any other Ordinance relating to the requirements of Curbs, gutters and Sidewalks in any Subdivisions within the limits of the City or to be constructed therein. 
(Ord. 990 § 2 (part), 1958: Ord. 952 § 2-d, 1957)  
12.16.070 - Guarantee required before final Utility connection Approval. 
The Building inspector Shall deny final Approval and acceptance of final public Utility connections to any Building or Dwelling until said Curb and gutter and/or Sidewalks exist or are constructed or their construction is guaranteed by cash deposited with the City in an amount equivalent to the actual cost of the construction thereof as determined by the City Engineer at the time which said deposit May thereafter be Used by the City without further Notice as a credit toward the construction thereof when same Shall be accomplished. 
(Ord. 952 § 3, 1957)  
12.16.080 - Inspection Fee—Determination. 
Any Owner, lessee or agent Shall at the time of applying for a Building Permit for the Improvement contemplated pay an inspection Fee in an amount to be determined by the City Council by a Resolution to cover the costs of examination and inspection by the City Engineer of the construction of any gutters or Sidewalks as provided herein prior to the accepting thereof and the amount to be paid therefor Shall be added to the amount of the cash deposit mentioned herein where the construction thereof is to take place in the future. 
(Ord. 952 § 4, 1957)  
12.16.090 - Improvements—Plans to be submitted—Charges. 
Any Person, firm or corporation desiring or required to construct any public works Improvement, including Curbs, gutters, Sidewalks, culverts, drains, Driveway approaches, grading, paving, waterlines, sewers or any appurtenant work thereto in a dedicated City Right-of-Way, Shall submit engineering plans for the Improvements; the plans to be prepared by a registered Civil Engineer of the State. Where the plans are prepared by the office of the City Engineer, a charge of seven percent of the estimated construction cost Shall be assessed for the work. 
(Ord. 1181 § 1, 1964)  
12.16.100 - Improvements—City Engineer to check plans. 
The City Engineer Shall thoroughly check the plans, require all necessary amendments and Alterations, estimate total construction cost of the Improvements and Shall indicate Approval of the plans when completed. 
(Ord. 1181 § 2, 1964)  
12.16.110 - Plan checking Fees—Amount. 
Plans that are made as required or in conjunction with any Subdivision map, record of Survey, Conditional Use Permit, zone change, Variance or land division proceedings Shall be subject to a plan checking Fee for the services specified in Section 12.16.100 in an amount to be determined by the Council by Resolution. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1972: Ord. 1181 § 3 (part), 1964)  
12.16.120 - Plan checking Fees—Approval contingent upon payment. 
Approval by the City Engineer Shall be contingent upon receipt of the plan checking Fee. Where plans are prepared by the office of the City Engineer, the plan checking Fee Shall be included in the seven percent Fee provided in Section 12.16.080. The City Engineer Shall not prepare plans filed in conjunction with Subdivision map proceedings. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1972: Ord. 1181 § 3 (part), 1964)  
12.16.130 - Plan checking Fees—Additional Fees not required when. 
In the event the City Council or Planning Commission or any authorized agency of the City alter or require Alteration or resubmission of plans previously checked by the City Engineer, no additional plan checking Fee Shall be required. 
(Ord. 1181 § 4, 1964)  
Chapter 12.20 - TREES AND SHRUBS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, adopted Jan. 15, 2019, amended former Ch. 12.20, §§ 12.20.010—12.20.210, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 12.20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 976, § 1, 1957; Ord. No. 1221, §§ 1—13, 1965. 
 
12.20.010 - Title and purpose. 
The Ordinance codified in Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.200 shall hereafter be referred to and cited as "City Trees, Shrubs and Tree Protection Ordinance of the City of Colton, California." 
The City of Colton is beautified by the presence of many mature trees that contribute long-term aesthetic, environmental, and economic benefits to the City. Aesthetically, trees offer dimensions in the form of color, shape, texture, scale and variety. Mature trees are integral components of vibrant communities historic sites and promote economic prosperity and their presence contributes to the cultural and historic significance of Colton and other communities that protect them. 
Environmental benefits derived from trees include the filtering of air pollutants; increasing atmospheric oxygen levels; stabilizing soils; reducing heat convection; reducing storm water runoff; decreasing wind speed; and reducing the negative effects of solar glare. The biological diversity of wildlife and plant communities is enhanced by the favorable conditions created by trees. 
The economic benefits derived from trees include increased property values, and additional revenue generated by businesses, visitors and new residents attracted to the urban forest. Trees are a major capital asset to the City and like any valuable asset they require appropriate care and protection. 
Therefore, it is the purpose of this chapter to: 
A.  Preserve and grow the City of Colton's canopy cover by protecting heritage, native and specimen trees in specified areas of public and private property. Expand the protection of street trees and trees located within public areas. 
B.  Safeguard the City's urban forest by providing for regulation and the protection of trees at the time of planting, as they are maintained and the removal of trees in the City as deemed necessary. 
C.  Protect and enhance the visual and aesthetic character of the City. 
D.  Improve and enhance property values by conserving and adding to the distinctive and unique aesthetic character of Colton. 
E.  Improve the quality of life for residents, visitors and wildlife. 
F.  Create favorable conditions for the protection of designated heritage, native and specimen trees, for the benefit of current and future residents of Colton. 
G.  Maintain and enhance the general health, safety and welfare of the City and its residents by assisting in counteracting air pollution and in minimizing soil erosion and other related environmental damage. 
H.  Protect and maintain healthy trees in the land use planning processes as set forth herein. 
I.  Establish procedures and practices for fulfilling the purposes of this City Tree and Tree Protection Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "City" shall mean City of Colton. 
B.  "Diameter-at-breast (DBH)" means the diameter of the tree 4½ feet above ground on the uphill side of the tree. If a tree forks below breast height, it is considered "a multi-trunk." A measuring tape can be used to measure tree trunk circumference and then the circumference divided by 3.14 to determine diameter. 
C.  "Established corner yard" means the areas between the side property line and the principal structure on a lot. 
D.  "Established front yard" means the area between the front property line and the principal structure on a lot. 
E.  "Hazard" or "Hazardous" means a tree, that has a high failure potential with a risk of total or partial tree failure resulting in damage to private or public property and/or the possibility of causing injury or loss of life when failure occurs. 
F.  "Injure" means any act or omission which substantially affects or seriously jeopardizes the health of a living tree, in the determination of the Public Works Director. 
G.  "Heritage Tree" means a tree designated as a historical resource as natural or agricultural features that have special historical, cultural or aesthetic values and are fifty years old or older. Criteria established in Section 15.40.080. 
H.  "Located" or "location" of a tree means that place where any portion of the trunk of a tree is found at natural grade. 
I.  "Maintain" or "maintenance" means pruning, trimming, spraying, fertilizing, watering, treating for disease or injury or any other similar act which promotes growth, health, beauty and prolongs the life of trees. 
J.  "Mature tree" means a tree that has reached a desired or near lifetime growth potential for the canopy for the space and conditions provided for growth. 
K.  "Median" or "Traffic island" means a raised area within a street right-of-way not used for vehicular traffic, protected by curbing. 
L.  "Multi-trunk" means any tree with multiple trunks attributed to a single tree. Each trunk shall be measured at a height of 4½ feet above natural grade, and the combined areas of the trunks shall he used to determine the tree's size for the purposes of this ordinance. 
M.  "Native tree" means any tree with a trunk more than eight inches in diameter at a height of 4½ feet above natural grade that is one of the following species: Quercus agrifolia (Coast live oak), Quercus engelmannii (Engelmann oak), Quercus chysolepis (Canyon oak), Platanus racemosa (California Sycamore), Juglans californica (California Walnut), Quercus berberidifolia (Scrub oak), Quercus Iobata (Valley Oak), Umbellularia californica (California bay), Populus fremontii (Cottonwood), Alnus rhombifolia (California alder), Populus trichocarpa (Black cottonwood), Salix lasiolepis (Arroyo willow), and Aesculus californica (California buckeye) or other less-common native California trees. 
N.  "Official street tree" means an approved species of street tree designated in the master street tree plan planted in the right conditions for proper growth. 
O.  "Parkway" means an area between the property line and the back of the curb, or an area between the property line and the area where the face of the curb meets the street. 
P.  "Planting Strip" when Used herein includes the area between Curb and Sidewalk not intended for Sidewalk purposes. 
Q.  "Property Owner" means the person listed as the owner in fee simple of a lot or parcel with the office of county recorder or lawfully exercising the power of the property owner with respect said lot or parcel. 
R.  "Protected tree" means a native, specimen, heritage-eligible, mature (except for the trees in RS or RM-12 zones), or public tree. 
S.  "Pruning" means the removal of dead, dying, diseased, live interfering, weak branches and thinning of canopies according to the most recent standards of the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA). 
T.  "Public benefit" means a public purpose, service or use which affects residents as a community and not merely as particular individuals. 
U.  "Public Street" when herein used includes every way set apart for public travel or use in the City, including the entire planting strip, sidewalk area, easements and rights-of-way. 
V.  "Public tree" means a tree located in a place or area under ownership or control of the City including but without limitation streets, parkways, open space, parkland and including City owned property under the operational control of another entity by virtue of a lease, license, operating or other agreement. 
W.  "Replacement matrix" means the table of requirements for planting replacement trees on private property when removing protected tree/s per Section 3.B of the Urban Forest Management Master Plan. 
X.  "Specimen tree" means any tree meeting the criteria established by resolution of the City council by species and size of tree which is thereby presumed to possess distinctive form, size or age, and to be an outstanding specimen of a desirable species and to warrant the protections of this chapter. 
Y.  "Street" means any public right of way regardless of whether it is described as a street, avenue, road, boulevard, drive, lane, court, place, alley, or by any other such designation. 
Z.  "Street tree" means any public tree whose trunk is located primarily within any parkway, public sidewalk, street median, traffic island or other right of way under ownership or control of the City by easement, licenses, fee title or other permissive grant use. 
AA.  "Tree" means a woody perennial plant that typically has a single main trunk with clear apical dominance (i.e.. one primary stem is significantly larger than the secondary stem/s). Multi-trunk trees are determined based on species and growth habit. 
BB.  "Tree Protection Zone" means an area where construction related activities are prohibited or limited to prevent injury to trees, especially during pre- construction and during construction. The area includes the Critical Root Zone and/or beyond determined by a Certified Arborist. 
CC.  "Urban Forest Management Master Plan" means the comprehensive street tree plan approved by the City Council, which outlines tree care practices, provides guidelines for managing our City's trees, private trees and also lists the official street tree to be planted or replaced for all streets or sections of street within the City. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.030 - Public Works Director—Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director to: 
A.  Authorize City employees, private contractors or authorized volunteers to plant, maintain and otherwise care for, or, if necessary, remove public trees: 
B.  Prepare an annual program for tree planting, tree care and removals in public places of the City; 
C.  Recommend to the City council changes or additions to the master street tree plan as needed; 
D.  Inspect the planting, maintenance and removal of all public trees by qualified staff or private contractor; 
E.  Develop maintenance standards as they relate to trees in public places; 
F.  Make determinations on public tree removal based upon tree reports prepared by Certified Arborists and considering other relevant facts, and upon established public tree removal criteria: 
G.  Review development and construction plans as they affect mature, heritage, heritage-eligible, native, public and specimen trees; 
H.  Act as or delegate an advisor to the Parks Commission of the City; 
I.  Prepare and submit tree protection guidelines, and the specimen tree list, and any revisions thereto to the City Council for adoption by resolution; 
J.  Issue permits and make determinations specified under this chapter: 
K.  Maintain a comprehensive inventory of public trees; and 
L.  Act as the enforcement official who is designated to issue a compliance order or an administrative citation to enforce this chapter Section 12.20.040 herein. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.040 - Permit required for planting, trimming, removal, chemical treatment or otherwise disturb any City tree. 
No person, firm or corporation shall trim, prune, plant, injure, chemically treat or interfere with any tree, shrub or plant upon any public street, planting strip, parkway, easement or alley in the City without permission from the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director is authorized to grant a permit at his/her discretion, provided, however, such authority shall not arbitrarily be withheld. Any request for permission to remove any tree from any street in the City shall be in the form of a permit application submitted to the Public Works Director, clearly stating the reasons for such a request. Any tree, plant or shrub removed for the benefit of the applicant, as determined by the Public Works Director shall be removed by and at the expense of the property owner and under his/her direction. Such removal shall be completed within thirty days from the date the original permit was issued. Extensions may be granted on a case by case basis. Proper replacement trees shall be installed per Section 3.B of the Urban Forest Management Master Plan Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.041 - Tree protection guidelines. 
Tree protection guidelines are the standards and specifications for the protection of trees under this chapter. The tree protection guidelines, and any revision thereto, shall be effective as of the date of their adoption by resolution of the City Council. 
A.  Tree protection guidelines are the standards and specifications for the protection of trees under this chapter. The tree protection guidelines, and any revision thereto, shall be effective as of the date of their adoption by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  All departments, agencies and personnel of the City shall consult with the Public Works Director prior to engaging in any action which would require the removal of, or which would otherwise substantially affect or seriously jeopardize the health of any existing public tree. 
C.  It shall be the policy of the City to protect and maintain mature and healthy trees. Special consideration shall be afforded to mature, public, landmark, landmark-eligible, native and specimen trees as forth in this chapter. 
D.  The preservation of mature trees is strongly considered during an application for any permit or approval. A decision may be made through the design review process or other entitlement process to waive development standards or accept alternative solutions to assist in the preservation of these trees. The review authority or director, if there is no other review authority, may modify the development standards or accept alternative solutions to these standards. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.042 - Duties of private property owners. 
The duties of any owner of private property whose property has a City easement are as follows: 
A.  To accept, protect and provide adequate water to any City tree planted in the public easement over his or her property, and not to interfere with the City's provision of water to such trees; 
B.  To notify the Public Works Director of any suspected tree hazards or maintenance needs of any City tree to his or her property; 
C.  To remove any vines from City street trees planted in the easement within his or her property; 
D.  To remove all fallen leaves and other deadfall from any City tree planted in the public easement over his or her property dispose of the deadfall in an appropriate waste receptacle. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to allow any tree, shrub or plant located primarily on private property to create a hazard or to create danger or likelihood of harm to any public place, public area, parkway or street or to public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.050 - Utilities desiring tree trimming or removal—Written request and agreement required. 
Any person, firm or corporation maintaining any overhead wires or any pipes or underground conduits along or across any street, parkway or alley in the City, or owning any property abutting upon any street, parkway or alley in the City desiring to have any tree, shrub or plant cut, trimmed, pruned or removed shall file with the Public Works Director a written request that such work be done, and such request shall describe the work desired to be done and it shall be within the discretion of the Public Works Director to require a written agreement upon the part of the petitioner to pay the cost thereof and to do such work in the manner and within the time stipulated by the Director before the issuance of any permit hereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.060 - Public Works Director—Interference with prohibited. 
No person, firm or corporation shall interfere with the Director or persons acting under his authority while engaged in planting, mulching, trimming, pruning, spraying, treating or removing any tree, shrub or plant of any public street, planting strip, parkway or alley in the City, or in the removing of any stone, concrete or other substance from about the trunk of any tree, shrub or plant on any public street, planting strip, parkway or alley. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.070 - Paving planting strips or parkways—Written request required—Approval. 
In the interest of tree protection zones, no person, firm or corporation shall pave, cement or concrete any planting strip, parkway or any part thereof in the City without first securing permission therefor from the Public Works Director and under the specifications as determined by the City Public Works Director. The Director upon receiving a written request shall cause an investigation to be made and in reaching a decision, the Director shall grant or deny the request. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.071 - Sidewalk and street repair. 
The repair of sidewalks, curbs, gutters or streets may create a need to prune tree roots to the extent that the tree is damaged or becomes unstable. When this occurs, the Public Works Director, whose decision shall be final, shall give consideration to the following in lieu of action that may damage, destabilize or cause the removal of a tree. 
A.  To not make such improvements; 
B.  To displace the sidewalk laterally away from the tree trunk, either locally for each tree, or uniformly along length of the street; 
C.  To displace the curb and gutter laterally into the paved roadway of the street, wither locally or uniformly along a length of the street, which in some cases may necessitate the prohibiting of street parking of vehicles at all times, provided such displacement does not create traffic hazard, or conditions adverse to proper street sweeping or drainage; 
D.  To defer repairs with temporary asphalt patch to eliminate hazard; 
E.  To widen the parkway; 
F.  To relocate the sidewalk or curb; 
G.  To eliminate the sidewalk on one side of the street; 
H.  To raise the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.080 - Foreign substances and objects prohibited on or near trees. 
No person, firm or corporation shall cause, authorize or procure any brine, oil or liquid dye or other substances deleterious to tree life, to lie, leak, pour, flow or drip upon or into the soil about the base of any street tree, shrub or plant in any street, planting strip, parkway or alley in the City or onto any sidewalk or any pavement within the City at a point from which such substance may by lying upon; or by flowing, dripping, or seeping into such soil injure such tree, shrub or planting, or to otherwise harm or kill any such tree, shrub or plant. No person, firm or corporation, without approval of the Director, shall place or maintain any stone, concrete or other substance so that it shall impede the free access of water or air to the roots of any tree, shrub or plant in any public street, planting, parkway or alley in the City. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.090 - Foreign objects attached to trees prohibited. 
No person, firm or corporation shall attach or keep attached to any tree, shrub or plant in any public street, planting strip, parkway or alley in the City, or to the guard or stake intended for the protection thereof, any wire, rope, sign or any other device whatsoever. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to injure, cut, damage, carve, transplant, prune, root prune or remove any public tree. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to attach, cause to be attached or keep attached to any public tree, or to the guard or stake of a public tree, any rope, wire nails, tacks, staples, advertising posters, decorations, ornaments, flags, toys, swings, lights or any other contrivance whatsoever without first obtaining a permit or explicit approval from the City. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow any herbicide, poison or other substance harmful to tree life to lie, leak, pour, flow or drip upon or into the soil within the drip line of any public tree; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree; or to operate any equipment, such as mechanical weeding devices, in such a manner as to cause damage to a public tree in any way. 
D.  No person shall injure any public tree located within an easement or public right-of- way on his or her private property by neglecting to provide the necessary amount of water, as determined by the Tree Policy Manual and the terms of this chapter, required for said tree's continued good health and viability. 
E.  No person shall impact the drip line area of a City tree in a way that may reasonably be expected to damage the root system, compact the soil over the roots, or impede free passage of water, air, or fertilizer to the roots of any public tree. 
F.  Special consideration shall be afforded public trees determined by the Parks and Recreation Commission to be heritage trees. Such trees shall he removed only when public interest served by removal outweighs the interest in preservation and heritage status. 
G.  Trees with the species and cultivar varieties of the genus Platanus such as Platanus racemosa (California Sycamore) or Platanus x acerifolia (London Planetree) which are found to be infected with Anthracnose in the City are a potential threat. There are a few cultivar considerations that are exempt. Trees of the Platanus genus shall be evaluated in Colton to determine potential hazards associated with this devastating fungal disease. This section requires that all aboveground portions of such infected hazardous trees be destroyed or properly disposed of as provided in this chapter. 
H.  No person shall possess, store or transport into the City all or any part of the trees of the genus Platanus infected with Anthracnose; provided, however, that wood, branches and roots of such trees may he transported wither to a safe place for burning or burial, under a minimum of two feet of earth, within five days following the discovery of such infection, or to such sites, and under such conditions, as are approved by the Parks Commission for the processing and subsequent elimination of the disease hazard. Infected trees may be treated in a manner approved by the County Agriculture Commissioner to effect a cure for the disease if and when an effective cure becomes known. 
I.  During the construction, repair, alternation, moving or removal of any building, structure of any other type of construction in the City, no person in control of such work shall leave any public tree, shrub or plant in the vicinity of such activity without sufficient guards or protections as identified in the tree policy manual to prevent injury to the tree, shrub or plant in connection with such construction, repair, alteration, moving or removal. The costs of any such protection shall be borne by the person responsible for the improvement. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.100 - Tree planting in new subdivisions and developments payment. 
Before any street improvement in any new subdivision or new development of real property in the City, the developer shall pay to the City the total costs of all trees required to be planted along all streets in the subdivision or development. After receipt of the payment, the developer will coordinate with the City and plant the appropriate approved trees at the proper time. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.110 - Building repair, erection or removal Requirements for tree protection. 
During the erection, repair or alteration of any building, house or structure in the City, no person, firm or corporation in charge of such work shall leave any tree, shrub or plant in any street, parkway or alley in the City, in the vicinity of such building or structure without such good sufficient guards or protectors as shall prevent injury to the tree, shrub or planting arising out of or by reasons of the erection, repair or alteration, no person, firm or corporation shall remove any building, house or structure or portion thereof without notifying the Public Works Director at least three working days in advance of such moving. The notice shall designate the route to be followed and all other details pertinent to such work. The Director shall have the authority to change such route and designate one which will in his opinion cause less damage to trees, shrubs or plants owned by the City along and adjacent to the route. As a condition to improving any route for the moving of any building, house or structure or portion thereof, the Director may require the person, firm or corporation doing such work to enter into an agreement to pay all costs incurred for any labor, material or equipment Used to protect or preserve such trees, shrubs, or plants either before or after such moving. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.120 - Regulations established. 
The regulations as set out in Sections 12.20.130 through 12.20.180 are established for the planting and care of trees in or upon public streets, planting strips, parkways, rights-of-way and alleys in the City. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.130 - Uniformity of tree species along streets. 
Along any given street, the species of tree shall be uniform with promoting species diversity and avoiding a monoculture of one species of tree to promote optimal tree canopy health in accordance with the official Urban Forestry Management Plan recommended by the Parks and Recreation Commission and Approved by the City Council by Resolution. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.140 - Planting near intersections prohibited. 
No tree, plant or shrub shall hereafter be planted at the intersection of two or more streets or within thirty-five feet of such intersection. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.150 - Tree planting—Between curb and sidewalk prohibited; when. 
No tree shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk wherein the clear space is less than thirty-six inches. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.160 - Tree planting—Specifications—Trimming requirements. 
Trees shall be planted in the center of the planting strip midway between the curb and street side of the sidewalk. These trees shall be at least five feet from any water meter or sewer line and shall be no less than ten feet from a driveway opening. Trees shall be trimmed to clear the sidewalk by at least ten feet; such trimming shall be done by and at the discretion of the Public Works Director, following the City of Colton Urban Forest Management Master Plan "Holistic and Adaptive Tree Management Best Practices." These best practices follow the American National Standard Institute (ANSI A300) and International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) standards for tree care and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.170 - Trimming, pruning or removal authority. 
The Public Works Director may cause to be trimmed, pruned or removed any tree, shrub, plant or vegetation of any public street, planting strip, or parkway or alley or other public easement when not in conformity with Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.200 or endangering the use of public facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.180 - Destroying prohibited. 
It is a Violation of Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.200 to destroy or mutilate any tree, shrub or plant in a public street, planting strip, parkway, public easement or any such public property. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.190 - Appeal from Director's decision procedure. 
Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any act or determination of the public works director in the exercise of the authority herein granted shall have the right of appeal to the Recreation and Parks Commission. Such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within five working days from the date of such decision or action of the Public Works Director. The Commission shall make a recommendation to the Council of the City for final decision of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.200 - Violation of Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.190—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.190 is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed three months, or by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
The City may recover the penalty wither through an administrative hearing or a civil action brought either by the City Attorney or a designated employee of the City. 
Irrespective of whether the City pursues criminal and/ or civil action under this chapter, nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City from seeking restitution for damage to City property as an alternative to criminal action and/or civil actions to recover a civil penalty in accordance with this section. 
No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the Director or any of his or her agents while engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement of this chapter. 
Provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as an attempt to inhibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the City. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
12.20.210 - Tree planting—Park Superintendent or designated Public Works Director appointee supervision required. 
No trees or shrubs shall hereafter be planted in the public streets of the City except under the direction of the Public Works Superintendent of the City. 
(Ord. No. O-14-18, § 1, 1-15-2019)  
Chapter 12.24 - PARKS* 
 
12.24.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the Following terms Shall have the meanings as set forth herein, unless the context in which they are Used clearly indicates a contrary meaning: 
"Alcoholic Beverages" means any and all spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquids or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented or not, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent, or more, of alcohol by volume which are potable or fit as, or which May be Used for beverage purposes. 
"City" means the City of Colton, California. 
"Department" means the Department of Parks, Recreation and Family Services. 
"Director" means the Director of the Parks, Recreation and Family Services Department or other Person(s) Designated by the Director of the Parks, Recreation and Family Services Department. 
"Park" means and includes every Park recreation center, lake, pond or other body of water, riding and hiking trail, Parking Lot and every other recreation Facility owned, managed and/or controlled by the City and under the jurisdiction of the Director. 
"Permission" means Written Permission, granted by the Director or the Director's authorized agent. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation or any other group acting as a unit. 
"Roller Skate" or "In-Line Skate" means as any shoe, boot or other footwear to which one or more wheels are Attached and includes roller blades. "Roller skating" or "in-line skating" or their derivatives when Used as a verb Shall include operating, driving, riding, propelling or otherwise using Roller Skates or, respectively, In-Line Skates. 
"Scooter" Shall be defined as any platform of any composition or size mounted between two or more wheels with an upright steering handle Attached thereto. 
"Skateboard" Shall be defined as any platform of any composition or size to which two or more wheels are Attached and which is intended to be ridden or propelled by one or more Persons standing or kneeling upon it and to which there is not affixed any seat or any other device or mechanism to turn and control the wheels. "Skateboarding" or its derivatives when Used as a verb Shall include operating, driving, riding, propelling, or otherwise using a skateboard. 
"Smoking" means possessing (and "Smoke" means to possess) a lighted pipe, lighted cigar, or lighted cigarette of any kind, or the lighting of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, including but not limited to, any Tobacco Product, or any other weed or plant. 
"Sound Amplifying System" means and includes any system of electrical hookup or connection, loudspeaker system or equipment, Sound Amplifying System and any apparatus, equipment, device, instrument or machine designed for or intended to be Used for the purpose of amplifying sound or increasing the volume of the human voice, musical tone, vibration, or sound wave. This definition Shall not apply to the regular and customary Use of portable radios, televisions, record players or tape Recorders played or operated in such places at such times so as not to disturb other Persons in their Permitted Uses of the Park. 
"Tobacco Product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, biddis, or any other preparation of tobacco. 
"Use" means to inhale, snort, chew, or otherwise ingest a Tobacco Product. 
"Vehicle" means any Vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle Code. The term "Vehicle" Shall not include skates, In-Line Skates Scooters or skateboards. 
(Ord. 0-23-06 § 1, 2006)  
12.24.020 - Unlawful Acts. 
It is unlawful for any Person to do or commit, or for any Person to cause or Permit to be done or committed within the boundaries of any public Park within the City of Colton, any Act in the Following sections. 
(Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.025 - Signs. 
No Person Shall fail or refuse to obey or comply with any Notice or Sign, including warning, regulatory and road markings, placed by Order of the Director for the safety or control of Persons, Vehicles or animals. No Person Shall wilfully refuse to follow or comply with any lawful Order or direction given by a City Employee. 
(Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.030 - Vandalism. 
No Person Shall wilfully cut, break, injure, deface, disfigure, mark or write upon, paint, carve, burn, tamper with, Attach rope or wire to, displace or remove any tree, shrub, plant, turf, rock, sand, soil, wood, Building, Fence, table, bench, barbecue unit, pole, light, playground apparatus, bridge, Railing, paving Material, fountain, trash receptacle, waterline or other public Utility, Part or appurtenance thereof, Sign, Notice or placard, whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post or other boundary marker, equipment, tools, implements, Materials, any Structure or Park Facility whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.040 - Public toilets. 
No Person Shall fail to cooperate in maintaining public toilets in a neat and sanitary condition nor Shall any Person loiter in or about any public toilet or enter any public toilet Designated for the opposite sex except that this provision Shall not apply to Persons under five Years of age that are accompanied by a Parent or guardian. 
(Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.050 - Littering. 
No Person Shall deposit, throw, Discharge or otherwise place any paper, ashes, dirt, bottles, broken glass, cans, trash, litter, animal carcass, Rubbish, debris or any substance, Matter or thing, either liquid or solid in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any Park or in or on the grounds of said Park except in the proper receptacles where these are provided; nor Shall any Person within any Park wash eating or cooking utensils elsewhere than in the sinks provided for such purposes; nor Shall any Person bring any such substance, except litter accumulated in the course of automobile travel, into a City Park for the purpose of disposal thereof in City Park facilities. Where receptacles are not provided, all such Rubbish or waste Shall be carried from the Park by the Person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.060 - Vehicle operations—Parking. 
No Person Shall operate, drive, ride, park or leave standing any automobile, truck, motorcycle, motor Scooter, motorized Bicycle, go-cart or any other motor Vehicle or any other Vehicle at any time in any Park; provided, however, that the provisions of this section Shall not apply to those specific areas within any public Park of the City which Shall have been regularly and lawfully set aside for the Use of Vehicles; and provided further that the provisions of this section Shall not apply to any Vehicle Used or owned by the City or any commercial Vehicle making lawful deliveries to or otherwise lawfully engaged in any undertaking or enterprise within any public Park of the City. No Person Shall park and leave unattended any Vehicle in areas other than those Designated for parking, without Permission, or it May be towed away and stored by the City and said removal and storage costs Shall be charged to and paid by the Owner prior to release. Nor Shall any Person ride or drive a Bicycle, skateboard, Scooter, In-Line Skates, or Roller Skates or upon any tennis, handball, basketball, shuffleboard or multipurpose Court in a City Park or within fifty feet of a City Building or monument. 
(Ord. 0-02-01 § 2, 2001: Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.061 - Vehicles—Speed. 
No Person Shall operate any wheeled conveyance of any type in any Park at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour unless a greater speed is posted. The maximum speed limit when Pedestrians are present Shall be five miles per hour. 
(Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.062 - Skating, in-line skating, skateboarding, riding Bicycles or Scooters—Fleming Park prohibited. 
Skateboarding, skating, in-line skating, bicycling and riding Scooters in Parks constitutes a Hazardous recreational activity and the City will not be liable for injuries incurred by Persons participating in the Hazardous recreational activity. Every Person skating, in-line skating, skateboarding or riding a Scooter or Bicycle within any Park who is under the age of fourteen Shall be supervised by an adult. The Director or the Director's Designee Shall have the authority to eject and expel from any Park, including its Parking Lot, any Person who is in Violation of this section or Section 12.24.063. Any Person failing to comply with the provisions of this section or Section 12.24.063 Shall also be subject to criminal citation or other applicable enforcement authority available to the City. 
Notwithstanding anything to contrary in this Code, no Person Shall skate, In-Line Skate, skateboard or ride a Scooter or Bicycle within the boundaries of Fleming Park. For the purposes of this section, the boundaries of Fleming Park Shall include, but Shall not be limited to, the walkways, Park benches and the amphitheater stage within Fleming Park. 
(Ord. 0-02-01 § 3 (part), 2001)  
12.24.063 - Skating, in-line skating, skateboarding and riding Scooters—Regulations. 
No Person Shall skate, In-Line Skate, skateboard or ride a Scooter along or within any Public Street, Alley, Park, Right-of-Way or other Public Place within the City unless such Person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads. All such gear Must be functional and protective, properly sized and designed for its intended Use. 
(Ord. 0-02-01 § 3 (part), 2001)  
12.24.064 - Skating, in-line skating, skateboarding and riding Scooters—Vehicle Parking Lot. 
No Person Shall skate, In-Line Skate, skateboard or ride a Scooter in or upon any paved Lot or Parcel Used for parking Vehicles within the City; provided however, that nothing in this section Shall prohibit a Person from skating, in-line skating, skateboarding or riding a Scooter on a private Driveway or in a private Lot or Parcel Used for parking Vehicles with the Permission of the Owner or possessor of such Driveway, Lot or Parcel. 
(Ord. 0-02-01 § 3 (part), 2001)  
12.24.065 - Signage and posting. 
In order to provide reasonable Notice to the public, the Director Shall post Signs in one or more conspicuous and visible area(s) of any Park, specifying the requirements of Sections 12.24.062, 12.24.063, 12.24.064, 12.24.115, and other prohibited activities described in this chapter. The Signs required pursuant to this section Shall cite the respective code section being invoked and Shall state that any Person failing to comply with such code section Shall be subject to citation or other applicable enforcement authority available to the City. 
(Ord. 0-23-06 § 2, 2006)  
12.24.070 - Animals. 
No Person Shall ride, lead or let loose any cattle, horse, mule, goat, sheep, swine, cat, dog, fowl or animal of any kind in a Park except that it is not unlawful to have dogs, physically restrained by a leash not in excess of six feet, or to ride horses on trails specifically provided for them. No Person Shall Permit a dog to be or remain unattended. No Person Shall keep or Permit to remain any dog which is noisy, vicious or dangerous or which disturbs other Persons within the boundaries of a Park after such Person has been directed by a City official to remove such dog. No Person Shall trap, kill, injure, catch or maltreat any wild or domesticated bird or animal; or destroy, remove or disturb any of the young or eggs of same, or Permit any dog to pursue, trap, kill or wound any wild or domesticated bird or animal, except that the provisions of this section Shall not apply to City Employees regulating animal populations that have been declared a Nuisance or hazard by the Director consistent with Laws protecting such animals. 
(Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.080 - Boisterous conduct. 
No Person Shall maliciously or wilfully disturb the peace or quiet of a Park or of any Person therein, by loud or unusual Noises, or by indulging in riotous, boisterous, threatening, indecent or offensive conduct, or by using abusive, profane, indecent or vulgar language. No Person Shall, within any Park, disturb in any manner any picnic, meeting, services, concert, exercise or exhibition. No Person Shall play or utilize any sound-amplifying system within or upon any Park or Facility not set aside for such purpose by the City Council or the Director. 
(Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.090 - Gambling. 
No Person Shall gamble or engage in gambling. 
(Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.100 - Vending and peddling. 
No Person Shall expose or offer for Sale any article or thing nor Shall he station or place any stand, Cart or Vehicle for the transportation, Sale or display of any such article or thing except by Written Permission from the Director. No Person Shall give, set up or maintain any exhibition, show, performance, concert, lecture, entertainment or similar activity without Written Permission to do so from the Director. No Person Shall for profit offer sports camps, sports lessons or other similar activity on Park Property without the Written Permission of the Director. 
(Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.110 - Alcoholic Beverages. 
No Person Shall consume or have in his possession, custody or control, either open or unopened, any Alcoholic Beverage of any kind whatsoever, except when attending a function operating under an alcohol Permit issued in accordance with Chapter 9.84 of this Code. No intoxicated Person Shall enter, be or remain in any Park. 
(Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.115 - Smoking. 
No Person Shall Smoke or Use any Tobacco Product within the boundaries of any public Park within the City. 
(Ord. 0-23-06 § 3, 2006)  
12.24.120 - Games and activities. 
It is unlawful for any Person to take Part in or abet the playing of any activity which endangers the health, safety or welfare of the participant or any Person whomsoever in any Park, except on Fields and Courts or areas specifically provided for such games and activities by the City Council or Director. Such games and activities Shall include, but Shall not be limited to, the Following: 
A.  Baseball, tackle football, Field hockey, rugby, cricket, golf, boxing, wrestling, soccer and the martial arts; 
B.  Wading, bathing, swimming, launching any type of boat, raft, air mattress, surfboard or to be in or on any lake, stream or pond found in a City Park; 
C.  Flying any model airplane or helicopter, and launching any model fuel power boat, provided that this subsection Shall not prohibit the launching of model boats powered by battery or sail; 
D.  Carrying, transporting, possessing, discharging, firing or shooting over, onto or through any Park any firearm, air gun, "bb" gun, spring gun, slingshot, bow and arrow, crossbow, spear, firecracker, rocket, explosive of any kind or any other form of weapon potentially dangerous to human beings or wildlife. This subsection Shall not apply to Law Enforcement Officers; 
E.  Lighting or maintaining any fire except in a stove, barbecue grill, fire circle, portable stove or barbecue grill Approved by the Director; 
F.  Erecting any barrier, whether string, wire, rope or chain, or placing any Obstruction of any kind across any path, trail or other area accessible to the public; 
G.  Engaging in any other activity which endangers the health and safety of the public. 
(Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.125 - Safety regulations and Signs. 
The Director Shall establish such safety regulations as May be necessary for specific areas of the Park and for specific activities that are Permitted in such areas. Signs giving Notice of such safety regulations within any Park Shall be posted in locations to be determined by the Director as Permitted or required by Law. 
(Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.130 - Curfew. 
No Person Shall remain, stay or loiter on or about any such Park between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. of the Following Day provided that this section Shall not apply to attendance at authorized community activities in the Park. Any Park, recreation center or Part or portion thereof May be closed to the public during an Emergency, or when it has been determined by the Director, or Police Officer that the public health, safety or morals require such action. Such Park, recreation center or Part or portion thereof Shall not be reopened except by Order of the City Council, City Manager, Director, or Police Officer. 
(Ord. 0-14-07 § 1, 2007)  
12.24.140 - Advertising. 
No Person Shall announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for Sale or hire, or paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any Sign, picture, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever on any City Park or community sports Facility. 
(Ord. 0-22-03 § 1, 2003)  
12.24.141 - Advertising exceptions. 
Section 12.24.140 Shall not apply to any concession or lessee operating under a lease granted by the City Council, or to any advertising placed within a community sports Facility pursuant to a community sports Facility sponsorship program Approved by Resolution of the City Council. In approving any such Resolution, the City Council Shall first determine that the sponsorship program is not contrary to the health, safety and welfare of the Residents of the City of Colton or Materially injurious to adjacent Properties. As Used herein, a community sports Facility Shall be any Facility, area or Enclosure on land owned by the City and Used, in whole or in Part, for organized community sporting events. 
(Ord. 0-22-03 § 2, 2003)  
12.24.150 - Violations—Penalty. 
Any Person violating any provision of this chapter Shall be subject to criminal citation and any other applicable enforcement authority available to the City. Criminal Violations of this chapter Shall be punishable as misdemeanors, and subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or be imprisoned in the City or County Jail for a period not to exceed six Months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 0-02-01 § 4, 2001: Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
12.24.160 - Other provisions of Law. 
The provisions of this chapter Shall supersede and take precedence over any other provisions of Law set forth in the Colton Municipal Code affecting City Parks to the extent that such provisions are inconsistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-14-96 § 1 (part), 1996)  
Chapter 12.26 - CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
12.26.010 - Purpose. 
Public property within the City should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended, and is deleterious to the public peace, health, safety and welfare, in that it obstructs intended uses for the public at large, contributes to blight and can cause damage to public property. The purpose of this Chapter is to maintain public property within the City as accessible to the public at large, to keep such areas in a clean and accessible condition, and to maintain the public peace, health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. O-08-11, § 2, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. O-09-11, § 1, 12-6-2011)  
12.26.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this article. Any terms not defined in this section shall be the same as defined in Section 1.04.010 of this Code. To the extent conflicts exist between definitions herein and elsewhere in this Code, the definitions in this section shall control for purposes of this Chapter. 
"Camp" means to pitch or occupy camp facilities and/or to use "camp paraphernalia." 
"Camp facility" includes, but is not limited to, tents, huts, or other temporary shelters, as well as, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or bedrolls. 
"Camp paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment. 
"Public property" means any publicly owned property in the City, improved or unimproved, including, but not limited to, any of the following: public alleyways; public parking lots; public passageways; public streets; public rights-of-way; publicly owned, maintained or operated parks; publicly owned, maintained or operated landscaped areas or greenbelts; publicly owned, maintained or operated open spaces, including, but not limited to, those adjacent to City hall or other public facilities or buildings of any kind; public sidewalks, curbs and gutters; public educational institutions; or other government owned, maintained or operated properties located within the City. 
"Store" means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location. 
"Sidewalk" means the same as defined in Section 1.04.010 of this Code. 
"Street" means the same as defined in Section 1.04.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-08-11, § 2, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. O-09-11, § 1, 12-6-2011)  
12.26.030 - Camping on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia on any public property within the City, except as otherwise provided herein or mandated by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. O-08-11, § 2, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. O-09-11, § 1, 12-6-2011)  
12.26.040 - Storage of personal property on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia on any public property within the City, except as otherwise provided herein or mandated by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. O-08-11, § 2, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. O-09-11, § 1, 12-6-2011)  
12.26.050 - Exceptions. 
This section shall not apply to any person camping, occupying camp facilities or using camp paraphernalia, or to any person storing personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, on any public property designated by the City for such purposes. The City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, establish one or more specified areas of public property for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-08-11, § 2, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. O-09-11, § 1, 12-6-2011)  
12.26.060 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in Section 8.02.040 of this Code. 
B.  Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or any portion thereof, during which any violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and each instance shall be deemed punishable as provided in this Chapter. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter are in addition to the authority of the police or other City officials to enforce this Code or other applicable law, and shall supplement, and not supplant, the exercise of any other power available to the City or the enforcement of any other law within the jurisdiction of the City. The remedies included in this Chapter are intended to be cumulative of other available remedies, and the City may pursue any other remedy allowed by law to enforce this chapter, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief and the issuance of administrative penalties pursuant to chapter 8.12 of this Code. All such remedies may be pursued individually, consecutively, or in conjunction with each other. 
D.  The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed as permitting conduct not prescribed herein and shall not affect the enforceability of any other applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. O-09-11, § 1, 12-6-2011)  
Chapter 12.28 - MUNICIPAL CEMETERY* 
 
12.28.010 - Definitions. 
"Adult Grave" means all other sites not defined herein as child or baby or Cremations. 
"Baby Grave" or "Cremation" means a site, the length of which does not exceed four feet. 
"Burial Space" and "Grave" are synonymous and mean a single Plot of ground suitable and Designated as and for the location of a burial site of human remains. 
"Child Grave" means a site, the length of which Shall not be less than four feet nor more than six feet. 
"Endowment Care Fund" means that certain fund created for the care, maintenance and embellishment of Hermosa Cemetery. 
"Lots" means the numbered Parcels in Hermosa Cemetery, created pursuant to replat of the Cemetery by Neste and Brudin, Civil Engineers. 
"Plot" means one or more Burial Spaces or Graves. 
(Ord. 1163 § 1, 1963)  
12.28.020 - Endowment Care Fund—Naming—Continuance. 
The "perpetual care fund" is renamed "Endowment Care Fund." Said fund has been and Shall continue to be created by the contribution thereto of a certain portion or percentage of the Sales price of each Burial Space or Grave. 
(Ord. 1163 § 2, 1963)  
12.28.030 - Endowment Care Fund—Administration authority. 
The administration of the Endowment Care Fund Shall be under and pursuant to the statutory authority established and promulgated in the Health and Safety Code of the State. The City Treasurer is Designated as the Person charged with administering the fund pursuant to said statutes and this chapter. 
(Ord. 1163 § 3, 1963)  
12.28.040 - Burial Space price fixing—Rules and regulations adoption. 
The City Council may, from time to time, by Resolution fix the price for each Burial Space or Grave, and the percentage thereof to be placed in the Endowment Care Fund, and to establish such policies, rules and regulations as from time to time May be necessary and convenient, provided the same Shall not be in conflict with this chapter, other public Law or Laws, or orders or decrees of Court on the subject and Shall be Used for the guidance and information of the public, City, its Employees and agents. 
(Ord. 1163 § 4, 1963)  
Chapter 12.32 - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT FEES 
 
12.32.010 - Public Improvement Fees within specified areas. 
A.  Purpose. This chapter is intended to provide a method whereby the burdens of installing public Improvements, the need for which is created by certain Development Projects and which will benefit certain land in addition to such Development Projects, will be required to be borne by all of the land so benefitted. Areas of benefit May be formed and Fees chargeable to such lands May be imposed in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. It is further the intent of this chapter that all Development Projects which impact surrounding Properties and create a need for new or expanded public Improvements be required to dedicate land, construct Improvements and/or pay Impact Fees sufficient to mitigate all adverse environmental impacts. To this end, areas of impact May be established, the need for Improvements within such area determined, and the proportionate responsibility of any Development Project for such cost fixed in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  Application. All Development Projects which are not otherwise exempt pursuant to this chapter Shall be reviewed in accordance herewith to determine whether the Project will create the need for construction of public Improvements within the Area of Impact of the Development Project. If such Area of Impact is determined to exist, then an Area of Benefit May be established for the land benefitted by construction of the Improvement, and the Developer Shall dedicate land and/or pay an Impact Fee reasonably related to the impact created by the Development Project and benefit derived thereby. All public Improvements provided in accordance with this chapter Shall meet the standards, specifications and requirements of the General Plan of the City, including the circulation element, and any specific plan adopted thereto, and any other adopted Resolution, policy, or standard of the City. 
C.  Effect on Other Laws. The authority created hereunder for the imposition of Impact Fees Shall be in addition to any other authority established by this Code and Shall not supersede any other provisions or authority adopted by Ordinance of the City Council unless expressly stated herein. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein Shall authorize any excessive Fee which is not reasonably necessary to meet the public needs arising as a result of the Development Project. 
D.  Exemptions. The Following Development Projects Shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  Any addition, modification, Improvement or reconstruction to an existing Single-Family residential unit. 
(Ord. 0-18-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.32.020 - Definitions. 
The Following definitions Shall govern the meaning of words in this chapter, unless from the context in which the word is Used, a different meaning is clearly intended: 
A.  "Approving Body" means that agency of the City vested with the authority to approve, conditionally approve or deny the Development Project. 
B.  "Area of Benefit" means the land upon which the Development Project is located and all surrounding land determined pursuant to this chapter to derive a benefit from the construction of the public Improvements required hereunder. 
C.  "Area of Impact" means the land upon which the Development Project is located and all surrounding land, including all transportation corridors relating to the Development Project, wherein the impacts of the Project are regarded to be significant and upon which public Improvements Must be constructed in order to mitigate such impacts. The Area of Impact can have two Components, Local where Improvements of a Minor nature are installed adjacent to and are in close proximity to the Development Project, and, area-wide where the Improvements provide significant increases to the capacity of the circulation system and other infrastructure. Both types of Improvements can benefit lands other than the Development Project. 
D.  "City Engineer" means the City Engineer of the City or his or her Designated Representative. 
E.  "Developer" means the Applicant for Approval of a Development Project and includes all partners and joint ventures of the Applicant and the Owner of the Real Property. 
F.  "Development Approval" means the Approval of any tentative or final tract map or Parcel map, any Conditional Use Permit, or other land Use Approval required for Development or construction pursuant to this code. 
G.  "Development Project" means any Project undertaken for the purpose of Development. 
H.  "Director of Community Development" or "Director of Public Works" means the Director of Community Development or the Director of Public Works, as the case May be, of the City or his or her Designated Representative. 
I.  "Impact Fee" means a monetary exaction imposed pursuant to this chapter, other than a tax, which is charged by the City to the Developer in connection with Approval of the Development Project for the purposes of defraying all or a portion of the actual or estimated costs of public Improvements related to the Development Project, including all elements listed in subsection J of this section, but does not include any Fees pursuant to Chapter 16.58, Fees for processing Applications for governmental regulatory actions or Approvals, or Fees collected pursuant to a Development agreement adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 65864, et seq. The amount of the Fee Shall be the amount reasonably determined to be equivalent to the Development Project's proportionate share of the actual or estimated cost of the Improvement, as measured by the impact caused by construction of the Development Project and/or by the benefit conferred to the land by said Improvements, as determined in accordance with this chapter. 
J.  "Improvements" means any public Improvements, public services, or community amenities including, but not limited to, construction of Streets, Highways, thoroughfares, bridges, Alleys, medians, turning lanes, paving, Driveways, Curbs, gutters, Sidewalks, lighting, signals, drainage, water, sewer, Utility, transit facilities (including bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads, etc.), Bicycle paths, Landscaping, planters, signage, safety Improvements, and any other similar related Structures or Improvements. Improvement refers to any other specific Improvements or types of Improvements the installation of which either by the Developer, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity Approved by the City, or by a combination thereof which is necessary to ensure consistency with or implementation of the General Plan or any applicable specific plan. The term Improvement includes the dedication of Real Property, either in Easement or in Fee; the planning, engineering and design of such Improvements; necessary Improvement Studies, reports and analyses; inflation factors; the financing of such Improvements; administration of contracts; as well as the actual construction of the Improvements. 
K.  "Improvement Study" means a report prepared by a competent traffic safety engineering expert Approved by the Director of Public Works and containing the information set forth in Section 12.32.050. 
L.  "Traffic Committee" means the Traffic Committee defined in section 10.50.010. 
(Ord. 0-7-95 § 1, 1995; Ord. 0-18-88 § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. O-18-16, § 2, 10-18-2016)  
12.32.030 - Nature of Improvements. 
A.  Minimum Local Improvements. Minimum Local Improvements Shall consist of a concrete Curb, gutter, Sidewalk, Street paving to the center of the Street, Alley paving, Street lighting, Driveway approaches, drainage Structures, sewer and water mains, Landscaping and Street trees located within Parkways, and similar Improvements, located within the public Right-of-Way of each Public Street that the Parcel fronts upon for the full length of the common boundary of the Parcel and the Street(s). 
B.  Minimum Area Improvements. Minimum area Improvements Shall be any Improvements within the Area of Impact, other than Local Improvements, which are found by the City based upon the Improvement Study to be necessary to mitigate the impacts of the Development Project. 
C.  Existing Improvements. Existing Improvements Shall satisfy the minimum Improvement requirements under this chapter if they are installed at the proper location and in the proper manner, have adequate capacity and are either in a good condition or it is practicable by repairs to place them in good condition. 
D.  Standard Specifications. The standard specifications for the Improvements required under this chapter Shall be those established by the Director of Public Works as minimum specifications for all Improvements installed in the Streets of the City pursuant to this Code. 
E.  Dedication Required. Whenever Improvements are required under this section, the Real Property necessary for such Improvements Shall be dedicated to the City and the Improvements Shall be installed by the Developer without any cost to the City as a condition of Approval of the Development Project. All dedications required under this chapter Shall conform to the requirements of the City's General Plan, any specific plan adopted pursuant thereto, and any other adopted Resolution, policy or standard of the City. 
(Ord. 0-18-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.32.040 - Submission of Application for Development Project and determination of whether Improvement Study is required. 
A.  Submission of Application. At the time the Developer submits an Application for a Development Project under any other provision of this Code, the Developer Shall submit a Written request to the Director of Community Development for a determination of whether an Improvement Study or studies are required under this chapter. The request Shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the Director of Community Development and containing such information as May otherwise be required under this Code for the Development Project including a Site Plan, circulation plan, description of the type of Development Project, a Projection of the total peak hour and aggregate Vehicle trips generated by Project, the density of the Project, and a Projection of sewer, water, Utility and other impacts of the Project. 
B.  Determination to Prepare Improvement Study. Within thirty Days after submission of a complete Application for a Development Project by the Developer, the Director of Community Development Shall determine whether an Improvement Study or studies should be prepared. An Improvement Study should generally be prepared where: 
1.  The impacts generated by the Development Project will affect surrounding land and transportation corridors; or 
2.  Area-wide Improvements are required to mitigate the impacts; or 
3.  Surrounding land will be substantially benefitted by the construction of the Improvements. 
Any required Improvement Study Shall be performed at the sole expense of the Developer prior to the Approval of the Development Project. No Improvement Study need be prepared if a previous study has been performed and is adequate to address the requirements of Section 12.32.050 for the Development Project. 
(Ord. 0-18-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.32.050 - Preparation of Improvement Study. 
Any Improvement Study prepared pursuant to this chapter Shall contain the Following: 
A.  The Area of Impact of the Development Project; 
B.  The impacts which will occur within the area; 
C.  Other land benefitted by the Improvements and the Area of Benefit; 
D.  The Improvements which will be required upon the Development of all the land in the area; 
E.  A phasing plan showing when Development of land in the area will occur, and when the Improvements will need to be completed to meet the needs created by such Development; 
F.  Those Local and area-wide Improvements which should be constructed as Part of the Development Project; 
G.  The formula for and allocation of benefit to all land in the Area of Benefit; 
H.  Those Impact Fees which should be provided by the Development Project, and those impacts Fees which should be reimbursed to the Development Project. 
The methodology, data, analysis, and recommendations contained within the Improvement Study Shall be subject to the review and Approval of the City as provided herein. 
(Ord. 0-18-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.32.060 - Determination of Improvement requirements. 
A.  Determination Where No Improvement Study. Where no Improvement Study has been required pursuant to Section 13.32.040, then at the time the Development Approval Shall be granted, such Approval Shall be subject to the condition that Improvements be constructed and/or Fees paid in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  Review of Improvement Study by Directors. The Director of Public Works Shall review every Improvement Study and, based upon said Improvement Study, Shall make such recommendations to the Director of Community Development, and the Director of Community Development Shall make such recommendations to the Approving Body, as such officials Shall deem appropriate, provided, that any recommendations concerning circulation Improvements Shall first be referred to the Traffic Committee. 
C.  Review by Traffic Committee. Where an Improvement Study has been prepared and includes traffic circulation Improvements, such Improvement Study Shall be reviewed by the Traffic Committee. The Developer Shall be given ten Days' Notice and the opportunity to be heard before the Traffic Committee prior to the Traffic Committee's determination. After the hearing by the Traffic Committee, the traffic Shall make its recommendation to the Approving Body. 
D.  Review by Approving Body. The body charged with the authority to grant the Development Approval Shall consider the recommendation of the Director and/or Traffic Committee, as the case May be, at the time of its consideration of the Development Project. The Developer and all other interested Persons Shall be given the same Notice of the Approving Body's deliberations pursuant to this chapter as would be required to grant the Development Approval for the Project. 
E.  Appeals. Any determination by the Approving Body which would otherwise be final under this chapter, May be Appealed in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.32.030 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-18-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.32.070 - Determination of Fee and Area of Benefit by Approving Body. 
A.  Construction of Improvements. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the Developer Shall complete construction of all Local Improvements and all area-wide Improvements required hereunder, or provide the security established by Section 12.32.100, prior to the issuance of certificate of Occupancy. 
B.  Determination of Need for Construction. In the event Developer is unable to construct the Improvements required hereunder due to any of the foregoing reasons: 
1.  The Improvements will be located wholly or in Part on private land not accessible to the Developer or Developer otherwise does not have the legal capacity to construct the Improvement; or 
2.  Although there is a need for the Improvement created by the Development Project, due to fiscal, legal, governmental or other considerations, as determined by the City, it is not appropriate to immediately construct such Improvements; or 
3.  There is insufficient aggregate current public need to warrant construction of the Improvement at the present time; or 
4.  The Improvements have been previously installed by others; then the Approving Body May waive the requirement that the Improvement be constructed in conjunction with the Development Project and, in lieu thereof, Impact Fees May be required pursuant to this section. The Approving Body May also require a combination of construction of public Improvements and payment of Impact Fees to fulfill the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  Determination of Impact Fee. Where Impact Fees are required to be paid under this chapter, the amount of such Fees Shall be established as provided in this chapter. 
D.  Determination of Area of Benefit and Fees. In the event lands other than the Development Project will be substantially benefitted by the construction of the Improvement, the City Shall establish the boundaries of the Area of Benefit, the costs of the Improvements, a method of apportioning such costs against the land benefitted, and the Fee for each Parcel. 
(Ord. 0-18-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.32.080 - Additional standards for determining Improvement requirement. 
A.  Improvements Shall be Necessary to Meet Needs of Development Project. No provision of this chapter Shall be construed to Permit the imposition of an Impact Fee which is excessive. An Impact Fee is excessive if the extent is not reasonably necessary to meet the public needs arising as a result of the Development Project. 
B.  Need for the Improvement. In requiring the Development any public Improvement pursuant to this chapter, the Approving Body Shall determine that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the Improvement and the impact created by the Development Project. 
C.  Use of Fee. In the event that Approving Body requires the payment of an Impact Fee, the Approving Body Shall determine how the Fee Shall be Used and that there is a reasonable relationship between the Use of the Fee and the impact of the Development Project. 
D.  Conditions of Approval. As a condition of Approval of any Development Project, the Approving Body Shall impose conditions requiring that the Developer comply with the provisions of this chapter. Such conditions May include specification of the required Improvements; time for construction; phasing of the Development Project in accordance with construction of the Improvements; posting of security for construction; dedication of land; payment of Impact Fees; reimbursement for Improvements, or Fees performed or paid by others; performance of necessary studies and design services; and related Matters. The Approving Body May Permit the later Establishment of any of the foregoing administratively based upon further necessary studies. In addition, the Approving Body May require the payment of Fees established in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter to reimburse any Person, including the City, for the previous construction of public Improvements which benefit the Development Project. 
(Ord. 0-18-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.32.090 - Control of accounts. 
A.  Capital Improvement Plan. The City May adopt a Capital Improvement Plan indicating the approximate location, size, time and availability, estimates of costs for all Improvements to be financed with the Impact Fees established hereby. The Capital Improvement Plan May be updated from time to time by Resolution of the City Council Following a Noticed Public Hearing. 
B.  Accounting for Funds or Fees. The City Shall deposit any Impact Fees in separate capital facilities account(s) or fund(s) in a manner to avoid any commingling of the Fees with other revenues and funds of the City, except for temporary investments, and expend those Fees solely for the purpose for which the Fee was collected. Separate accounts or funds May be established for different public Improvement Projects. Any interest income earned by moneys in the capital facilities account(s) or fund(s) Shall also be deposited in that account or fund and Shall be expended only for the purpose for which the Fee was originally collected. 
C.  Advance of City Moneys. The City May advance moneys from its General Fund or other funds to pay the cost of constructing Improvements hereto, and May reimburse such funds for any advances from Fees paid pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-18-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.32.100 - Time of payment. 
A.  Improvement Security. The City May require the Developer to enter into an agreement for completion of the Improvements and May require the posting of security to secure the obligations of the agreement in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.56 of this Code. 
B.  Dedication. The City May require the dedication of land pursuant to this chapter concurrent with the issuance of Building Permits or at such other time as May be appropriate. 
C.  Impact Fees. All Impact Fees Shall be paid directly to the City cashier upon the date of final inspection, or the date the certificate of Occupancy is issued, whichever occurs last. In the case of Residential Dwelling Units, the City May require a payment on pro rata basis for each Dwelling or upon a percentage of Dwellings when they have received final inspection or certificate of Occupancy, whichever occurs last. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City May require earlier payment of such Fees if necessary to reimburse City for previous expenditures or if the Fees are collected for Improvements where the City established an account, appropriated funds, and an updated construction schedule or plan for the Improvements prior to final inspection or issuance of certificate of Occupancy. 
(Ord. 0-18-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.32.110 - Reimbursement for oversized or prior constructed Improvements. 
A.  Construction by Developer. The Developer May be required to construct Improvements for the benefit of the Development Project which include supplemental size, capacity or number, or to pay Fees, or provide such other consideration for the construction of the same, for the benefit of Property not included in the Development Project. 
B.  Reimbursement to Developer. In the event that the Developer is required to construct Improvements under this section, the City Shall enter into an agreement with Developer pursuant to which the Developer May be reimbursed for the amount by which value of the Improvements or consideration exceeds the cost to the Developer of constructing the Improvements without supplemental size, capacity or number or otherwise applicable Fees. The agreement Shall set forth the amount to be reimbursed and the time and manner in which payment thereof will be made, and will be in a form Approved by the City Attorney. Generally, such payments Shall be made by the Developers of other benefitted Property at the time such Property is developed, and such payments Shall be made from revenues paid to the special fund created for the Area of Benefit. 
C.  Reimbursement to City. In the event that the Improvements are installed by the City, either before or after the granting of a Development Approval, at the time of Development Approval, any Developer of Property benefitted by such Improvements May be required to pay Impact Fees determined in accordance with an Improvement Study, in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 12.32.120, or otherwise determined in accordance with this chapter. 
D.  Development Approval. Conditions requiring reimbursement and payment of Impact Fees in accordance with this section May be made a condition of any Development Approval in accordance with subsection D of Section 12.32.080. 
(Ord. 0-18-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.32.120 - Alternative method. 
A.  General. This section is intended to establish an alternative method for the spreading of the costs of certain public Improvements against the lands which would be benefitted thereby. The provisions hereof Shall not be construed to limit the power of the City Council to utilize any other method authorized by Law for the accomplishment of this purpose including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, to establish any assessment District, or to establish a Mello-Roos community facilities District pursuant to Government Code Sections 53311, et seq. This alternative method May be utilized whenever determined by the City Council to be appropriate, including as follows: 
1.  Whenever the Impact Fee to be paid by the Development Project is less than ten percent of the total Improvement cost; or 
2.  Whenever the area of the Development Project is less than ten percent of the land benefitted; or 
3.  Whenever the Developer formally requests utilization of the Alternative Procedure. 
The Alternative Procedure May be utilized where Improvements have been constructed prior to the formation of the Area of Benefit to collect Fees to reimburse a Developer or the City pursuant to Section 12.32.110. 
B.  Initiation of Proceedings. In lieu of the procedure otherwise provided in this chapter, the Developer, Planning Commission or City Council, on its own motion, May initiate proceedings for the formation of an Area of Benefit, the adjustment of the boundaries in an Area of Benefit, or annexations to an Area of Benefit by adopting a Resolution stating its intention to do so. 
C.  Resolution of Intention. Pursuant to this section the Resolution of Intention Shall include the Following: 
1.  A description of the Improvements; 
2.  The estimated total cost for or actual cost of construction of the Improvements; 
3.  The boundaries of the Area of Benefit; 
4.  Preliminary information concerning the method pursuant to which the costs are proposed to be apportioned among the Parcels and a preliminary estimate of the amount which will be charged each such Parcel; 
5.  The contribution, if any, which the City or other public entity will make toward the total cost; 
6.  The time and place at which the City Council will hold a hearing to consider the formation or adjustment of the Area of Benefit. 
D.  Notice of Hearing. Notice of the hearing Shall be provided at least ten Days before the date set for the hearing by: 
1.  Mailing copies of the Resolution of Intention to the Owners of Real Property located within the proposed Area of Benefit and within three hundred feet of the boundaries of such area at the address as shown on the last equalized assessment roll or as otherwise known to the City Clerk; 
2.  Publication of the Resolution of Intention in a newspaper of general circulation; 
3.  Posting the Resolution of Intention in at least three Public Places within the City, including at least in one Public Place in the proposed Area of Benefit; and 
4.  Mailing the Resolution of Intention to each Local agency expected to provide essential services or facilities within the proposed Area of Benefit whose ability to provide such services or facilities May be significantly affected. 
E.  Protest. At any time not later than the hour set for the Public Hearing, any Owner of Property within the proposed Area of Benefit May file a Written protest against the Improvement Project proposed to be undertaken or against the extent of the Area of Benefit or against the charges proposed to be levied within the Area of Benefit or against any or all of the foregoing. Such protest Must be in writing, Must contain a description of the Property in which the signer is interested sufficient to identify the same, and Shall be delivered to the City CLERK prior to the close of the Public Hearing. A protest May be withdrawn prior to the close of the Public Hearing. 
F.  Hearing. At the time and place established by the resolution of Intention, the City Council Shall hear and consider all protests. The hearing May be continued from time to time. If within the time the protests May be filed, there is filed to the City Clerk a Written protest by the Owners of more than one-half of the area of the Property proposed to be included within the Area of Benefit, and if sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented to less than said one-half, then the proposed proceedings Shall be Abandoned unless the protests are overruled by an affirmative vote of four-fifths of the members of the City Council. The City Council Shall not overrule a majority of protests unless it Shall find that the public health, safety or general welfare require the installation of the Improvements. 
G.  Resolution of Formation. At the conclusion of the hearing and provided that there are no protests by the Owners of over one-half of the land included in the Area of Benefit, the City Council May adopt a Resolution ordering the formation or adjustment of the Area of Benefit. Said Resolution Shall cover those Matters listed in subsection C of this section. Notice of the adoption of the Resolution of formation or adjustment Shall be provided in the same manner as set forth herein for Resolutions of Intention. A certified Copy of the Resolution May be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder. 
H.  Payment of Fees. After the adoption by the City Council of a Resolution forming or adjusting an Area of Benefit, no Development Shall be Permitted on any land included within the Area of Benefit unless or until the proportional share of the Fees established by the Resolution of formation or adjustment for such lands have been paid or provision has been made for such payment to the satisfaction of the City Manager. In addition, whenever the City determines that the Improvement is needed, the City Shall serve a Notice of assessment on the Owners of Properties within the Area of Benefit in the same manner as delivery of the hearing Notices pursuant to subsection D of this section, and Shall record such Notice in the Office of the County Recorder. The amount of the levy shown in the Notice Shall be a lien against the Properties, and the City May foreclose the lien if it is not paid in the same manner as for abatement of Nuisances pursuant to Chapter 6.20. Money received by the City as payment of such Fees Shall be deposited in a special fund established for the Area of Benefit and Shall thereafter be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of the Improvement or to reimburse the City for the cost of constructing any Improvement. 
I.  Annual Review. The City Council May annually after the adoption of the Resolution of formation cause an adjustment to be made in the Fees established by said Resolution. Adjustments May reflect: changes in the estimated cost of the proposed public Improvements, as reflected in the Consumer Price Index or such other indices as the City Council May deem appropriate; changes in the Improvements proposed to be constructed; changes in the boundaries of the Area of Benefit; the availability, or lack thereof, of other funds with which to construct the public Improvements; or other factors. However, in no case Shall a modification, the effect of which would be to increase the Fee payable, be made applicable to the lands for which the Fees established by the Resolution formation have already been paid. 
J.  Termination of Area of Benefit. Upon receipt of an Application by a landOwner or Developer, or on its own motion, City Council May initiate proceedings for the termination of an Area of Benefit by adopting a Resolution stating its intention to do so. The Resolution of Intention Shall state the time and place at which the City Council will hold a hearing to consider such termination. If, at the conclusion of such hearing, the City Council finds and determines that the public Improvement for which the area was originally formed will not be required in the reasonably foreseeable future, or that the installation of said public Improvement May be financed more effectively by another method, the City Council May adopt a Resolution declaring the Area of Benefit to be terminated. Upon the termination of the Area of Benefit, the money May remain in the special fund established in connection therewith and Shall be returned to those Persons who had made payment thereof, in proportion to the amount of their payments. 
(Ord. 0-18-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 12.34 - STORM DRAIN FACILITIES FEES FOR DRAINAGE BENEFIT AREA NO. 1 
 
12.34.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish the method of financing the construction of necessary storm drain facilities and Improvements to serve new Subdivision Development proposed within Drainage Benefit Area No. 1. Pursuant to Government Code Section 66483, the City does establish a storm drain facilities Fee for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated costs of the City for constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and Stormwaters from Drainage Benefit Area No. 1. Drainage Benefit Area No. 1 was formed in order to ensure that the costs of drainage facilities needed to serve the new Development within Drainage Benefit Area No. 1 be borne by the Properties benefitted by such drainage facilities. 
(Ord. 0-27-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.34.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever the Following terms are Used in this chapter, they Shall have the meanings established by this section: 
A.  "Development Permit" means any discretionary Permit, entitlement or Approval by the City. 
B.  "Drainage Benefit Area No. 1" means that area of the City lying within County Flood control study zone 2 for which the City has adopted an Approved plan for the construction of storm drain facilities and Improvements, the boundaries of which are described in the map on file with the Public Works Director of the City.  
12.34.030 - Compliance with chapter. 
Every Subdivider who subdivides land within Drainage Benefit Area No. 1 Shall pay a storm drain facilities Fee as provided for in this chapter. The requirements of this chapter are imposed as a condition of Subdivision Development to ensure implementation and consistency with the City's General Plan and to protect the public health, safety and welfare by insuring that adequate public facilities and Improvements will be installed and available to serve new Development prior to or concurrently with the need for such facilities. 
(Ord. 0-27-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.34.040 - Storm drain facilities Fees. 
Storm drain facilities Fees Shall be collected from Applicants for Subdivision Development proposed within Drainage Benefit Area No. 1 in accordance with the schedule of Fees as established from time to time by Resolution of the City Council. No Development Permit Shall be issued unless the Fees required by this chapter are first paid. Fees collected pursuant to this chapter Shall be deposited in a special planned Local drainage facilities fund established for the purpose of funding the construction of the storm drain facilities and Improvements provided for in the City's storm drain Improvement plan for Drainage Benefit Area No. 1. The Fees required by this chapter are in addition to any other means of financing facilities or Improvements identified in the City's storm drain Improvement plan which May be imposed on the Development of Property under the provisions of State Law, this Code or City policy. 
(Ord. 0-27-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.34.050 - Establishment of account. 
A.  Accounting for Funds. All storm drain facilities Fees collected pursuant to this chapter Shall be deposited in the planned Local drainage facilities fund for Drainage Benefit Area No. 1 in a manner to avoid any commingling of such Fees with other revenues and funds of the City. Any interest income earned by moneys in the planned drainage facilities fund for Drainage Benefit Area No. 1 Shall also be deposited in that account and Shall be expended only for the purpose for which the Fee was originally collected. 
B.  Advance of City Moneys. The City May advance moneys from its General Fund or other funds to pay the costs of constructing storm drain facilities and Improvements for Drainage Benefit Area No. 1 and May reimburse such funds for any advances from Fees paid pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  Fee Review. On or about October 1, 1989, and each Following Year, the Public Works Department Shall review the estimated cost of the planned storm drain facilities and Improvements, the continued need for those Improvements and the reasonable relationship between such need and the impacts of new Subdivision Development on which the Fee is levied. The Public Works Director Shall report the Department's findings to the City Council at a Noticed Public Hearing and recommend any adjustment to this Fee or other action as May be needed. 
(Ord. 0-27-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.34.060 - Time of payment. 
As a condition of issuance of any Building or Development Permit for new Subdivision Development proposed within Drainage Benefit Area No. 1 after the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this chapter, the Applicant Shall pay the Fees established by this chapter at the time the Building Permit is issued. 
(Ord. 0-27-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 12.36 - STORM DRAIN FACILITIES FEES FOR DRAINAGE BENEFIT AREA NO. 2 
 
12.36.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a method for financing the costs of construction of necessary storm drain facilities and Improvements which will serve new Subdivision Development occurring within Drainage Benefit Area No. 2. Pursuant to Government Code Section 66483, the City does establish a storm drain facilities Fee for the purpose of defraying the actual costs of construction of drainage facilities and Improvements for the removal of surface and Stormwaters from Drainage Benefit Area No. 2. Drainage Benefit Area No. 2 was formed in order to ensure that the costs of drainage Improvements needed to serve new Subdivision Development within Drainage Benefit Area No. 2 be borne by the Properties benefitted by such drainage facilities. 
(Ord. 0-26-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.36.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever the Following terms are Used in this chapter, they Shall have the meanings established by this section: 
A.  "Development Permit" means any discretionary Permit, entitlement or Approval by the City. 
B.  "Drainage Benefit Area No. 2" means that territory within the City for which the City has an Approved plan for the construction of storm drain facilities and Improvements, the boundaries of which are described in the map on file with the Public Works Director of the City. 
(Ord. 0-26-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.36.030 - Compliance with chapter. 
Every Subdivider who subdivides land within Drainage Benefit Area No. 2 Shall pay the storm drain facilities Fee as provided for in this chapter. The requirements of this chapter are imposed as a condition of Subdivision Development to ensure implementation and consistency with the City's General Plan and to protect the public health, safety and welfare by ensuring that adequate public facilities and Improvements will be installed and available to serve new Subdivision Development prior to or concurrently with the need for such facilities. 
(Ord. 0-26-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.36.040 - Storm drain facilities Fees. 
Storm drain Fees Shall be collected from Applicants for Subdivision Development proposed within Drainage Benefit Area No. 2 in accordance with the schedule of Fees as established from time to time by Resolution of the City Council. No Development Permit Shall be issued unless the Fees required by this chapter are first paid. Fees collected pursuant to this chapter Shall be deposited in a special planned Local drainage facilities fund established for the purpose of reimbursing certain costs of construction of the storm drain facilities Improvements provided for in the City's storm drain Improvement plan for Drainage Benefit Area No. 2. 
(Ord. 0-26-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.36.050 - Establishment of account. 
A.  Accounting for Funds. All storm drain Fees Shall be deposited in the planned Local drainage facilities fund for Drainage Benefit Area No. 2 in a manner to avoid any commingling of such Fees with other revenues and funds of the City. Any interest income earned by moneys in the planned drainage facilities fund for Drainage Benefit Area No. 2 Shall also be deposited in that account and Shall be expended only for the purpose for which the Fee was originally collected. 
B.  Fee Review. On or about October 1, 1989, and each Following Year, the Public Works Department Shall review the costs of construction of the storm drain facilities and Improvements serving Drainage Benefit Area No. 2, and their relationship between the need for those Improvements and the impacts of new Subdivision Development for which the Fee is levied. The Public Works Director Shall report the Department's findings to the City Council at a Noticed Public Hearing and recommend any adjustment to this Fee or other action as May be needed. 
(Ord. 0-26-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
12.36.060 - Time of payment. 
As a condition of issuance of any Building Permit for new Subdivision Development proposed within Drainage Benefit Area No. 2 after the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this chapter, the Applicant Shall pay the Fees established by this chapter at the time the Development Permit is issued. 
(Ord. 0-26-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 12.40 - DISPOSAL OF CANINE FECES ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
12.40.010 - Duty to dispose. 
It Shall be unlawful for any Person owning or having control or custody of any dog: 
A.  To Permit or allow the dog to defecate upon Public Property, including, but not limited to, any Sidewalk, Street, Park, public Right-of-Way or other public area, within the City unless the Owner or the Person having control or custody of the dog immediately removes the feces and properly disposes the container of the feces in a sanitary manner; or 
B.  To Permit or allow the dog to defecate upon Private Property neither owned nor occupied by said Person unless the Owner or the Person having control or custody of the dog immediately removes the feces and properly disposes the container of the feces in a sanitary manner; or 
C.  To walk a dog on public or Private Property without carrying at all times a suitable container or other suitable instrument for the removal and disposal of canine feces. 
(Ord. 0-10-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
12.40.020 - Method of disposal. 
Any Person owning or having control or custody of a dog will have on or near their Person a tool or device, such as a plastic bag, or any other disposable vessel that can be Used to fully clean-up and contain the feces, unexposed to said Person or the public, until it can be disposed of in a trash can or other appropriate receptacle. Such a device Must be produced and shown to anyone authorized to enforce this chapter upon request. 
(Ord. 0-10-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
12.40.030 - Enforcement. 
Violation of this chapter Shall be punishable as follows: 
First Offense (over a 12-month period) 	$50.00 
Second Offense (over a 12-month period) 	$100.00 
Third Offense and each subsequent offense (over a 12-month period) 	$150.00 
 
(Ord. 0-10-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
12.40.040 - Exemption. 
This chapter Shall not apply to a dog accompanying any handicapped Person who, by reason of his or her handicap, is physically unable to comply with the requirements of this chapter or to any individual who utilizes a guide dog. 
(Ord. 0-10-02 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 12.44 - REGULATION FOR UNLICENSED ITINERANT VENDING BUSINESS 
 
12.44.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the Following words Shall have the meanings set forth herein: 
"Goods" means any consumable items, foods, beverages, merchandise or wares, being offered for Sale. 
"Itinerant Vending Business" means any vending or similar Business activity transacted on any public or Private Property within the City when such vending or similar Business activity is conducted from any motorized or Nonmotorized Vehicle, Cart, trailer, stand, booth, wagon, box, grocery Cart or similar container, other wheeled conveyance movable by human power, any instrumentality Used in food preparation or food keeping, or from any location that has not obtained all requisite zoning and Development Approvals. 
"Itinerant Vendor" means any Person who engages in an Itinerant Vending Business, regardless of whether such Person is the Owner of the Goods offered for Sale, or the servant, agent or Employee of the Owner. 
"Perishable" means any item or items that spoil, perish or decay rapidly; or are likely to spoil, perish or decay rapidly if not refrigerated, including but not limited to food, beverages and flowers. 
(Ord. 0-06-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
12.44.020 - Unlicensed Itinerant Vending Business prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any Person to engage in any Itinerant Vending Business, without first paying the Application Fee and obtaining a City Business License as set forth in Section 5.02.030 of the City Code, or for any Person to carry on the activities of the Itinerant Vending Business without keeping a current City Business License with him or her at all times while transacting and carrying on the activities of the Itinerant Vending Business, as set forth in Section 5.02.130 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-06-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
12.44.030 - Violation—Remedies. 
Any Person who violates Section 12.44.020 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, as set forth in Section 5.02.370 of this Code, and May be cited or arrested for such Violation. 
(Ord. 0-06-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
12.44.040 - Seizure of Goods. 
Upon the citation or arrest of any Person for Violation of Section 12.44.020 of this chapter, the City May seize and impound all Perishable and Nonperishable Goods in the possession of the unlicensed Itinerant Vendor. 
(Ord. 0-06-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
12.44.050 - Procedure for release of Perishable Goods. 
A.  Following citation or arrest pursuant to Section 12.44.030 of this chapter, the unlicensed Itinerant Vendor Shall sign a declaration, which Shall declare, under penalty of perjury, the name and contact information of the rightful Owner of the seized Goods. 
B.  The City Shall make a reasonable attempt to contact the rightful Owner of any seized Perishable Goods, if other than the Itinerant Vendor arrested or cited, in order to provide that Owner with an opportunity to retrieve the Goods within twenty-four hours. The rightful Owner, as set forth in the declaration described in subsection A of this section, Must present valid identification to the City, before the City will release any seized Goods. 
C.  If the unlicensed Itinerant Vendor claims to be the rightful Owner of the seized Perishable Goods, such Itinerant Vendor Must present valid identification to the City, and Must sign the declaration described in subsection A of this section declaring himself or herself to be the rightful Owner. In such case, the City Shall provide such Itinerant Vendor the opportunity to either: 
1.  Contract, with one phone call (which one phone call Shall be in addition to any other phone calls Permitted by Law to an arrestee), another individual to pick up the seized Perishable Goods, provided that the Goods Must be picked up within twenty-four hours; or 
2.  Sign a release allowing the City to immediately dispose of or donate any seized Perishable Goods. 
D.  Prior to releasing, disposing or donating any Perishable Goods seized pursuant to Section 12.44.040 of this chapter, the City Shall inspect, and take photographs and any necessary samples of such Goods to maintain as evidence. 
E.  Any Perishable Goods not retrieved, as provided in this chapter, within twenty-four hours Shall be immediately donated or discarded by the City, with no liability to the City for such action. 
F.  Nothing contained in this chapter Shall limit the ability of the City to cite the Owner of the seized Perishable Goods for Violation of this CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE. 
G.  The Police Chief May adopt reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, in order to implement this section. 
(Ord. 0-06-06 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 12.45 - REGULATION OF NEWSRACKS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
12.45.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to authorize the placement and maintenance of news racks upon public sidewalks or parkways under the limitations set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Director" means the Director of Public Works of the city of Colton or designee thereof. 
B.  "News rack" means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or news periodicals. 
C.  "Parkway" means that area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and, where there is no sidewalk or curb, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. 
D.  "Roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.030 - Permit required. 
No person, whether as a principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for himself or any other person, or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise, shall place or maintain a news rack on or projecting onto a sidewalk or parkway unless and until an encroachment permit has been obtained from the Director. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.040 - Fee required. 
An encroachment permit fee shall be levied in accordance with the currently adopted Fee Resolution. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.050 - Issuance of permit. 
Upon proper application on forms provided by the Director, the Director shall issue the applicant an encroachment permit. One encroachment permit shall be required for each location of news rack(s) identified in the permit (i.e., individual news rack or grouping of news racks). 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.060 - Permits—Applications—Contents. 
Any person desiring permits pursuant to this chapter shall make application therefor to the Director. The encroachment permit applications shall be upon forms furnished by the Director and shall set forth: 
A.  The name, address, telephone number (and facsimile or electronic mail address, if available) of the applicant; 
B.  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal corporate officers and the state of incorporation; 
C.  The name, address, telephone number (and facsimile or electronic mail address, if available) of the person to be in immediate charge of the individual news rack(s) who the city may notify or contact at any time; 
D.  The location(s) where the news rack(s) shall be placed; 
E.  A color photograph and model number of the type of news rack(s); 
F.  The name of the publication to be contained in each news rack; 
G.  A site map showing the width of the sidewalk and the location of each proposed news rack installation and any and all structures, encroachments or objects of any kind or character within twenty-five feet of the proposed installation including, but not limited to, traffic signals, street light poles, fire hydrants, bus benches, utility poles, telephones, building entrances, driveways and parking meters; 
H.  A statement that the applicant will directly control and supervise each news rack proposed to be authorized under the permit sought and will be responsible for the operation and maintenance thereof; 
I.  Such other data as the Director may reasonably require in the interests of public health, safety or welfare; and 
J.  A statement certifying on penalty of perjury the correctness of the information given on the application and agreeing on behalf of the proposed applicant that there shall be full compliance of the applicant with all state and city laws in the conduct of the activities for which a permit may be granted. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.070 - Renewable annually. 
An encroachment permit for news racks shall be renewable annually. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.080 - News rack identification. 
Every news rack permittee shall permanently affix to each news rack placed on or maintained on or projecting over any portion of a sidewalk or parkway the permittee's name, address, and telephone number. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.090 - Prohibited placement. 
A.  No person shall install, use or maintain any news rack or other structure which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street. 
B.  No person shall install, use or maintain any news rack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property; or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use; or when such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near the location. 
C.  No person shall install, use or maintain any news rack which is located in a parkway or sidewalk adjacent to property zoned residential, as such zone is defined in this code; provided, however, that this subsection shall not prohibit such placement where the news rack is in a parkway or sidewalk directly in front of a public building within a residential zone which is open to and used regularly by the public, so long as such public building is not an elementary, junior high or high school. 
D.  No person shall install, use or maintain any news rack or other structure which is located in a parkway or sidewalk adjacent to a public park, in any zone. 
E.  No person shall install, use or maintain any news rack or other structure which is located in a parkway or sidewalk in any zone within three hundred feet of any public or private school, church, library, community center, or public building if the news rack will contain matter described in CMC 12.45.110. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.100 - Standards. 
Any news rack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  No news rack shall exceed forty-eight inches in height, thirty inches in width, or twenty-four inches in depth. 
B.  News racks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to a wall of a building. News racks placed near the curb shall be placed no closer than eighteen inches to the face of the curb and no farther than twenty-four inches from the face of the curb, measured from the curb face to the nearest point on the news rack. News racks placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six inches from the wall. No news rack shall be placed or maintained on the sidewalk or parkway opposite a newsstand or another news rack. 
C.  No news rack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the news rack or to any permanently fixed object without the consent of the owner or such property. News racks shall be bolted to the sidewalk, unless otherwise authorized by the director. Upon removal of a news rack, the permittee shall fully restore the sidewalk or parkway to its original condition. No news rack shall be chained or attached to loose objects including, but not limited to, bricks, rocks, cinder blocks, pipes or other such objects. 
D.  News racks may be chained or otherwise attached to another; however, no more than three news racks may be joined together in this manner, and a space of not less than forty-two inches shall separate each group of three news racks so attached, unless the news racks are placed adjacent to the wall of a building. 
E.  Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 12.45.090(B), no news rack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
1.  Within five feet of any marked crosswalk; 
2.  Within fifteen feet of any curb return of any unmarked crosswalk; 
3.  Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility; 
4.  Within five feet of any driveway or alley approach; 
5.  Within five feet in front of, and within twenty-five feet to the rear of, any sign or pavement markings designating a bus stop, measured parallel to the flow of traffic; 
6.  Within six feet of any bus bench; 
7.  Within three feet of any outdoor sidewalk dining area or area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees, or block any display window or any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway in such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes; 
8.  Within forty-two inches of any sidewalk obstruction which shall include, but not be limited to, traffic signals, street light poles, trees, sign posts, telephones, and utility poles; 
9.  Within one hundred feet of any other news rack or group of news racks on the same side of the street containing the same edition of the same publication, unless the permittee can demonstrate to the Director that the demand for such publication within such one hundred feet requires an additional news rack or racks. The total number of news racks within such one hundred feet shall not exceed the maximum number of news racks allowed by subsection (H) of this section; 
10.  At any location where the clear space for pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet; 
11.  Which causes or constitutes a traffic hazard; 
12.  Which unreasonably obstructs or interferes with access to, or the use and enjoyment of, abutting property; 
13.  Which will endanger persons or property; 
14.  Which will unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the highway; 
15.  Where a curb is painted blue, yellow or white; 
16.  Which obstructs the motoring public's view of pedestrian or traffic and parking signage. 
F.  No news rack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or news periodical sold therein. 
G.  Each news rack shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times. Each news rack shall be serviced and maintained so that: 
1.  It is free of dirt, grease and graffiti; 
2.  It is free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible areas thereof; 
3.  The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed, are unbroken and free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration; 
4.  It is free of rust and corrosion in the visible areas thereof; 
5.  The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are free of tears, peeling or fading; 
6.  The structural parts thereof are not broken or misshapen. 
H.  No more than six news racks shall be permitted within a space of one hundred feet on the same side of any highway where vehicles are allowed to park, load, unload or stand for any period of time. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.110 - Display of certain matter prohibited. 
Publications offered for sale from news racks placed or maintained on or projecting over a sidewalk or parkway shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner which exposes to public view from a sidewalk or parkway any of the following: 
A.  Any statements or words describing specified sexual activities or anatomical areas, as defined in Chapter 18.49, Section 18.49.020 of CMC Title 18, where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront; 
B.  Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perinea, anuses, or anal regions of any person where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront; 
C.  Any picture or illustration depicting specific sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.120 - Impounding of news racks. 
A news rack may be impounded for being in violation of CMC 12.45.030, 12.45.080, 12.45.090, 12.45.100 or 12.45.110 under the following conditions: 
A.  The Code Compliance Officer must attach a tag upon the particular news rack found in violation. Thereafter, a written notice of the violation in accordance with CMC Chapter 8.12 shall be sent within two working days to the permittee designated in CMC 12.45.060(A) and the person in immediate charge of the news rack as designated in CMC 12.45.060(C). The permittee or person in immediate charge of the news rack must correct the violation within ten calendar days from the date on the tag or request an appeal pursuant to CMC Chapter 8.12, Section 8.12.060 within that same time for the purpose of demonstrating that the particular news rack is not in violation. The director may impound the news rack if the violation is not corrected or an appeal is not requested in writing within ten calendar days from the date of the tag. 
B.  Notwithstanding the impound provisions of this section, the Director may immediately correct any violation of CMC 12.32.090 and, if such violation is creating a dangerous or hazardous condition, may immediately impound any such news rack. If the news rack is impounded pursuant to this section, a written notice of such action shall be sent to the permittee and person in immediate charge of the news rack within two working days after the impoundment. The permittee or person in immediate charge of the news rack may request an appeal within ten calendar days from the date of service of the written notice pursuant to CMC Chapter 8.12 for the purpose of demonstrating that the particular news rack was not in violation and should not have been impounded. Notices made pursuant to any section of this chapter shall be deemed served and effective upon the date the notice is provided in person, or by email or facsimile machine, or two calendar days after sending by first class mail. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.130 - Return of impounded news racks. 
A.  Unless the news rack and its contents are being held as evidence in a criminal prosecution, the permittee, or if there is no known permittee a claimant, who provides sufficient proof of ownership of such news rack may have such news rack together with its contents and all moneys, if any, returned within a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty calendar days from the date of removal and impoundment, upon paying an impound fee as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council plus the reasonable cost of impounding, removing, and storing the news rack, if any, in excess of the fee established by the City Council. 
B.  Should there be a dismissal of an action charging a violation of this chapter, or an acquittal of such charges, the court or City official ordering such dismissal or entering such acquittal shall provide for the release of any news rack and its contents and all moneys, if any, impounded or the return of any impound fee and costs paid for the release of a news rack impounded pursuant to such charges. 
C.  If the news rack is not being held as evidence in any criminal proceeding, and no criminal proceeding concerning the violation for which the news rack was impounded is still pending, and if no appeal pursuant to CMC Chapter 8.12, Section 8.12.060 has been requested, or, if requested, has resulted in a final decision that the news rack was rightfully impounded, and if the impound fees and costs specified in this chapter have not been paid within the time specified, the Director may sell or otherwise dispose of the news rack and its contents, if any, and retain the proceeds from any such sale or other disposition and any moneys contained in said news rack at the time of its removal and impoundment. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.160 - Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished in accordance with CMC Chapter 8.12. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any person who violates CMC 12.45.110 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six months, or by fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.170 - Other remedies. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not limit any other remedies authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
12.45.180 - Time for compliance. 
Any news rack which does not comply with this chapter shall be removed or otherwise brought into conformance with this chapter not later than ninety days following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section ("compliance date"). If any news rack remains in violation of this chapter after the compliance date, the City may take all appropriate legal actions authorized by this chapter to enforce compliance, including impoundment of the news rack. 
(Ord. No. O-07-17, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
Title 13 - UTILITIES* 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.04 - WATER RATES 
Sections: 
 
13.04.010 - Definitions. 
"City of Colton" and "City" when Used hereinafter means the City of Colton and each and all of the various Departments thereof and each and all of its officers and Employees now engaged, or to be hereafter engaged, directly or indirectly, with any of the Matters referred to or related to the Matters set forth herein. 
"Month" or "Monthly Period" when Used hereinafter means thirty calendar Days and/or one-half the period of time between each bimonthly billing for water service by the City. 
(Ord. 1390 § 1, 1971)  
13.04.020 - Schedule. 
The water rates are set forth in Exhibit "A," Attached to the Ordinance codified in this section and on file in the Office of the City Clerk. Exhibit "B" is also on file and provides a comprehensive schedule of water rates. 
(Ord. 0-15-98 § 1, 1998: Ord. 0-2-96 § 1, 1996; Ord. 0-7-92 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1497 § 1, 1976; Ord. 1390 § 2, 1971) 
(Ord. No. O-03-09, § 1, 5-5-2009)  
13.04.030 - Measuring devices. 
All water supplied to User of water referred to in Section 13.04.020 hereof, Shall be supplied only where meters or other adequate measuring devices satisfactory to the City have been made available to the City in order to accurately measure the same. 
(Ord. 1390 § 3, 1971)  
13.04.040 - Unlawful Use. 
No Person, firm or corporation Shall take or Use, or cause to be taken or Used, any water directly or indirectly from the water system of the City without paying the rates and charges therefor as provided herein, unless the City Council has authorized and has Permitted the taking in Use thereof for special reason or for special purposes. 
(Ord. 1390 § 4, 1971)  
13.04.050 - Service connections—Charges. 
The City will furnish and install a service of such size and at such location as the User requests, provided the City considers the same to be reasonable and such service will be installed from the City water distribution main to the Curb line or Property line of the Premises which May abut on the Street, or other thoroughfares, or on the dedicated Utility Right-of-Way or Easement or such other location which the City May deem to be reasonable and for any such service the Party requesting the same Shall pay the installation charges as adopted by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1497 § 2, 1976; Ord. 1390 § 5, 1971)  
13.04.060 - Meters. 
A.  Meters Shall be installed behind the Curb line, or in the walk area or such other suitable location that the City May deem to be reasonable and proper. 
B.  Meters Shall be furnished when available by the City and Shall at all times remain the Property of the City and the City Shall install and remove all meters at the expense of the City excepting as otherwise provided herein. 
C.  The City Shall not be obligated in any manner whatsoever for Rental or any other charge of any nature by reason of the location or Use of any Part of its water facilities upon the Premises of the User including the locating of meters, housing and connections thereupon. 
D.  All meters Shall be sealed by the City at the time of installation thereof and after the same are sealed upon installation, the seal thereof Shall not be broken, damaged or removed by any Person, firm or corporation for any reason whatsoever other than by an authorized Representative of the City. 
(Ord. 1390 § 6, 1971)  
13.04.070 - Main extensions and connections—City's policy. 
The City Shall make connections to and extend water mains from existing water mains upon Application and payment of the extension and connection charges as set forth by this chapter. It is the policy of the City that only one such extension and/or connection charge be made on the Properties now fronting on existing mains and which are not now served or for Properties fronting on future main extensions. 
(Ord. 1390 § 7 (part), 1971)  
13.04.100 - Main extension charges—Oversized—Payment. 
Any Applicant for a main extension which will be a larger pipe size than the Local water main requirement Shall pay the difference between the current Material price of the pipe requested and the current Material price of the pipe required. Such charge will be in addition to all other charges set forth by this chapter and Shall be paid to the City at the time of Application for such extension. 
(Ord. 1390 § 7(C), 1971)  
13.04.110 - Fire hydrants or valves—No additional charge. 
If the City Engineer or his Designee determines the installation of fire hydrants, valves and other appurtenances are necessary at the time the main is extended, no additional charges for such installations Shall be incurred by the Applicant. All such installations, including the extended main, Shall be and remain the Property of the City. This section does not include the charges for service connections as provided by Section 13.04.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-16-05 § 3, 2005: Ord. 1390 § 7(D), 1971)  
13.04.120 - Main extension charges—Refunds. 
In the event that an Applicant for a main extension is required to pay an extension charge as set forth in Section 13.04.090 of this chapter, it Shall be the policy of the City to refund connection charges collected by the City from Properties fronting on that section of the extension over four hundred feet from the original point of water supply. Such refunds will be made only for connection charges so collected within ten Years from the date of the Application for the main extension. In no event Shall the City refund a total amount to the Applicant which exceeds the original amount paid by the Applicant for the extension charge. 
(Ord. 1390 § 7(E), 1971)  
13.04.130 - Acreage charge. 
The City Shall assess an acreage charge for every Property making Application for water service. It is the policy of the City that such acreage charge Shall be made for each new Dwelling Unit which is constructed on Property within a Residential Zone as established by officially adopted Zoning Maps for the City. The acreage charge for Manufacturing and Commercial Zones as established by said maps, Shall be assessed for the entire Parcel at such time as water Application is made; this acreage charge Shall be waived only if the Applicant or his predecessors in interest of the Property have paid the same. The acreage charge Shall be made according to the established zoning District classification maps, regardless of the individual addition or construction for which water service is applied. The zoning District classification water acreage charge Shall be as follows: 
Zoning District Classification 	Acreage 	Charge 
R-1 	One Dwelling Unit 	$45.00 each 
R-2, R-3 	First five Dwelling Units Six or more Dwelling Units 	45.00 each 25.00 each 
M-1, M-2, C-1, C-2 	200 per acre 
 
(Ord. 1390 § 8(A), 1971)  
13.04.140 - Water depreciation fund established—Revenue disposition. 
There is established a fund within the water Utility Designated as the water depreciation fund. All revenues derived from the acreage charge assessed by this chapter Shall be deposited in the water depreciation fund. All revenues deposited in the water depreciation fund Shall be Used for the purchase of capital needs of the water Utility. 
(Ord. 1390 § 8(B), 1971)  
13.04.150 - Fire hydrant withdrawal—Air-Gap separation or Backflow device required. 
All trucks Shall have Air-Gap separation on filler pipe, or an Approved Backflow device. 
(Ord. 1390 § 9 (part), 1971)  
13.04.160 - Fire hydrant withdrawal—Eight loads or less—Permit. 
Small withdrawals, eight loads or less, Shall require a ten dollar Permit to be purchased from the City. The Permit Shall remain in effect for thirty Days from the date of issuance, and Must be carried in the truck at all times. 
(Ord. 1390 § 9(A), 1971)  
13.04.170 - Fire hydrant withdrawal—Larger than eight loads—Meter required—Charges. 
Withdrawals larger than eight loads Shall require a fire hydrant meter. Application for fire hydrant meter Shall be accompanied with a meter deposit of one hundred fifty dollars. A minimum charge of ten dollars per Month or any portion thereof Shall be charged for water Used from the public fire hydrant. Water charges Shall be at the rate as set forth in Section 13.04.020 of this chapter, and the aforesaid deposit Shall be applied to the cost thereof, and any balance due and owing Shall be paid to the City upon demand therefor together with the cost of any damage caused directly or indirectly by the User in such withdrawal or taking. 
(Ord. 1390 § 9(B), 1971)  
13.04.180 - Fire hydrant withdrawal—Nonapplicability of provisions when. 
The Permit, deposit and charges for water taken or withdrawn Shall not apply to water Used for public purposes for the City or such other public body or Use as the City Council May determine. 
(Ord. 1390 § 9(C), 1971)  
13.04.190 - Rate increase authority. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the City Council Shall have the power to adopt by Resolution a modification of rates for services referred to herein. 
(Ord. 1390 § 10, 1971)  
13.04.200 - Special Uses—City's determination and action for conservation. 
In any case where the City May determine that the User is using an exceptionally large quantity of water or using water for special purposes or with particular types of equipment or machines that in the opinion of the City, water is being wasted in the Use thereof, or in the opinion of the City, water can be conserved by the User making certain changes or Improvements in the Use thereof, the City Shall require the User to make such changes or Improvements as the City May deem to be necessary to conserve the Use thereof for the benefit of the entire system and should any such User fail to make such recommended changes and Improvements to conserve the Use of water, the City Shall terminate such service and cease to supply water to such User until and unless such changes and Improvements are made. 
(Ord. 1390 § 11, 1971)  
13.04.210 - Service refusal—City's right. 
The City Shall reserve the right to discontinue service to any User who fails to comply with the provisions of the chapter or the rules and regulations adopted by the City Council in administering of the same and the City reserves the right to refuse service or to discontinue service to any User whomever when such service will be detrimental to the water system of the City for any reason whatsoever in the opinion of the City. 
(Ord. 1390 § 12, 1971)  
13.04.220 - Rules and regulations adoption. 
The City Council Shall, from time to time, adopt by Resolution such rules and regulations as it May deem to be necessary in order that the appropriate Employees and officials of the City May properly administer and carry on the terms and provisions of the chapter and the operation of the water system of the City, and upon the adoption thereof, the same Shall be Used in the administration thereof. 
(Ord. 1390 § 13, 1971)  
13.04.230 - Deposits. 
If an Application is made by a Person or Persons other than the Owner of the Real Property, the Applicant Shall make a cash deposit equal to twice the average bill for the amount of Use anticipated. Provided that any amount still held by the City from a deposit previously made by the same Applicant Shall be applied against the deposit required by this section. Should the amount still held by the City exceed the amount required by this section, the excess Shall be credited to the Applicant and applied against subsequent billings. If the Person or Persons applying for service have been receiving service for at least one Year immediately Preceding the time of Application and during the Preceding twelve Months, all water bills or combined bills including water charges have been paid promptly, as determined by the City, the deposit required by the Preceding May be waived. Charges for starting and discontinuing water services, including special charges for resuming service discontinued for failure to pay City charges promptly, May be established in the rules and regulations authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1390 § 14, 1971)  
13.04.240 - Damaging system or wasting water prohibited. 
No Person, firm or corporation Shall in any manner whatsoever damage, injure or adversely interfere with the normal operation of the water system of the City or any Part thereof and no Person, firm or corporation Shall unnecessarily waste or cause to be wasted any water from said system. 
(Ord. 1390 § 15, 1971)  
13.04.250 - Penalty for Violation. 
Any Person, firm or corporation violating this chapter or any provision or rule thereof, except as otherwise herein provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof Shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six Months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each Day that a Violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1390 § 18, 1971)  
Chapter 13.08 - WASTEWATER SYSTEM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, adopted February 17, 2015, amended Ch. 13.08 in its entirety, to read as herein set out, and repealed Ord. No. O-06-09, from which this chapter is derived. Former Ch. 13.08 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. O-06-09, § 1, 9-2-2009; Ord. No. O-02-14, § 1—3, 2-18-2014. 
 
I. - PREAMBLE 
 
13.08.100 - Purpose and Policy. 
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for all Users of the Colton Wastewater collection and Treatment system, which serves the City of Colton and unincorporated areas of San Bernardino County. 
The City of Grand Terrace, which is also served by the City of Colton, is required by the "Joint Powers Agreement for Pretreatment Program Responsibilities and Authority in the Colton Wastewater Treatment Plant Service Area", dated November 15, 1990, to establish and maintain legal authority within its sewer Service Area and to amend and revise its Sewer Use Ordinance and Wastewater Discharge limits whenever necessary to assure that its ordinance provisions and Wastewater are, at least, as restrictive as those specified in this chapter. 
The ordinance from which this chapter derives allows the City to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and amendments thereto and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
A.  To prevent the introduction of Pollutants into the Wastewater system which may interfere with the operation of the system, including but not limited to blockages caused by solids or Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG) or Pollutants that contaminate the resulting sludge; 
B.  To prevent the introduction of Pollutants into the Wastewater system which may Pass Through the system, inadequately treated, into surface waters, groundwaters, the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
C.  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim Wastewaters and sludges from the system; and 
D.  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the Wastewater system. 
E.  To clearly define responsibilities of the City and the User regarding operation and maintenance of the Public Sewer system and private sewer laterals. 
This chapter Shall apply to all Users of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works ("POTW"). This chapter provides for regulation through issuance of Permits to certain non-domestic Users and enforcement of general requirements for the other Users. This chapter also authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities, requires User reporting, establishes administrative review procedures, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs for sewer service. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.105 - Definitions and Abbreviations. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases used in this chapter Shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
1.  Act or "the Act". The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. Pursuant to California Water Code §13370 et seq., the State is authorized to implement the provisions of the Act. 
2.  Approved Analytical Methods. The sampling referred to in 40 CFR Part 403, Appendix E, and analysis of samples so collected, Shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and Amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the Pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the Pollutant in question, sampling and analysis Shall be performed using other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the City and the EPA. 
3.  Authorized Representative of Industrial User. An Authorized Representative of an Industrial User May be: 
a.  A Responsible Corporate Officer, if the User submitting required reports is a corporation; 
b.  A general partner or proprietor if the User submitting the required reports is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively; 
c.  The Person in responsible charge, if the User is a governmental agency; or 
d.  An individual responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the Discharge originates. 
If authorization under this definition is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matter for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of these definitions Shall submitted to the City prior to or together with any reports to be signed by the new Authorized Representative. 
4.  Best Management Practices. The schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include Treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage of raw materials storage. 
5.  Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen (expressed in mg/L), required to biochemically oxidize the organic material in a Wastewater sample over a five-day period at twenty degrees centigrade. 
6.  BMR. Baseline Monitoring Report. 
7.  BOD. Biochemical Oxygen Demand (five-day). See definition under "Biochemical Oxygen Demand." 
8.  Bypass. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a User's Pretreatment facilities. 
9.  Categorical Industrial User. An Industrial User who is subject to any promulgated Categorical Standard. 
10.  Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any regulation containing Pollutant Discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1317) which apply to a specific category of Users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, as it exists and as it may be amended. 
11.  CFR. Code of Federal Regulations. 
12.  Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD). The quantity of oxygen (expressed in mg/L) required to chemically oxidize the contents of a Wastewater sample under specific conditions of oxidizing agent, temperature, and time. 
13.  City. The City of Colton or the City Council of the City of Colton. 
14.  Class I User. A Categorical Industrial User. 
15.  Class II User. A Non-Categorical Significant Industrial User. 
16.  Class III User. A Non-Significant Industrial User, including a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial Users (NSCIU). 
17.  Class IV User. A Temporary Industrial User. 
18.  Class V User. A Wastehauler. 
19.  COD. Chemical Oxygen Demand. See definition under "Chemical Oxygen Demand." 
20.  Compliance Time Schedule (CTS). A formal timetable issued by the Director for Users to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter and/or a Wastewater Discharge Permit. Each Compliance Time Schedule Shall contain milestone dates as well as a final compliance date. 
21.  Composite Sample. A sample which is collected from a Wastewater Discharge at selected intervals over a time period of twenty-four hours. A composite sample May be collected using automatic continuous or discrete sampling equipment, or by manually collecting a minimum of four Grab Samples. When specified by the Director, composite samples Shall be collected in a manner which is proportional to the flow rate of the Discharge. 
22.  Constituent. Any physical, chemical, or microbiological component or parameter of water or Wastewater which can be quantified using Approved Analytical Methods. 
23.  County. The County of San Bernardino or the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino. 
24.  Director. The Director of Water and Wastewater for the City of Colton or his Authorized Representative, agent or deputy. 
25.  Discharge: Shall mean the introduction of Pollutants into a POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Clean Water Act 
26.  Discharger. Any Person who, directly or indirectly, causes or contributes to a Discharge into the POTW. 
27.  Discharge to the Ground. The Discharge of Wastewater to or into the soil which is not contained in an impermeable facility approved by the Director. 
28.  Domestic Wastewater. Water bearing wastes from residences and other premises resulting from personal use of water for ordinary living processes of humans and of such a character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special Treatment, into the POTW. The maximum strength Shall be considered to be two hundred fifty mg/L each for Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) and for Total Suspended Solids (TSS). 
29.  Effluent. The treated Wastewater flowing from the Wastewater Treatment Facilities, or the Non-domestic Wastewater Discharged by an Industrial User, to the POTW. 
30.  Enforcement Response Plan (ERP). A plan that details the progressive responses to escalating non-compliance issues related to violation(s) of a Wastewater Discharge Permit or any section of this chapter. 
31.  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term May also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency. 
32.  EPA. Environmental Protection Agency. See definition under "Environmental Protection Agency." 
33.  Exchange-Type Water Conditioning Equipment. Water Conditioning Equipment that is removed for regeneration from the premises at which it is normally operated to a commercial regeneration facility. 
34.  Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG). Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended. 
35.  Federal Regulations. Any applicable provision of the Act as amended and any regulation promulgated by the EPA under Title 40 CFR implementing the Act. 
36.  Food Processing Facilities. Those wholesale or retail facilities which handle, process or prepare food intended for human and/or animal consumption. 
37.  Grab Sample. A sample which is collected from a Wastewater Discharge, without regard to the flow in the wastestream, over a period of time not exceeding fifteen minutes. 
38.  Gravity Separation Interceptor (or Grease Interceptor). A detention chamber designed to remove Oil and Grease, and solids from Wastewater before Discharge to the POTW and which detention chamber is acceptable to the Director. 
39.  Grease. See definition under "Oil and Grease." 
40.  Hazardous Substance. Any substance which is toxic, explosive, corrosive, flammable or an irritant, or which generates pressure through heat or decomposition including but not limited to, any substances determined to be a toxic or Hazardous Substance pursuant to Section 307 and 311(b)(2) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C., Section 1251, et seq., or its implementing regulations at 40 CFR Parts 116 and 129; any substance classified as a Hazardous Substance pursuant to California Water Code Section 13050(p) and; any imminently hazardous chemical substance subject to regulation under the Toxic Mixtures or Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C., Section 2601, et seq. 
41.  Hazardous Waste. Any Hazardous Substance which is either the resultant and/or intermediate or final by-product of any process. 
42.  Indirect Discharge. See Discharge. 
43.  Industrial User (IU). Any Non-Residential User who Discharges Non-domestic Wastewater to the POTW. 
44.  Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit. The maximum concentration of a Pollutant allowed to be Discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected independent of the industrial flow rate and duration of the sample event. 
45.  Interference. Shall mean a Discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a Discharge or Discharges from other sources, both: 
a.  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its Treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
b.  Causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of Sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent State or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including State regulations contained in any applicable State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
46.  L. Liter 
47.  LEL. (Lower Explosive Limit). See definition under "Lower Explosive Limit." 
48.  Lower Explosive Limit (LEL). The minimum concentration of a combustible gas or vapor in the air which will ignite if an ignition source is present. 
49.  Mass Emission Rate. The mass of material Discharged to the POTW during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the Mass Emission Rate Shall be expressed in pounds per day of a particular Constituent or combination of Constituents. 
50.  May is permissive 
51.  MBAS. Methylene Blue Activated Substances. 
52.  Medical Waste. Isolated wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, formites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, dialysis wastes, hypodermic needles, syringes, instruments, utensils or any other paper or plastic items of disposable nature used for medically related purposes. The term "Medical Waste" Shall exclude de minimus amounts of wastes, human blood and paper items of a disposable nature associated with Domestic Wastewater Discharges. 
53.  Mg. Milligrams. 
54.  Milligrams per Liter (mg/L). Shall mean unit of the concentration of water or Wastewater Constituent. It is one gram of the Constituent in one thousand Liters of water. 
55.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. The permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342) for the City's POTW Treatment Plant. 
56.  New Source is defined in 40 CFR 403.3 and Shall mean any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a Discharge of Pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such Standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the Discharge of Pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or Wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
57.  Non-Categorical Significant Industrial User. A Significant Industrial User who is not subject to promulgated Categorical Standards. 
58.  Non-Contact Cooling or Heating Water. Water Discharge from any use which has no direct contact with any raw material, intermediate or final product, and to which the only Pollutant added is heat. 
59.  Non-domestic Wastewater. All Wastewater except Domestic Wastewater and Unpolluted Water as defined herein. Non-domestic Wastewater Shall include, but not be limited to, Wastewater resulting from industrial, commercial, producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, governmental, and agricultural operations, and brine Wastewater resulting from the regeneration of water conditioning devices. All liquid Wastewater hauled by truck, rail, or any other means Shall also be considered as Non-domestic Wastewater, regardless of the original source of the wastes. 
60.  Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User (NSCIU). A Categorical Industrial User that meets all of the following requirements: (a) never Discharges more than one hundred gallons per day of a total categorical Wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown Wastewater, unless specifically included in the applicable Pretreatment Standard); (b) if an existing facility has consistently complied with all applicable categorical Pretreatment Standards and Requirements; (c) annually submits the certification statement required in §403.12(q) together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; (d) never Discharges any untreated concentrated Wastewater; and (e) is found by the Director to have no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement. 
61.  Non-Significant Industrial User (NSIU). Any Industrial User who is not a Significant Industrial User, including without limitation any NSCIU. 
62.  NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
63.  NPDES PERMIT. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit. See definition under "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit." 
64.  Oil and Grease. Any of the following in part of in combination: 
a.  Petroleum derived products, e.g., oils, fuels, lubricants, solvents; 
b.  Vegetable derived products, e.g., oils, shortenings, soluble cutting oils; 
c.  Animal derived products, e.g., fats, greases, oils, lard. 
65.  Pass Through. A Discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other Discharges, causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
66.  Permittee. Any User or group of Users which are issued a Permit to Discharge to the POTW pursuant to Sections 13.08.300 et seq. of the Colton Municipal Code. The Permit May be an individual (for a specific Industrial User) or group (general) Permit as deemed appropriate by the Director to control Wastewater Discharges to the POTW. 
67.  Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their representatives, agents, or assigns. 
68.  pH. The logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions, as analyzed in accordance with Approved Analytical Methods. pH represents both acidity and alkalinity on a scale ranging from zero to fourteen where seven represents neutrality, numbers less than seven increasing acidity and more than seven increasing alkalinity. 
69.  Plumbing Official. Plumbing Official Shall mean the Director of Community Development of the City of Colton or his Authorized Representative or deputy. 
70.  Pollutant. Any Constituent or characteristic (including but not limited to pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor) of Wastewater on which a Discharge limit May be imposed either by the City or regulatory bodies empowered to regulate the POTW; and any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, Sewage, garbage, Sewage sludge, munitions, Medical Wastes, chemicals wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or Discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agriculture wastes. 
71.  Pollution. The man-made or man-induced adverse alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water. 
72.  POTW. Publicly Owned Treatment Works. See definition under "Publicly Owned Treatment Works." 
73.  POTW Treatment Plant. The portion of the POTW designed to provide Treatment to Wastewater. 
74.  Pretreatment or Treatment. The reduction of the amount of Pollutants, the elimination of Pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of Pollutant properties in Wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such Pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, or process changes of other means, except, as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d), use of dilution. 
75.  Pretreatment Requirement. Any substantive or procedural Pretreatment Requirement, other than a Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an Industrial User. 
76.  Pretreatment Standard. Any regulation containing Pollutant Discharge limits or prohibitions promulgated by EPA or the City, applicable to Industrial Users, including promulgated Categorical Standards; National Prohibitive Discharge Standards developed pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5, general Discharge prohibitions contained in Section 13.08.210 herein; and any specific local Discharge limits established by the City. 
77.  Pretreatment Wastes. All wastes liquid or solids, removed from a waste stream or Discharge by physical, chemical or biological means. 
78.  Public Sewer. Any sewer located in or maintained by the City of Colton. The term as used herein does not include storm drains or channels for conveyance of natural surface waters. 
79.  Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW). The Colton Wastewater Treatment Plant and any other devices or systems used by the City in the storage, conveyance (including all sewers, pipes, lift stations, and other conveyances which convey Wastewater to the Wastewater Treatment Plant), Treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal Sewage. 
80.  RCRA. The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.) as amended or revised. 
81.  Regional Board. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region. 
82.  Responsible Corporate Officer. 
a.  A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other Person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation. 
b.  The Manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty Persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the Manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
83.  Restaurants. Restaurants Shall include, but not be limited to, retail establishments selling prepared foods and drinks for consumption or off the premises. 
84.  Sample Point. A location approved by the Director from which Wastewater that is representative in content and consistency of the entire flow of Wastewater being sampled can be collected. 
85.  Septic Waste. Any Sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump trucks. 
86.  Service Area. The area in which Discharges to the Sewerage System flow to, or are intended by the City to flow to, the POTW. 
87.  Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
88.  Sewer Collection System. All facilities, owned and maintained by the City, that are used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of Wastewater, excluding Sewer Service Laterals. 
89.  Sewer Service Lateral. The Wastewater collection pipe extending from the structure where the Wastewater is generated up to and including the connection to the City's Sewer Collection System. 
90.  Shall is mandatory. 
91.  SIC. Standard Industrial Classification. 
92.  Significant Industrial User (SIU). An Industrial User of the POTW who (1) is subject to categorical standards, or (2) has an average daily Discharge of twenty-five thousand gallons or more of process Wastewater (excluding sanitary waste, Unpolluted Water, and boiler/cooling tower blowdown Discharges), or (3) has a Discharge which makes up five percent or more of the average dry-weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the Wastewater Treatment Facilities receiving the Wastewater, or (4) has in its wastes Toxic Pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act, or (5) is designated by the Director to have a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or violating any applicable Pretreatment Standard, Requirement or Discharge limit set forth in this chapter. 
93.  Significant Non-compliance (SNC). Violations of Pretreatment Standards or Requirements, which include violations of Effluent limits, sampling violations, analysis violations, reporting violations, compliance schedule and regulatory deadline violations, which satisfy one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Violations of Wastewater Discharge limits: 
i.  Chronic Violations. Sixty-six percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same Pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l); 
ii.  Technical Review Criteria (TRC) Violations. Thirty-three percent or more of all the measurements for the same Pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, Fats, Oil, and Grease, and 1.2 for all other Pollutants except pH); 
iii.  Any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum or long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other Discharges, Interference or Pass Through (including endangering the health of the POTW personnel or the public). 
iv.  Any Discharge of a Pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health or welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a Discharge. 
v.  Failure to meet, within ninety days after the schedule date, a compliance milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, achieving final compliance; 
vi.  Failure to provide, within forty-five days after the due date, required reports such as Baseline Monitoring Reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
vii.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
viii.  Any other violation or group of violations, which May include a violation of Best Management Practices, which the Director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the Pretreatment Program. 
94.  Single Pass Non-contact Cooling or Heating Water. Water used solely for the purpose of cooling or heating, which has no direct contact with any raw material, or any intermediate, final or waste product, and which is used only once and then discarded. 
95.  SIU. Significant Industrial User. See definition under "Significant Industrial User." 
96.  Slug Discharge Control Plan. A plan submitted to the City by a User pursuant to Section 13.08.330D of this chapter, which specifies to the Director's satisfaction the potential Pollutants used and/or stored at the User's facility; potential pathways of entry of the potential Pollutants into the POTW; and facilities and procedures for preventing or controlling the occurrence of Slug Loading. 
97.  Slug Loading (Slug Discharge). The Discharge of any Pollutant, including oxygen demanding Pollutants (BOD, etc.), which is released at a flow rate and/or Pollutant concentration which may cause Pass Through of or Interference with the POTW. 
98.  SNC. Significant Non-compliance. See definition under "Significant noncompliance." 
99.  Solvent Management Plan (Toxic Organic Management Plan). A plan submitted to the City by an Industrial User pursuant to Section 13.08.330C of this section, which specifies to the Director's satisfaction the solvents and other toxic organic compounds used and stored; the methods of delivery, storage, and disposal used; and procedures for assuring that solvents and other toxic organics do not routinely spill or leak into the POTW or ground. 
100.  Specific Compliance Plan. A plan submitted to the City by an Industrial User pursuant to Section 13.08.330E of this section, which specifies to the Director's satisfaction the cause of noncompliance, the corrective actions which will be taken to prevent recurrence of the noncompliance, and, if required by the Director, a proposed compliance time schedule. 
101.  Spent Solutions. Any concentrated Non-domestic Wastewater (i.e., plating solutions and static rinses), which contains concentrations of Pollutants, the Discharge of which may cause Interference, Pass Through or a violation of any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement. 
102.  Spill Containment. A protection system to prevent the Discharge of noncompliant Pollutants to the sewerage system. 
103.  Standard Industrial Classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987 or latest edition thereof. 
104.  Standard Methods. "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," latest edition, prepared and published by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, and Water Environment Federation, which specifies accepted procedures used to assess the quality of water and Wastewater. 
105.  State. State of California. 
106.  State Water Board. The State of California Water Resources Control Board. 
107.  Stormwater. Any flow of water resulting from natural precipitation. 
108.  Stormwater System. All Stormwater conveyance and Treatment Facilities located within the City including, but not limited to storm drains, catch basins, storm drain manholes, and storm water pumping facilities. 
109.  SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq. 
110.  TDS. Total Dissolved Solids. See definition under "Total Dissolved Solids." 
111.  Temporary Industrial User. Any Industrial User who is granted temporary permission by the Director to Discharge Unpolluted Water or Wastewater to the POTW. Such temporary permission Shall not be granted to Industrial Users subject to promulgated categorical standards. 
112.  TFR. Total Filterable Residue. See definition under "Total Dissolved Solids." 
113.  Total Dissolved Solids (TDS). The quantity of nonvolatile substances remaining after filtration through a standard filter and drying to constant weight at one hundred eighty degrees C, expressed in terms of Milligrams per Liter (mg/l) and analyzed in accordance with Approved Analytical Methods. TDS is synonymous with Total Filterable Residue (TFR). 
114.  Total Toxic Organics (TTO). The sum of the concentrations for each of the toxic organic compounds regulated by applicable categorical standards and/or adopted by the City as a local Discharge limit, which are found in the User's Discharge at a concentration greater than 0.010 mg/L, and analyzed in accordance with Approved Analytical Methods. The local limit TTO Constituents Shall be defined in the local limit resolution. 
115.  Toxic Pollutant. Any Pollutant or combination of Pollutants listed as toxic in 40 CFR 401.15 or 40 CFR 403, Appendix B. 
116.  TRC. Technical Review Criteria. 
117.  TSS. Total Suspended Solids. 
118.  Unpolluted Water. Non-contact Cooling or Heating Water, air conditioning condensate, ice melt, condensate, rain water, or uncontaminated groundwater, surface water, Stormwater or other water to which no Pollutant has been added either intentionally or unintentionally. 
119.  U.S.C. United States Code. 
120.  User. Any Person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of Wastewater into the POTW. 
121.  Wastehauler. Any Person engaging in vehicular transport of waste, as part of or incidental to any business, for the purpose of discharging the transported waste to the POTW. 
122.  Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried domestic wastes or non-domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and Stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
123.  Wastewater Discharge Permit or Permit. The regulatory procedure established and enforced by the Director to control the flow and quality of wastes Discharged into the POTW. 
124.  Wastewater Treatment Facilities. The structures, equipment, and processes maintained by the City which accept untreated Sewage from the Public Sewer and which treat and dispose of Domestic and Non-domestic Wastewater. 
125.  Water Conditioning Equipment. Any device or apparatus used to soften or otherwise condition water, including zeolite or resinous anion or cation exchange softeners, demineralizers or any other like device. 
126.  Waters of the State. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, well, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the State or any portion thereof. 
Words used in this chapter in the singular May include the plural and the plural the singular. Use of masculine Shall include feminine and the use of feminine Shall include masculine. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
13.08.200 - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided, the Director Shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Director May be delegated by the Director to other Persons acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.201 - Permit Required. 
It Shall be unlawful for any Person to connect any pipe on private property with any pipe that is connected with the Public Sewer, without first obtaining a Permit to do so from the City. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.202 - Design and Construction of Sewer Lateral Connections. 
All connections (sewer laterals) Shall be designed and constructed in accordance with established City standards. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.203 - Responsibility for Installation, Maintenance and Replacement. 
The costs for installation, maintenance, and replacement of the Sewer Service Lateral as defined in Section 13.08.105, Shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.204 - Responsibility for Removal of Obstructions in Sewer Service Laterals. 
The City is not responsible for maintaining the Sewer Service Lateral as defined in Section 13.08.105. When necessary, to mitigate a sanitary sewer overflow caused by a Sewer Service Lateral blockage, the property owner Shall pay to the City all costs associated with the remediation of such obstruction including cleanup. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.205 - Authorization for New or Increased Pollutant Discharges or Changes in the Nature of Pollutant Discharges. 
It is unlawful to commence, increase, or substantially change any Discharge of Wastewater to the POTW except as authorized by the Director in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.207 - Record Keeping. 
Each Permittee Shall retain records of all monitoring activities, including documentation associated with Best Management Practices. Such records Shall include for all samples: 
A.  The date, exact place, method, time of sampling and the name of Person or Persons taking the samples; 
B.  The dates analyses were performed; 
C.  Who performed the analyses; 
D.  The analytical techniques or methods used; and 
E.  The results of the analyses. 
All calibration and maintenance records and all original chart recordings for continuous monitoring instrumentation, copies of all reports required by the permit, and records of all data used to complete the application for the permit, for a period of at least three years from the date of the sample, measurement, report or application. This period May be extended by request of the Director at any time. 
All records that pertain to matters that are the subject of special orders or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the City Shall be retained and preserved by the Permittee until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.210 - General Discharge Prohibitions. 
No Person Shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any Pollutant or Wastewater which causes Pass Through or Interference with the operation or performance of the POTW. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.211 - Specific Discharge Prohibitions. 
No Person Shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW the following Pollutants, substances or Wastewater: 
A.  Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire, explosion, or in any other way be injurious to the POTW or to operation of the POTW including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit or sixty degrees Centigrade, using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21, or which result in conditions where two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of Discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), are more than five percent, or any single reading is over ten percent, of the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylenes, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides; 
B.  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to sewer flow or Interference with the operation of the Wastewater Treatment Facilities including, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, cat litter, dead animals, diatomaceous earth, feathers, ashes, cinders, earth, sand, mud, gravel, rocks, plaster, concrete, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, metal filings, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, glass, or glass grinding or polishing wastes; 
C.  Any Wastewater having a pH less than five or greater than eleven, or Wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW; 
D.  Any Wastewater containing Hazardous Substances or Toxic Pollutants, in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other Pollutants, to injure or interfere with any Wastewater Treatment process including sludge disposal, constitute a hazard to human or animals, or create a hazardous effect or acute or chronic toxicity in the receiving waters of the POTW; 
E.  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair; 
F.  Any substance which may cause the POTW's Effluent, or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse. In no case Shall a substance Discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to violate applicable sludge use or disposal regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, Clean Air Act, Toxic Substances Control Act, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act, or State regulations; 
G.  Any Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the Treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; 
H.  Any Wastewater having a temperature greater than sixty degrees Centigrade (one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW Treatment Plant resulting in Interference, but in no case Wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the POTW Treatment Plant to exceed forty degrees Centigrade (one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit); 
I.  Any Pollutants, including oxygen demanding Pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or Pollutant concentration which will cause Interference, Pass Through, or otherwise cause violation of the NPDES permit or receiving water quality standards; 
J.  Any Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable State or Federal Regulations; 
K.  Any Discharge which may, alone or in combination with other waste substances, result in the presence of toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, gases, vapors, or fumes in the POTW in such quantities that would create a hazard, public nuisance, or acute worker health and safety problems; 
L.  Any Stormwater, groundwater, well water, street drainage, sub-surface drainage, roof drainage, yard drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds, lawn sprinklers, or any type of surface water or Unpolluted Water. The Director May approve, on a temporary basis, the Discharge of such waters to the POTW when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available, subject to the payment of all applicable User charges and fees by the Discharger. Water from swimming pools, wading pools, and therapy pools May be Discharged to the sewerage system between eight p.m. and six a.m. unless specifically prohibited by the Director; 
M.  Any Wastewater, sludge or Septic Waste removed from a cesspool, septic tank, chemical toilet or similar waste holding device, except such wastes which are Discharged to the POTW in accordance with a Wastewater Discharge Permit issued by the City. No Wastehauler discharging Septic Waste to the POTW Shall Discharge Constituents in excess of the limits for Wastehaulers set forth by Resolution of the City of Colton and amended from time to time; 
N.  Any trucked or hauled Pollutants or Wastewater, except at such place and in such manner as authorized by a Wastewater Discharge Permit issued by the City; 
O.  Any pesticides or fertilizers in amounts which may cause Interference or Pass Through; 
P.  Any non-biodegradable cutting oil, petroleum oil, refined petroleum products, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts which could cause Interference or Pass Through; 
Q.  Any substances containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). PCBs include, but are not limited to, the following: Aroclors 1016, 1221, 1228, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, 1260 and 1262; 
R.  Any excessive quantities of dispersed biodegradable oils or fats such as lard, tallow, or vegetable oil or any other substances that may precipitate, solidify, or become viscous at temperatures between forty and one hundred degrees Fahrenheit; 
S.  Any Pretreatment wastes. All Pretreatment wastes Shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable federal, State, County, and other local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.215 - Prohibition Against Discharging Solid or Fluid Material to Watercourse. 
No Person Shall Discharge or cause to be Discharged into any storm drain, Stormwater channel, or natural watercourse, whether currently carrying water or not, or into any pipe, parking lot, street, gutter, or waterway leading to such drain, channel, or watercourse, any solid or fluid material which will impair the useful functioning of such drain, channel, or watercourse, or which will cause expense to the City, or other public agency, in maintaining the proper functioning of same, or which will cause or threaten to cause a public nuisance, public hazard, or Pollution of Waters of the State. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.220 - Prohibition Against Discharging Pollutants to the Ground. 
No Person Shall deposit or Discharge, or cause to be deposited or Discharged, into any sump which is not impermeable, or into any pit or well, or onto the ground, or into any storm drain or watercourse, any material which, by seeping underground or by being leached or by reacting with the soil, can pollute usable groundwaters. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.222 - Point of Discharge Limits. 
No Person, excluding authorized City personnel involved in maintenance of POTW facilities, Shall Discharge any Wastewater directly into the POTW other than through an approved building sewer, unless written permission for the Discharge has been granted by the Director. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.223 - Prohibition Against Dilution. 
No Person Shall increase the use of process water or, in any way attempt to dilute a Discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate Treatment to achieve compliance with categorical standards, the Discharge limits contained in this chapter or in any Wastewater Discharge Permit, or any other Pollutant limit developed by the City. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.225 - Special Restrictions, Vehicle Servicing Facilities. 
A.  Any facility maintained for the servicing, repair, washing, or cleaning of any vehicles or roadway machinery, including car and truck washes, which Discharges Non-domestic Wastewater, Shall install and maintain a Gravity Separation Interceptor in accordance with Section 13.08.253. Wastewater from toilets Shall not be allowed to Pass Through the interceptor, but all Wastewaters arising from the servicing, repair, washing or cleaning of vehicles Shall Pass Through the interceptor before Discharge to the POTW. 
1.  If the vehicle servicing facility is only capable of serving one vehicle at a time, the interceptor Shall have a fluid detention capacity of at least one hundred gallons. 
2.  If the vehicle servicing facility has facilities for servicing, repair, washing, or cleaning more than one vehicle at a time, the interceptor Shall be as large as necessary so that seven-day accumulation of sand and oil will not together fill more than twenty-five percent of the fluid capacity, and Shall have a fluid detention capacity of at least seven hundred fifty gallons. The interceptor Shall be designed so as to retain any Oil and Grease which will float and any sand which will settle. 
B.  Any interceptor legally and properly installed at a vehicle servicing facility before June 2, 1990 Shall be acceptable as an alternative to the interceptor specified in subsection A of this section provided such interceptor is properly maintained, effective in removing sand and oil, and designed and installed so that it can be inspected. 
C.  The Plumbing Official Shall not approve the plumbing of a vehicle servicing facility which is designed to accommodate the Discharge of Non-domestic Wastewater if it does not have a Gravity Separation Interceptor meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.230 - Restrictions on Water-Softening Wastes. 
A.  It is unlawful to install, replace, or enlarge apparatus for softening all or any part of the water supply to any residential premises when such apparatus is an ion exchange softener or demineralizer of the type that is regenerated on the site of use, except as otherwise authorized by the provisions of California Health and Safety Code Sections 116775 through 116795, inclusive, and any amendment thereto. 
B.  This section Shall not apply to existing units nor to apparatus of the type which is regenerated off-site by a water conditioning company. 
C.  This section Shall not apply to any type of commercial or industrial softening apparatus which will be considered individually in connection with Non-domestic Wastewater controls. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.235 - Special Restrictions-Food Processing Facilities. 
All Food Processing Facilities, including Restaurants, which Discharge food processing wastes to the POTW, Shall direct all Wastewater from floor drains and sinks in the food processing area, waste container wash racks, and dishwashers through a minimum of one hundred-gallon Gravity Separation Interceptor in accordance with Section 13.08.253. All domestic Wastewaters from restrooms, showers, mop sinks, and drinking fountains Shall be kept separate until the previously specified wastes have passed through the interceptor. Sizing of interceptor Shall be determined as described in the latest version of Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the City except that the capacity of the interceptor Shall not be less than one hundred gallons, unless a conditional waiver is granted pursuant to Section 13.08.237. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.237 - Conditional Waivers. 
Conditional waivers modifying or waiving the Gravity Separation Interceptor requirements May be granted by the Director for those Restaurants and other Food Processing Facilities determined not to have the potential to adversely affect the POTW. Conditional waivers May be revoked for the following reasons: 
A.  Changes in types of food prepared or served; 
B.  Falsification of information submitted to the City; 
C.  Changes in operating hours; 
D.  Changes in equipment used. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.240 - Specific Local Discharge Limits. 
A.  Except as specifically allowed by the Director on a temporary basis or as provided herein, no Class I or Class II User Shall Discharge or cause to be Discharged to the POTW any Wastewater unless it conforms to all of the applicable local Discharge limits as set forth by Resolution of the City of Colton and amended from time to time as needed to protect the POTW and comply with current and future State and federal regulatory requirements. 
The local Discharge limits apply at the point where the Wastewater is Discharged to the POTW. The Director May impose average daily, monthly and/or mass limits in addition to the instantaneous concentration based limits set forth by Resolution of the City of Colton. 
B.  Specific Local Pollutant Mass Emission Rate Limits. The Director May authorize the Discharge of Non-domestic Wastewater to the POTW which contains Pollutants in concentrations exceeding the specific local Pollutant concentration limits contained herein, when said concentrations, in combination with the measured Discharge flow rate, do not exceed specific local Mass Emission Rate Limits which are computed for the individual Discharger on the basis of the specific local Pollutant concentration limits and the Discharger's permitted Discharge flow rate limit, and which are issued to the Discharger as part of the Discharger's Permit. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.242 - Prohibition on Disposal of Spent Solutions and Sludges. 
No User Shall Discharge to the POTW Spent Solutions, sludges, or any other materials of a quantity or quality in violation of or prohibited by this chapter or any Permit issued pursuant to this chapter. All waste manifests for such materials Shall be retained for a minimum of three years, and made available to the City upon request. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.243 - Prohibition on Discharge of Medical Waste. 
A.  No Person Shall Discharge to the POTW Medical Wastes from hospitals, clinics, offices of medical doctors, convalescent homes, medical laboratories, other medical facilities or any other locations except where prior written authorization for such Discharges is given by the Director following the Director's determination that the Discharge will not, alone or in conjunction with other Discharges, adversely affect the operation and maintenance of the POTW. If written authorization for such a Discharge is given, the Director Shall have the authority to require that any Discharge of an infectious waste to the sewer be rendered noninfectious prior to Discharge if the infectious waste is deemed to pose a threat to the public health and safety, or will result in any violation of applicable waste Discharge requirements. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.245 - Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
Promulgated National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, located in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, are incorporated into this chapter. Upon the promulgation of new or revised Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the new or revised Categorical Pretreatment Standards Shall immediately be deemed incorporated herein. The Director Shall notify affected Users of applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, Chapter I, subchapter N, Parts 401, et seq. 
No User subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards Shall Discharge or cause to be Discharged to the POTW any Wastewater which is not in conformance with the Discharge limits set forth in the Categorical Pretreatment Standards, including any revisions thereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a User May obtain a variance from a categorical Pretreatment Standard in accordance with the provisions of 40 CFR 403.13 and by establishing to the satisfaction of the Director, that the Discharge will not adversely affect POTW operation and maintenance. 
In the event that a categorical Pretreatment Standard establishes a Discharge limit which conflicts with a local Discharge limit, the more stringent Discharge limit Shall apply. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.247 - Mass Emission Rates. 
A.  Mass Emission Rates for Pollutants that are present or anticipated in a User's Wastewater Discharge May be set for each User and made an applicable part of each User's Permit. These rates Shall be based on specific local Wastewater Discharge limits as adopted by Resolution of the City of Colton and amended from time to time or Categorical Pretreatment Standards, and the User's average daily Wastewater Discharge for the past three years, the most recent representative data, or other data acceptable to the Director. 
B.  To verify the User's operating data, the Director May require a User to submit an inventory of all Wastewater streams and/or records indicating production rates. 
C.  The Director May revise limits or Mass Emission Rates previously established in the User's Permit at any time, based on: (1) current or anticipated operating data of the Discharger or the City; (2) the City's ability to meet NPDES limits; or (3) changes in the requirements of regulatory agencies. 
D.  The excess use of water to establish an artificially high flow rate for Mass Emission Rate determination is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.250 - Pretreatment. 
Users Shall provide necessary Wastewater Treatment as required to comply with this chapter and Shall achieve compliance with all applicable, promulgated categorical standards within the time limitations specified therein. Any facilities required to pretreat Wastewater to meet applicable Discharge limits Shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in proper operating condition at the User's expense. 
Upon request by the Director, Users Shall provide to the City detailed construction drawings and plumbing plans showing existing process equipment, Pretreatment facilities, Spill Containment facilities, monitoring facilities, metering facilities, and a description of existing operating procedures. Prior to construction of new or modified facilities, Users Shall submit to the Director for review and acceptance, detailed construction plans and a description of proposed operating procedures for any new equipment or facilities. Users Shall submit any subsequent changes in operating procedures of the equipment or facilities to the Director for review and acceptance prior to initiation of the changes. The review and acceptance of such drawings and operating procedures by the Director Shall not relieve the User from the responsibility of modifying the equipment or facilities as necessary to produce an Effluent in compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.252 - Prohibited Discharge of Recovered Pretreatment Wastes. 
No Person Shall Discharge wastes recovered from Pretreatment devices into any sewer or storm drain opening, any drains or other openings leading to any sewer or storm drain, parking lot, street, curb and gutter, or the ground. All recovered Pretreatment Wastes Shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable federal, State, County and local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.253 - Gravity Separation Interceptor. 
Any Person so required by the Director, Shall install and maintain a Gravity Separation Interceptor. Domestic Wastewater Shall not be allowed to Pass Through this interceptor. This interceptor Shall have an operational fluid capacity of not less than one hundred gallons and Shall be designed so as to retain any material which will float and any material which will settle. The interceptor Shall be watertight, structurally sound, and durable. Interceptors of less than seven hundred fifty gallons capacity and interceptors for Restaurants and Food Processing Facilities Shall have no less than two compartments. Interceptors of seven hundred fifty gallons or larger Shall conform to the City's most current approved standard drawings for Gravity Separation Interceptors. 
A.  Interceptor Requirements. 
1.  All interceptor chambers Shall be immediately accessible at all times for the purpose of inspection and cleaning. At no time Shall any material, debris, obstacles or obstructions be placed in such a manner so as to prevent immediate access to the interceptor. 
2.  All interceptors of three hundred gallons capacity or larger Shall be equipped with a sample chamber located at the downstream end of the interceptor. The sample chamber Shall have a twenty-four-inch square, or twenty-four-inch diameter, clear opening for the temporary installation of the City's portable automatic sampling equipment. Any sample chamber legally and properly installed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter Shall be acceptable as an alternative to the sample chamber specified herein, provided such sample chamber is so designed and installed that the City's portable automatic sampling equipment May be readily installed therein, or the owner provides a secure and protected location for installation of such sampling equipment within an eight-foot radius of the sample chamber. 
3.  Any interceptor legally and properly installed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter Shall be acceptable as an alternative to the interceptor specified herein, provided such interceptor is effective in removing floatable and settleable material and is so designed and installed that it can be inspected and properly maintained. 
4.  If the Director finds that an interceptor is incapable of adequately retaining the floatable and settleable material in the Wastewater flow or is structurally incomplete, he Shall notify the owner that it does not meet the requirements of this section and Shall require the User to install, at the User's expense, an acceptable interceptor. 
B.  Interceptor Approval. If a Gravity Separation Interceptor is required, the Plumbing Official Shall only approve plumbing plans which include an interceptor which meets the requirements of this section. 
C.  Interceptor Maintenance. Any Person who owns, operates, or maintains a Gravity Separation Interceptor Shall maintain it properly. It Shall be cleaned as often as is necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the interceptor. The use of chemicals to dissolve grease is specifically prohibited. When an interceptor is cleaned, the accumulated sediment and floating material Shall be removed and legally disposed of otherwise than to the sewer. An interceptor is not considered to be properly maintained if for any reason it is not in good working condition or if the operational fluid capacity has been reduced by more than twenty-five percent by the accumulation of floating and settling solids, Oils and Grease. The owner of any facility required to install an interceptor, the lessee and sublessee, if there be such, and any proprietor, operator or superintendent of such facility are individually and severally liable for any failure of proper maintenance of such interceptor. If the interceptor is not properly maintained under the conditions of use, the Director May require that the interceptor be resized and replaced. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.255 - Monitoring Facilities. 
The City May require, at the User's expense, installation and operation of monitoring facilities to allow inspection of Discharges to the POTW, monitoring of Wastewater quality, and collection of Wastewater samples. The monitoring facilities, including sampling and monitoring equipment, Shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the User. The City May require that the monitoring facilities include a security enclosure that can be locked with a City provided hasp lock, or similar device, during monitoring or upon termination of service. 
Monitoring facilities Shall normally be situated on private property, but the City May, when such a location would be impractical, allow the facilities to be constructed in public right-of-way. 
There Shall be ample room in or near any monitoring facility to allow installation of portable sampling and monitoring equipment by the Director. 
Construction drawings for proposed monitoring facilities Shall be submitted to the Director for review prior to construction. The sampling and monitoring facilities Shall be constructed in accordance with the City's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction Shall be completed within ninety days following written acceptance by the Director. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.257 - Flow Metering Facilities. 
The Director May require any Class I or Class II User to install a flow meter capable of measuring, recording, and totalizing the Discharge to the POTW on a continuous basis. The flow measuring equipment Shall conform to the requirements of the Director. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.260 - Inspection and Sampling. 
The Director Shall have the right to enter the premises of any User where Non-domestic Wastewater is created or Discharged during all times that the User's facility is open, operating or at any other reasonable time to determine whether the User is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any Wastewater Discharge Permit or administrative order issued hereunder. The Users or the occupants of such premises Shall allow the Director ready access to all parts of the premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records, and any other activities related to determining compliance with this chapter. Unreasonable delay in allowing the Director access to the User's premises Shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
The Director Shall inspect the facilities of each Class I and Class II User a minimum of once each year, and Shall sample the Discharge of each Class I and Class II User a minimum of once each year. 
The Director Shall have the right to set up on the User's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring, and/or metering operations. Where a User has security measures in force, which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the User Shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, the Director will be permitted to enter, without delay, for purposes of performing the functions described in this section. 
All sampling and reporting of monitoring results Shall comply with 40 CFR 403.12(g). 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.262 - Sampling and Analysis-Fee-Billing. 
A.  Sampling and analysis Shall be at the expense of the User. The actual cost for laboratory analyses and reports and an administrative fee, Shall be the obligation of the occupants of the premises where the Wastewater is created or Discharged. 
B.  The administrative fee Shall be fixed by the City Manager based on the City's current overhead cost allocation percentage. 
C.  The expense to be paid by the User Shall be billed and be payable the same as for other sewer-use charges. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.265 - Confidential Information. 
Information and data regarding a User, obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections, Shall be available without restriction to the EPA, the State Water Board, and the Regional Board. Such information Shall also be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the User specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the User. Any such request Shall be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data and marked "Confidential Business Information" by the User on each page containing information asserted to be trade secrets. The demonstration of the need for confidentiality made by the User must meet the burden necessary for withholding such information from the general public under applicable State and federal law. Wastewater Constituents and characteristics and other Effluent data as defined in 40 CFR 2.302 Shall not constitute confidential information and Shall be available to the public without restriction. 
Information which a User demonstrates to constitute a trade secret Shall not be made available for inspection by the public without prior notification to the User, but Shall be made available to the EPA, the State Water Board, and the Regional Board, and upon written request, to other governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the NPDES permit, or other State regulations. Such information Shall also be available for use in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the User furnishing the information. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.267 - Industrial User Survey. 
The Director Shall prepare and maintain a current list of Industrial Users subject to the requirements of this chapter. Each Industrial User listed Shall be identified by class. Class I Industrial Users Shall be further identified by a citation of the applicable, promulgated categorical standards. At least once every two years, the Director Shall conduct a survey of facilities located within the POTW Service Area to identify any facilities which should be added to the list of Industrial Users. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.270 - Reporting Changes in Discharge, Slug Loading, and Potential Problems. 
All Industrial Users Shall promptly notify the City in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of Pollutants in their Discharge. If any routine or special sampling or monitoring by an Industrial User indicates that, for any reason, Pollutants are Discharged at a rate or concentration which may cause Pass Through or Interference with the POTW, a violation of categorical standards or permit limits, violation of Sections 13.08.211 or 13.08.240, or a hazard to City, POTW personnel and/or the public, the User Shall verbally notify the Director and POTW staff immediately. If the Discharge to the sewerage system has the potential to cause a fire or explosion hazard, the Industrial User Shall also immediately notify the fire department. The verbal report to the City Shall be followed by a written report submitted to the Director within twenty-four hours describing the cause of the incident and corrective action taken by the User. The User Shall also collect a representative repeat sample of the Discharge and submit the analysis to the City within thirty days after becoming aware of the violation to determine whether compliance has been achieved. 
The notification provided pursuant to this section Shall not relieve the User of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred pursuant to this chapter or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.272 - Notification of Bypass. 
A.  Bypass of Non-domestic Wastewater to the sewerage system is prohibited. The City May take enforcement action against the User unless: 
1.  Bypass was unavoidable because it was done to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
2.  There were no feasible alternatives to the Bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, elective slow-down or shut-down of production units or maintenance during periods of production downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment could have been feasibly installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a Bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
3.  The Permittee submitted notices as required under subsection B of this section. 
4.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the User Shall be liable to the City for any expenses or costs incurred by the City as a result of a Bypass. 
B.  If a Permittee knows in advance of the need for a Bypass, it Shall submit a written request to allow the Bypass to the Director, if possible, at least ten days before the date of the Bypass. 
C.  The Director May approve an anticipated Bypass at his sole discretion after considering its adverse affects, and the Director determines that the conditions listed in subsection (A)1 to 3 are met. 
D.  A Permittee Shall provide telephone notification to the City of an unanticipated Bypass that exceeds its permitted Discharge limits within four hours from the time the Permittee becomes aware of the Bypass. A written report Shall also be provided within five days of the time the Permittee becomes aware or could reasonably have been aware of the Bypass. The report Shall contain a description of the Bypass and its cause; the duration of the Bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the Bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the Bypass. Failure to submit oral notice or written report May be grounds for Permit revocation. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.275 - Annual Public Notice of Significant Non-compliance. 
Each year, the Director Shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the Service Area, a list of all Industrial Users determined to have been in significant noncompliance with applicable Pretreatment Standards or Requirements during the previous twelve months. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.280 - Damage to City's Equipment or Facilities. 
Any unauthorized entering, breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing, or tampering with any temporary or permanent structure, equipment, or appurtenance which is part of the POTW Shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.282 - Compensation for Unauthorized Discharges. 
Any User who Discharges Wastewater which impairs, interferes with or damages the POTW, its operations or monitoring equipment, detrimentally affects the Wastewater Treatment process, significantly increases POTW operation costs, requires non-routine inspection and/or sampling, or results in any other damages, costs or expenses, including the imposition of fines or penalties on the City, Shall be liable to the City for all damages, costs and expenses occasioned thereby. An administrative fee, which Shall be fixed by the City Manager based on the City's current overhead cost allocation percentage, Shall be added to these charges. The City's total expenses Shall be payable within thirty days of invoicing by the City. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.284 - Charges. 
Charges for sewer use Shall be established and revised periodically by ordinance or resolution, as appropriate, of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.286 - City's Right of Revision. 
The City reserves the right to amend this chapter to impose more stringent Discharge limits or requirements if deemed appropriate to advance the objectives presented in Section 13.08.100 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.295 - Interpretation. 
The provisions of this chapter are to be reasonably interpreted. It is the intent herein to recognize that there are varying degrees of hazard to surface and underground waters and to apply the principal that the degree of protection should be commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.296 - Severability. 
If any provision, paragraph, word, section, or article of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and articles Shall not be affected and Shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
III. - PERMITS 
 
13.08.300 - Wastewater Discharge Permits. 
All Class I, Class II, Class IV and Class V Users and those Class III Users so notified by the Director, which propose to connect or to Discharge to the POTW, Shall obtain a Wastewater Discharge Permit before connecting to or discharging to the POTW. Obtaining a Wastewater Discharge Permit Shall not relieve a Permittee of its obligation to comply with any other applicable requirements of federal, State and/or local law. Class I, Class II, Class IV and Class V Users are issued individual or site specific permits. Class III User Permits May be either individual or group (general) Permits as deemed appropriate by the Director. In general, when it has been established that a group of similar type businesses (i.e., Restaurants, photo processing, car washes, and automotive repair, etc.) are better regulated using Best Management Practices (BMPs), a general Permit will be issued with conditions and BMP requirements that have been established for a specified business group. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.305 - Permit Applications. 
Users required to obtain a Permit Shall complete and file with the Director an application in a form prescribed by him and submit any required application, filing, or Permit Fee. Applicable Permit Fees Shall be established by separate ordinance or resolution of the City. 
New Class I and Class II Users Shall apply for a Permit at least ninety days prior to connecting to or discharging to the POTW. Class III Users Shall apply for a Permit within thirty days after receiving notification to apply from the Director. Class IV Users Shall apply for a Permit at least ten days prior to the proposed Discharge. Class V Users Shall apply for a Permit at least five days prior to the proposed Discharge. 
The following information May be required with the Permit application: 
A.  Name, address, and location of the facility (if different from the address); 
B.  Names and addresses of the operator and owner, if different than above; 
C.  Name and address of any and all principals, owners, major shareholders of company, articles of incorporation; business license (if applicable); 
D.  Name and address of property owners, landlord and/or property manager of the facility site; 
E.  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1987, as amended; 
F.  Wastewater Constituents and characteristics of the proposed Discharge, as determined by a State certified analytical laboratory using Approved Analytical Methods and sampling procedures in accordance with 40 CFR 136 and 40 CFR 403.12(g)(3), and other EPA Approved Analytical Methods; 
G.  Time, volume and duration of proposed Discharge(s); 
H.  Average daily, peak daily, and fifteen-minute peak Wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any; 
I.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, including details showing all sewers, sewer connections, treatment facilities, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation. If required by the Director, such plans Shall be certified by a civil engineer registered in the State of California; 
J.  A process flow schematic diagram. If required by the Director, the diagram Shall be certified by a civil engineer registered in the State of California; 
K.  Descriptions of activities, facilities, operations and planned processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be Discharged; 
L.  Number and type of employees, and hours of plant operation, and proposed or actual hours of Pretreatment system operation; 
M.  The categorical Pretreatment Standards applicable to each regulated process; 
N.  A time schedule for compliance with any categorical standards or provisions of this chapter for which immediate compliance is not possible; 
O.  A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the User's facility, and a copy of the San Bernardino County "business plan" which addresses the location, type, and quantity of hazardous materials handled by the User; 
P.  Water supplier and water account numbers; 
Q.  Volume of cooling tower capacity, if applicable; 
R.  Waste minimization and water Conservation practices; 
S.  Production records, if applicable; 
T.  Waste manifests, if applicable; 
U.  EPA Hazardous Waste generator number, if applicable; 
V.  Additional information May be required of Wastehaulers, including the following: 
1.  A description of the industries and clients using the applicant's services; 
2.  Name and address of leaseholder of the vehicle or trailer, if applicable; 
3.  Number of trucks and trailers used and the license numbers and tank hauling capacity of each; 
4.  A copy of the applicant's San Bernardino County health department permit. 
W.  Any other information as May be deemed by the Director to be appropriate to evaluate the Discharge to the POTW. 
After evaluation and acceptance of the data, the Director May issue a Wastewater Discharge Permit subject to terms and conditions provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.310 - Permit Modifications. 
Within three months of the promulgation of a categorical standard, Permits for Users subject to the categorical standards Shall be revised to require compliance within the time frame prescribed by the new standard. Where an affected User has not previously submitted an application for a Permit as required by Section 13.08.305, the User Shall apply within one hundred eighty days after the promulgation of the applicable categorical standard. In addition, Users with existing Permits Shall submit to the Director, within one hundred eighty days after the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, a time schedule for compliance with the categorical standard. 
The terms and conditions of any Permit May be subject to modification by the Director during the term of the Permit if Discharge limits or requirements, as referenced in Sections 13.08.210 and 13.08.240, are modified or other good cause exists. The User Shall be informed of any proposed changes in the Permit at least thirty days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in a Permit Shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. Good cause for Permit modification includes, but is not limited to, the following reasons: 
A.  To incorporate new or revised categorical standards or to incorporate other new or revised federal, State or local standards or requirements; 
B.  To address significant alterations or additions to the User's operation, processes, or Wastewater volume or character since the time of Permit issuance; 
C.  A change in the POTW operations that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized Discharge; 
D.  Information indicating that the Permitted Discharge poses a threat to the POTW, City employees, the public or the receiving waters; 
E.  The User's actual Discharge is significantly different than the proposed Discharge identified in the User's Permit application; 
F.  Changes in the requirements of regulatory agencies which affect the City; or 
G.  A determination by the Director that modification is appropriate to further the objectives of this chapter. 
The Director May at any time rescind the requirement that any NSIU obtain and maintain a Class III Permit, at the Director's discretion. With respect to any User that was designated as an SIU solely as a result of the Director's designation under 13.08.105(90), clause (5), the Director May terminate said User's designation as an SIU and Class II Permittee on the Director's later determination that the User no longer has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or violating any applicable Pretreatment Standard, Requirement, or Discharge limit set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.315 - Permit Contents. 
Wastewater Discharge Permits Shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, and such charges and fees established, as appropriate, by City resolution or ordinance. 
A.  Class I and Class II Permits Shall contain at least the following: 
1.  Statement of Permit duration; 
2.  Statement of Permit non-transferability; 
3.  Discharge limits based on applicable Pretreatment Standards and/or local limits, including but not limited to Discharge limits on the average and/or maximum Wastewater Constituents and characteristics; 
4.  Specifications for monitoring programs which May include: Pollutants to be monitored; sampling location(s); frequency of sampling; sample type(s); number, types and standards for tests; and a reporting schedule for submitting to the City reports, data and records relating to production levels and Wastewater Discharges to the POTW; 
5.  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of Pretreatment Standards and Requirements; 
6.  Compliance time schedule(s) where required; 
7.  Statement that all SIUs must comply with slug load control programs and reporting requirements in compliance with 40 CFR 403.8. SIUs will be evaluated at least once every two years for the need to develop and implement an approved slug load control plan. 
B.  Permits May also contain the following: 
1.  The unit charge or schedule of User charges and fees for the Wastewater Discharged to the POTW; 
2.  Schedule of penalty fees for noncompliance; 
3.  Limits on the average and/or maximum Discharge, time of Discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
4.  Instantaneous concentration Discharge limits and/or mass emission Discharge limits; 
5.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
6.  Requirements for the installation of Pretreatment technology, pH control equipment, flow monitoring facilities, sampling facilities, development of Pollution control plans and/or other special conditions including management practices appropriate to prevent accidental, unanticipated or non-routine Discharges; 
7.  Requirements for development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of Pollutants Discharged to the POTW; 
8.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of Spill Containment systems; 
9.  Requirements for submission of technical or Discharge reports; 
10.  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to the Wastewater Discharge as specified by the Director; 
11.  Requirements for notification of slug or accidental Discharges, and/or Discharges of Hazardous Waste; 
12.  Requirements for submittal of Slug Discharge Control Plans and/or Solvent Management Plans; 
13.  Requirements to submit tax and water bills; 
14.  Requirements for maintaining and submitting waste manifests and/or wastehauling records; 
15.  Requirements to develop and implement Best Management Practices; 
16.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director to ensure protection of the POTW and compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.320 - Permit Duration. 
Permits Shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years for Class I and Class II Permits, and Shall identify the Permit expiration date. The User Shall apply for a Permit reissuance a minimum of ninety days prior to the expiration of the User's existing Permit. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.325 - Permit Transfer. 
Permits are issued to a specific User for a specific operation. A Permit Shall not be reassigned, transferred, or sold to a new owner or User, different premises, or a new or changed operation. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.330 - Reporting Requirements. 
In addition to reporting potential problems (see Sections 13.08.270 and 13.08.272), Industrial Users, at their sole expense, May be required to submit one or more of the following types of reports to the City: 
A.  Self-monitoring reports: The Director May require a Permittee to submit periodic self-monitoring reports containing a description of the (1) nature, concentration, and flow of Pollutants; (2) the time, date, and place of sampling; (3) methods of analysis; and (4) other information reasonably related to ensuring compliance with this chapter. Sampling for self-monitoring reports Shall be performed by the User as the Director specifies. All required analyses Shall be performed by a State-certified laboratory using Approved Analytical Methods. Class I and Class II Users Shall submit self-monitoring reports at least once every six months. 
B.  Compliance reports: Class I Users Shall submit initial Baseline Monitoring Reports (BMRs) and periodic compliance reports, and, if applicable, compliance schedule reports and final compliance reports. 
1.  Initial Baseline Monitoring Reports Shall be submitted to the City within one hundred eighty days after the effective date of the categorical standard, which will facilitate evaluation of initial compliance status and any modifications or conditions necessary to achieve full compliance with categorical standards. 
Baseline Monitoring Reports Shall include: 
a)  All information listed in Section 13.08.305 
b)  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, where required by the applicable categorical standard or the Director, of regulated Pollutants in the Discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, Shall be reported. 
c)  A statement, reviewed by an Authorized Representative of the Industrial User, and certified as to accuracy by a qualified professional, indicating whether Pretreatment Standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional Pretreatment is required for the Industrial User to meet the Pretreatment Standards and Requirements. New sources Shall submit a Baseline Monitoring Report at least ninety days prior to commencement of Discharge. 
If immediate compliance with the categorical standard is not possible and additional Pretreatment or operation and maintenance is necessary, the report must specify the shortest time necessary to achieve compliance. The completion date must not be later than that specified in the applicable categorical standards. New sources Shall achieve compliance with all applicable Pretreatment Standards within ninety days of commencing Discharge. 
2.  Compliance schedule reports Shall be submitted to the City, if necessary, to demonstrate compliance with conditions of a time schedule requiring full compliance with categorical standards and/or other applicable Discharge limits set forth in this chapter by a specific date. 
Compliance schedule reports Shall contain dates for commencement and completion of major events leading to construction and operation of additional Pretreatment equipment, including but not limited to dates for Pretreatment equipment design completion, building permit submittal, construction commencement, construction milestones, progress reports, construction completion, employee training completion, and final compliance. Samples Shall be collected and analyzed to demonstrate compliance. The samples Shall be taken in accordance with 40 CFR 136 and 40 CFR 403.12(g)(3). Compliance schedule reports Shall be submitted at the completion of all major events necessary to achieve full compliance with categorical standards or Discharge requirements, but not less frequency than thirty days. Compliance schedule reports Shall be submitted within fourteen days of a milestone date. Absent unusual circumstances, the duration of a compliance schedule Shall not exceed nine months. 
3.  Final compliance reports Shall be submitted to the City by any User subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards within ninety days following the date for final compliance with applicable, Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in the case of a New Source, within ninety days following commencement of the introduction of Wastewater into the POTW, to demonstrate that full compliance with categorical standards has been achieved. Final compliance reports Shall include all information contained in a Baseline Monitoring Report. 
4.  Periodic compliance reports Shall be submitted to the City to demonstrate continued compliance with categorical standards. Periodic compliance reports Shall include all monitoring data specified in the applicable categorical standard, and any additional monitoring data obtained by the User during the period covered by the report. 
Sampling for periodic compliance reports Shall be performed during the period covered by the report. Analyses Shall be performed by a State-certified laboratory using Approved Analytical Methods. The Control Authority Shall require that frequency of monitoring necessary to assess and assure compliance by Industrial Users with applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements. Grab Samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, Oil and Grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds. For all other Pollutants, twenty-four-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Control Authority. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Control Authority, the samples must be representative of the Discharge and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented in the Industrial User file for that facility or facilities. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple Grab Samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period May be composited prior to the analysis as follows: For cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples May be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and Oil and Grease the samples May be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies May be authorized by the Control Authority, as appropriate. 
Periodic compliance reports Shall be submitted every six months in June and December of each year, unless required to be submitted more frequently by the Director. Periodic compliance reports May be combined with self-monitoring reports pursuant to subsection A of this section. 
C.  Solvent Management Plans. All Industrial Users subject to promulgated categorical standards which include a total toxic organic (TTO) limitation Shall be required to file a Solvent Management Plan. The Director May also require other Users to submit solvent management plans where, in his judgment, a plan is necessary to assure proper containment and disposal of solvents. 
D.  Slug Discharge Control Plans. All Industrial Users so required by the Director Shall develop and file with the Director and implement a Slug Discharge Control Plan. The plan Shall contain at least the following elements: 
1.  Description of Discharge practices, including non-routine batch Discharges; 
2.  Description of stored chemicals; 
3.  Procedures for prompt verbal notification to the City of Slug Discharges, including any Discharge that would violate a specific prohibition under Sections 13.08.210 or 13.08.240 of this chapter or 40 CFR 403.5(b), and procedures for follow-up written notification to the Director within twenty-four hours; 
4.  If required by the Director, the plan Shall include procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic Pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response; and 
5.  If required by the Director, the plan Shall include follow-up practices to limit the damage suffered by the POTW or the environment. 
E.  Specific Compliance Plans. All Industrial Users so required by the Director Shall file a Specific Compliance Plan. The plan Shall indicate the cause of noncompliance, the corrective actions which will be taken to prevent recurrence of the noncompliance, and, if required by the Director, a proposed compliance time schedule indicating the dates those corrective actions will be completed. 
F.  Notification of Hazardous Waste Discharge. Any User Shall notify the City, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State Hazardous Waste authorities in writing of any Discharge by the User into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be classified a Hazardous Waste pursuant to 40 CFR Part 261, as revised. Such notification Shall include the name of the Hazardous Waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA Hazardous Waste number, and the type of Discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the User Discharges more than one hundred kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification Shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the User: an identification of the hazardous Constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such Constituents in the wastestream Discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of Constituents in the wastestream expected to be Discharged during the following twelve months. 
Users Shall provide notification no later than one hundred eighty days after the Discharge of the Hazardous Waste. 
Any notification under this section need be submitted only once for each Hazardous Waste Discharge. However, notifications of changed Discharges must be submitted in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(j). 
The Hazardous Waste Discharge notification requirements specified herein do not apply to Pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections A and B of this section. Users are also exempt from the above requirements during a calendar month in which they Discharge no more than fifteen kilograms of Hazardous Wastes, unless the wastes are acute Hazardous Wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). 
Discharges of more than fifteen kilograms of non-acute Hazardous Wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), require a one-time notification. Additional notification is not required for subsequent months during which the User Discharges additional quantities of the same non-acute Hazardous Waste. 
In the case of new Federal Regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of Hazardous Waste or listing any additional substance as a Hazardous Waste, the User Shall notify the City, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State Hazardous Waste authorities of the Discharge of such substance within ninety days of the effective date of such regulations. 
In the case of any notification made under these requirements, the User Shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume or toxicity of Hazardous Wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
G.  Any other reports required by California State Law; including such reports as are required by Chapter 6.95 of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Users Shall be responsible for compliance with all milestone dates established pursuant to the reports required pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.335 - Spill Containment Facilities. 
All Industrial Users Shall provide Spill Containment for protection against the unauthorized Discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter. Such protection Shall be designed to prevent such materials and wastes from entering into the sewerage system in accordance with reasonable engineering standards. Such facilities Shall be provided and maintained at the Industrial User's expense. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.340 - Signatory and Certification Requirements. 
All Permit applications, reports and plans submitted to the City by Industrial Users pursuant to Sections 13.08.270, 13.08.272, 13.08.305, 13.08.310, and 13.08.330 Shall be signed and dated by an Authorized Representative of the User. The signature Shall accompany the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the Person or Persons who manage the system, or those Persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
Analytical reports submitted directly to the City by a certified analytical laboratory at the request of the User for samples of Wastewater collected at User Facilities May be signed, dated, and certified by the laboratory manager in lieu of an Authorized Representative of the User; however, such reports Shall be accompanied by a statement, signed, dated, and certified by an Authorized Representative of the User, as above, which verifies that the sample identified in the analytical report was collected on the date and time indicated at the location indicated, and using the method indicated on the analytical report. This signed, dated, and certified statement May be included as part of the chain-of-custody form for the sample. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
IV. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
13.08.400 - Enforcement, General. 
Whenever any Person violates any provision of this chapter, a Wastewater Discharge Permit or administrative order issued hereunder, the violation constitutes a violation of this chapter and is immediately actionable. The Director May take any, all or any combination of these actions in accordance with progressive enforcement response procedures as contained in the City's Enforcement Response Plan (ERP) against a noncompliant User. The Director May immediately proceed with any one or more of the enforcement remedies set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.401 - Notification of Violation (NOV). 
Whenever the Director finds that any User has violated any Discharge limit or requirement contained in this chapter or a Wastewater Discharge Permit, the Director May serve upon such User a written notice stating the nature of the violation and the penalties for continued noncompliance. Within a prescribed period specified in the notice, the User Shall submit to the Director a Specific Compliance Plan pursuant to Section 13.08.330 E. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.402 - Compliance Time Schedules (CTS). 
The Director May issue a compliance time schedule submitted by a User, or May issue a revised compliance time schedule if, in the judgment of the Director, the User's proposed compliance time schedule is insufficient to achieve timely compliance with this chapter. The Director will notify the User of the compliance time schedule established by the Director in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.403 - Administrative Orders (AO). 
The Director May direct compliance with any prohibition, Discharge limit, or requirement of this chapter or the provisions of a Wastewater Discharge Permit by issuing one or more of the following administrative orders: 
A.  Compliance order; 
B.  Cease and desist order; 
C.  Termination of service order; 
D.  Immediate termination of service order. 
Any User served with an administrative order Shall be subject to noncompliance fees which May be established by City ordinance or resolution, as appropriate. The City May also bring a court action to enforce any administrative order issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.404 - Compliance Orders. 
When the Director finds that a User has violated or threatens to violate any prohibition, Discharge limit or requirement of this chapter or the provisions of a Wastewater Discharge Permit, the Director May issue a compliance order and direct the User to: 
A.  Comply immediately; or 
B.  Comply in accordance with a specific compliance time schedule. 
A compliance order May establish a noncompliance monitoring program, or modify an existing noncompliance monitoring program. A compliance order May also include, but is not limited to, modifications in the frequency and extent of monitoring, sampling and analysis, submission of self-monitoring reports and directives to institute management practices designed to minimize the amount of Pollutants Discharged to the sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.405 - Cease and Desist Orders. 
When the Director finds that a User has violated or threatens to violate any prohibition, Discharge limit, provision of this chapter, Wastewater Discharge Permit, or administrative order, the Director May issue a cease and desist order and direct the User to: 
A.  Comply immediately; or 
B.  Take appropriate remedial or preventative action, including, if necessary, halting operations or terminating the Discharge, in order to prevent the recurrence of a violation or a threatened violation. 
A cease and desist order May establish a noncompliance monitoring program or modify an existing noncompliance monitoring program. A cease and desist order May also include, but is not limited to, modifications in the frequency and extent of monitoring, sampling and analysis, and submission of self-monitoring reports. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.406 - Determination of Non-compliance with Discharge Limits. 
A.  Sampling procedures. 
1.  Sampling of all Users Shall be conducted in the time, place, manner, and frequency determined at the sole discretion of the City. 
2.  Noncompliance with Mass Emission Rate limits, concentration limits, Permit Discharge conditions, or any Discharge provision of this chapter May be determined by an analysis of a grab or composite sample of the Effluent of a User. Noncompliance with Mass Emission Rate limits Shall be determined by an analysis of a composite sample of the User's Effluent, except that a Grab Sample May be used to determine compliance with Mass Emission Rate limits when the Discharge is from a closed (batch) Treatment system in which there is no Wastewater flow into the sewerage system when the Discharge is occurring, the volume of Wastewater contained in the batch system is known, the time interval of Discharge is known, and the Grab Sample is homogeneous and representative of the Discharge. 
3.  Any sample taken from a Sample Point Shall be deemed to be representative of the Discharge to the POTW. 
B.  Waste hauler Noncompliance with Discharge Limits. A Wastehauler's noncompliance with Discharge limits Shall be determined by an analysis of a sample of the Discharge for any Constituent or conditions specified in the waste hauler's Wastewater Discharge Permit or this chapter. If the Discharge of a waste hauler is found by the analysis to be in excess of the concentration limits specified in the waste hauler's Wastewater Discharge Permit or in this chapter, the waste hauler Shall, upon receiving a demand from the City, identify in writing all sources of the Discharge. 
Even if it is established to the satisfaction of the Director that the origin of the Discharge is Septic Waste or sanitary waste, the City May still elect not to accept waste from that particular source. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.407 - Non-compliance Monitoring Program. 
A.  Repeat Sampling: If any sample analysis indicates that the User is discharging Wastewater with Pollutant concentrations or levels exceeding Discharge limits contained in this chapter or contained in User's Permit, then the User Shall notify the City of the violation within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the incident. The User Shall also collect and analyze a follow-up sample or samples (as directed by the Director using Approved Analytical Methods). The User Shall submit the completed follow-up sample analysis to the City within thirty days of becoming aware of the violation. 
B.  Initiation of Noncompliance Monitoring Program: If the follow-up sample indicates continued noncompliance, the User May be ordered by the Director to immediately initiate a noncompliance monitoring program requiring additional sampling and reporting by the User in accordance with a schedule issued by the Director. During the program, the User May be subject to noncompliance fees established by City ordinance or resolution, as appropriate. 
C.  Termination of Noncompliance Monitoring Program: The noncompliance monitoring program May be terminated by the City upon the User's demonstration of a return to consistent compliance. To demonstrate consistent compliance, the User must either: 
1.  Terminate the Discharge; or 
2.  Provide analyses (which have been analyzed using Approved Analytical Methods), which show Discharge levels in consistent compliance over a period of not less than thirty days or as specified in the program. 
D.  Non-compliance Fees: The payment of non-compliance fees by Users Shall not bar the City from undertaking any other enforcement, civil, or criminal proceedings. The purpose of noncompliance fees is to compensate the City for costs of additional sampling, monitoring, laboratory analysis, Treatment, disposal and administrative processing incurred as a result of non-compliance. Non-compliance fees are established by City Resolution and are amended from time to time to reflect the cost of providing additional oversight to remedy non-compliance with the provisions of this chapter or Wastewater Discharge Permit. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.408 - Permit Suspension or Revocation. 
A.  Grounds. The Director May suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that a Permittee: 
1.  Knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the City; 
2.  Refuses to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the City to determine Permit terms, conditions, or limits, Discharge compliance, or compliance with this chapter; 
3.  Falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method; 
4.  Fails to report significant changes in operations or Wastewater Constituents and characteristics; 
5.  Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of an administrative order issued pursuant to this chapter; 
6.  Discharges Effluent to the POTW while its Permit is suspended; 
7.  Refuses reasonable access to the Permittee's premises for the purpose of inspection and monitoring; 
8.  Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed to the City for fees imposed pursuant to this chapter; 
9.  Causes Interference with the City's collection, Treatment or disposal system; 
10.  Fails to submit oral notice or written report of Bypass occurrence; 
11.  Violates any condition or limit of its Discharge Permit or any provision of this chapter. 
B.  Notice/Hearing. When the Director has reason to believe that grounds exist for the suspension or revocation of a Permit, he Shall give written notice by personal service or certified mail thereof to the Permittee setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist together with the time and place where the charges Shall be heard by the Director's designee. The hearing date Shall be not less than fifteen calendar days nor more than forty-five calendar days after the mailing of such notice. 
1.  At the hearing, the Permittee Shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the notice by presenting written or oral evidence. The suspension or revocation hearing Shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures established by the Director and approved by counsel for the City. 
2.  After the conclusion of the hearing, the Director's designee Shall submit a written report to the Director setting forth a brief statement of facts found to be true, a determination of the issues presented, conclusions, and a recommendation. Upon receipt of the written report, the Director Shall make his determination and should he find that grounds exist for suspension or permanent revocation of the Permit, he Shall issue his decision and order in writing within thirty calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing by his designee. The written decision and order of the Director Shall be served personally or by certified mail on the Permittee or its legal counsel/representative. 
In the event the Director determines to not revoke the Permit, he May order other enforcement actions, including, but not limited to, a temporary suspension of the Permit, under terms and conditions that he deems appropriate to further the purposes of this chapter. 
C.  Effect. 
1.  Upon an order of suspension or revocation by the Director becoming final, the Permittee Shall lose all rights to Discharge any Non-domestic Wastewater directly or indirectly to the POTW in accordance with the order. All costs for physical termination Shall be paid by the Permittee. 
2.  Any owner or responsible management employee of the Permittee Shall be bound by the order of suspension or revocation. 
3.  Any future application for a Permit at any location within the POTW's Service Area by any Person subject to an order of revocation will be considered by the City after fully reviewing the records of the revoked Permit, which records May be the basis for denial of a new Permit. 
4.  An order of Permit suspension or revocation issued by Director Shall be final in all respects on the thirty-first day after it is served personally or by certified mail on the Permittee unless a notice of appeal is filed with the City pursuant to Section 13.08.427 no later than five p.m. on the thirtieth day following such mailing. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.410 - Termination of Service. 
When the Director finds that any User has done any of the following acts, the Director May terminate sewer service to that User upon serving appropriate notice to the User: 
A.  Violate a cease and desist order; 
B.  Fail to accurately report the Wastewater Constituents and characteristics of its Discharge; 
C.  Fail to report significant changes in operations, or Wastewater volume, Constituents and characteristics prior to Discharge; 
D.  Refuse to allow reasonable access to the User's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; 
E.  Violate any Pretreatment Standard. The procedures set forth in Section 13.08.408B Shall apply to termination of service proceedings. The User Shall be liable for all costs for termination of sewer service incurred by the User and the City. This provision is in addition to other statutes, rules, or regulations authorizing termination of service for delinquency in payment, or for any other reason. 
Sewer service May be re-instituted if the Director is satisfied that the User has remedied all aspects of noncompliance with this chapter and that the User has the capability to and will remain in compliance in the future. The User Shall be liable for all costs for re-institution of sewer service. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.415 - Emergency Suspension of Service. 
A.  The Director May suspend sewerage service or wastehauler Discharge service, after informal notice to the User, when the Director determines that such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or impending Discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of Persons, or to the environment, may cause Pass Through of or Interference with the POTW, or may cause the City to violate any State or federal law or regulation. Any User notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order Shall immediately cease the Discharge of all Non-domestic Wastewater to the sewerage system. In the event that a User fails to immediately comply with an emergency suspension order, the Director Shall take steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent the continued Discharge of Non-domestic Wastewater to the POTW. The User Shall be liable for all costs incurred by the City in terminating sewer service. 
B.  As soon as reasonably practicable following the issuance of an emergency suspension order and informal notice to the User of the time and location for a hearing, but in no event more than five days following the issuance of such order, the Director Shall hold a hearing to provide the User the opportunity to present information in opposition to the issuance of the emergency suspension order. Such a hearing Shall not stay the effect of the emergency suspension order. The hearing Shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the Director and approved by counsel for the City. The Director Shall issue a written decision and order within two business days following the hearing, which decision Shall be served personally or by certified mail on the User or the User's legal counsel. The decision of the Director following the hearing Shall be final and not appealable. 
C.  Upon a demonstration by the User to the satisfaction of the Director that the period of endangerment has passed and will not recur, the Director May allow the User to recommence its Discharge to the POTW, unless the Director proceeds with Permit revocation or termination of service pursuant to Sections 13.08.408 or 13.08.410. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.416 - Public Nuisance. 
Discharge of Wastewater in any manner in violation of this chapter or of any administrative order issued pursuant to this chapter, is declared a public nuisance and Shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Director. Any Person creating a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.417 - Criminal Penalties. 
Any Person who violates any provision of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor, which is punishable by a fine of at least one thousand dollars per day for each violation, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or both. Each such Person Shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this chapter has been committed or continued. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.419 - Search or Inspection Warrants. 
If the Director has been refused access to a building or property, or any part thereof, or determines that a search or inspection warrant is appropriate to conduct an investigation in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter, the Director May apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for the issuance of a search or inspection warrant. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.420 - Legal Action. 
If any Person, firm or corporation violates or has the reasonable potential to violate any provision of its Wastewater Discharge Permit, this chapter, federal or State Pretreatment Standards or Requirements, or any administrative order issued pursuant to this chapter, the City attorney May petition a court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate legal, equitable or injunctive relief including, but not limited to, issuance of a temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction, permanent injunction, and/or any other relief that may be appropriate to restrain the continued violation or prevent threatened violations by the User. 
In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Director May recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporter's fees, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit of law against the Person found to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued thereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.425 - Civil Penalties. 
A.  Authority. All Users of the POTW are subject to enforcement actions administratively or judicially by the district, EPA, Regional Board, and/or the County of San Bernardino district attorney. The actions May be taken pursuant to the authority and provisions of several laws, including but not limited to: (1) Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.); (2) California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.); (3) California Hazardous Waste Control Law (California Health and Safety Code Section 25100 et seq.); (4) Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et seq.); and (5) California Government Code, Sections 54739 et seq. 
B.  Recovery of Fines or Penalties. In the event the City is subject to the payment of fines or penalties pursuant to the legal authority and actions of other regulatory or enforcement agencies based on a violation of law or regulation or its permits, and the violation can be established by City as caused by the Discharge of any User of the POTW which is in violation of any provision of this chapter, the User's Permit, or an administrative order issued pursuant to this chapter, City Shall be entitled to recover from the User all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the full amount of said fines or penalties to which it has been subjected. 
C.  Ordinance. Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54739-54740, any Person who violates any provision of this chapter; any permit condition, prohibition or Effluent limit; or any suspension or revocation order Shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. Pursuant to the authority of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., any Person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any permit condition, prohibition, or Effluent limit Shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. Counsel for the City, upon order of the Director, Shall petition a court of competent jurisdiction to impose, assess, and recover such penalties, or such other penalties as the City May impose, assess, and recover pursuant to federal and/or State legislative authorization. 
D.  Administrative Civil Penalties. 
1.  Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54740.5 and 54740.6, the City May issue an administrative complaint to any Person who violates: 
(a)  Any provision of this chapter; 
(b)  Any permit condition, prohibition, or Effluent limit; or 
(c)  Any suspension or revocation order. 
2.  The administrative complaint Shall be served by personal delivery or certified mail on the Person and Shall inform the Person that a hearing will be conducted, and Shall specify a hearing date within sixty days following service. The administrative complaint Shall allege the act or failure to act that constitutes the violation of the City's requirements, the provisions of law authorizing civil liability to be imposed, and the proposed civil penalty. The matter Shall be heard by the Director or his designee. The Person to whom an administrative complaint has been issued May waive the right to a hearing, in which case a hearing will not be conducted. 
3.  At the hearing, the Person Shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the administrative complaint by presenting written or oral evidence. The hearing Shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures established by the Director and approved by the counsel for the City. 
4.  After the conclusion of the hearing, the Director's designee Shall submit a written report to the Director setting forth a statement of the facts found to be true, a determination of the issues presented, conclusions, and a recommendation. 
5.  Upon receipt of the written report, the Director Shall make his determination and should he find that grounds exist for assessment of a civil penalty against the Person, he Shall issue his decision and order in writing within thirty calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing by his designee. 
6.  If, after the hearing or appeal, if any, it is found that the Person has violated reporting or Discharge requirements the Director or City Council May assess a civil penalty against that Person. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the Director or City Council May take into consideration all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the economic benefit derived through any noncompliance, the nature and persistence of the violation, the length of time over which the violation occurs, and corrective action, if any, attempted or taken by the Person involved. 
7.  Civil penalties May be assessed as follows: 
(a)  In an amount which Shall not exceed two thousand dollars for each day for failing or refusing to furnish technical or monitoring reports; 
(b)  In an amount which Shall not exceed three thousand dollars for each day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance schedules established by the City; 
(c)  In an amount which Shall not exceed five thousand dollars per violation for each day of Discharge in violation of any waste Discharge limit, Permit condition, or requirement issued, reissued, or adopted by the City; 
(d)  In any amount which does not exceed ten dollars per gallon for Discharges in violation of any suspension, revocation, cease and desist order or other orders, or prohibition issued, reissued, or adopted by the City. 
8.  An order assessing administrative civil penalties issued by the City Shall be final in all respects on the thirty-first day after it is served on the Person unless a notice of appeal is filed with the City Council pursuant to Section 13.08.427 no later than the thirtieth day following such mailing. An order assessing administrative civil penalties issued by the City Council Shall be final upon issuance. 
9.  Copies of the administrative order Shall be served on the party served with the administrative complaint, either by personal service or by registered mail to the Person at his business or residence address, and upon other Persons who appeared at the hearing and requested a copy of the order. 
10.  Any Person aggrieved by a final order issued by the City Council, after granting review of the order of the Director, May obtain review of the order of the City Council in the superior court, pursuant to Government Code Section 54740.6, by filing in the court a petition for writ of mandate within thirty days following the service of a copy of the decision or order issued by the City Council. 
11.  Payment of any order setting administrative civil penalties Shall be made within thirty days of the date the order becomes final. The amount of any administrative civil penalties imposed which have remained delinquent for a period of sixty days Shall constitute a lien against the real property of the Discharger from which the Discharge resulting in the imposition of the civil penalty originated. The lien Shall have no effect until recorded with the County recorder. The City May record the lien for any unpaid administrative civil penalties on the ninety-first day following the date the order becomes final. 
12.  No administrative civil penalties Shall be recoverable under subsection D of this section for any violation for which the City has recovered civil penalties through a judicial proceeding filed pursuant to Government Code Section 54740. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.427 - Appeals to the City Council. 
A.  General. Any User, Permit applicant, or Permittee adversely affected by a decision, action, or determination made by the Director May file a written notice of appeal requesting a hearing before the City Council, which notice Shall be accompanied by an appeal fee in the amount established by a separate resolution of the City Council. The notice of appeal Shall be filed within thirty days of the service on the appellant of notice of the decision, action or determination of the Director. The notice of appeal Shall set forth in detail all the issues in dispute for which the appellant seeks determination and all facts supporting appellant's request. 
No later than sixty days after receipt of the request for hearing, the City Council Shall either set the matter for a hearing, or deny the request for a hearing in accordance with subsection B of this section. 
Upon receipt of a timely notice of appeal, a hearing Shall be held by the City Council within sixty-five days, unless a later date is agreed to by the appellant and the City Council. If the matter is not heard within the required time, due to actions or inactions of the appellant, the Director's order Shall be deemed final. 
As the ordinance codified in this chapter constitutes a legislative enactment, except as expressly authorized under this chapter, there are no provisions for waiver or variance from the terms of said ordinance. 
B.  Granting Request for Hearing. The City Council Shall grant all requests for a hearing on appeals concerning an award of civil penalties, or orders of Permit suspension, revocation, or denial. Whether to grant or deny the request for a hearing on appeals of other decisions of the Director Shall be within the sole discretion of the City Council. 
C.  Appeal Fee Refund. The appeal fee Shall be refunded if the City Council denies a hearing or reverses or modifies, in favor of the appellant, the order of the Director. The fee Shall not be refunded if the City Council denies the appeal. 
D.  Written Determination. After the hearing, the City Council Shall make a determination whether to uphold, modify, or reverse the decision, action, or determination made by the Director. 
The decision of the City Council Shall be set forth in writing within sixty-five days after the close of the hearing and Shall contain findings of the facts found to be true, the determination of issues presented, and the conclusions. The written decision and order of the City Council Shall be served personally or by certified mail on the appellant or its legal counsel/ representative. 
The order of the City Council Shall be final upon its adoption. In the event the City Council fails to reverse or modify the Director's order, it Shall be deemed affirmed. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.428 - Financial Security/Amendments to Permit. 
A.  Compliance Deposit. Permittees that have been subject to enforcement and/or collection proceedings May be required to deposit with the City an amount determined by the Director as necessary to guarantee payment to City of all charges, fees, penalties, costs and expenses that may be incurred in the future, before permission is granted for further Discharge to the sewer. 
B.  Delinquent Accounts. The City May require an amendment to the Permit of any Permittee who fails to make payment in full of all fees and charges assessed by the City or otherwise incurred by Permittee. 
C.  Bankruptcy. Every Permittee filing any legal action in any court of competent jurisdiction, including the United States Bankruptcy Court, for purposes of discharging its financial debts or obligations or seeking court-ordered protection from its creditors, Shall, within ten days of filing such action, apply for and obtain the issuance of an amendment to its Permit. 
D.  Permit Amendments. The City Shall review and examine Permittee's account to determine whether previously incurred fees and charges have been paid in accordance with time requirements prescribed by this chapter. The City May thereafter issue an amendment to the User's Permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  Security. An amendment to a waste Discharge Permit issued pursuant to subsections B, C and/or D of this section, May be conditioned upon the Permittee depositing financial security in an amount equal to the average total fees and charges for two calendar quarters during the preceding year. The deposit Shall be used to guarantee payment of all fees and charges incurred for future services and facilities furnished by City and Shall not be used by the City to recover outstanding fees and charges incurred prior to the Permittee filing and receiving protection from creditors in the United States Bankruptcy Court. 
F.  Return of Security. In the event the Permittee makes payment in full within the time prescribed by this chapter of all fees and charges incurred over a period of two years following the issuance of an amendment to the Permit pursuant to subsections B, C and/or D of this section, the City Shall either return the security deposit posted by the Permittee or credit his account. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.430 - Enforcement Response Plan. 
The Director Shall prepare, implement, and, if necessary, periodically update an Enforcement Response Plan in conformance with EPA guidance contained in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(5). 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.440 - Notice of Discharge Prohibition. 
The Director May serve a written notice of Discharge prohibition on any Person(s) engaged in any activity or activities which, while not resulting in a Discharge of Non-domestic Wastewater to the POTW at the time, may, in the Director's judgment, result in a Discharge of Non-domestic Wastewater at some time in the future. A notice of Discharge prohibition Shall include at least the following: 
A.  A list of general Discharge restrictions and prohibitions; 
B.  A list or citation of any categorical standards that would be applicable upon commencement of Non-domestic Wastewater Discharge; 
C.  A requirement to apply for and obtain a Wastewater Discharge Permit prior to commencing Discharge of Non-domestic Wastewater to the POTW; 
D.  A requirement for notification of slug or accidental Discharges; and 
E.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of Pretreatment Standards and Requirements. A notice of Discharge prohibition May also contain one or more of the following: 
1.  A requirement to prepare and submit a Slug Discharge Control Plan; 
2.  A requirement to install and maintain one or more Spill Containment systems; 
3.  A requirement for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastes removed from the facility; 
4.  A requirement to submit an annual written statement to the Director certifying that no Non-domestic Wastewater has been Discharged to the POTW during the previous year other than Discharges of which the Director was properly notified, and that no Non-domestic Wastewater will be Discharged during the forthcoming year without proper notification and/or obtaining a Wastewater Discharge Permit. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.445 - Industrial Waste Pass Through or Interference. 
Any Person whose Discharge results in a Pass Through or Interference event affecting the POTW Shall be liable for all costs associated with the event, including Treatment costs, regulatory fines, penalties, assessments, and other indirect costs. The User Shall submit to the City plans to prevent future recurrences to the satisfaction of the Director. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.450 - Publication of Violation. 
Upon a determination in a Permit suspension, Permit revocation, or civil penalty proceedings that a User has Discharged in violation of its Permit or any provision under this chapter, the City May require that the User notify the public and/or other Users of the POTW of such violation, of actions taken to correct such violation, and of any administrative or judicial orders or penalties imposed as a result of such violation. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.460 - Recovery of Costs Incurred by City. 
In the event a Permittee fails to comply with any of the terms and conditions of this chapter, an administrative order, compliance schedule or a Permit issued hereunder, the City Shall be entitled to reasonable attorney fees and costs which may be incurred in order to enforce any of the terms and conditions, with or without filing proceedings in court. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.470 - Judicial Review. 
A.  Purpose and Effect. Pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, the City enacts this section to limit to ninety days following final decisions in adjudicatory administrative hearings the time within which an action can be brought to review such decisions by means of administrative mandamus. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms and words Shall have the following meanings: 
1.  Decision Shall mean and include adjudicatory administrative decisions that are made after hearing, and after an award of civil penalties pursuant to Section 13.08.425D, after revoking, suspending, or denying an application for a permit or a license, or after other administrative hearings taken to enforce this chapter. 
2.  Complete record Shall mean and include the transcript, if any exists, of the proceedings, all pleadings, all notices and orders, any proposed decision by the Director, and the final decision, all admitted exhibits, all rejected exhibits in the possession of the City or its officers or agents, all written evidence, and any other papers in the case. 
C.  Time Limit for Judicial Review. Except as set forth in subsection G of this section, judicial review of any decision of the City or its officer or agent May be made pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure only if the petition for writ of mandate is filed not later than the ninetieth day following the date on which the decision becomes final. If there is no provision for reconsideration in the procedures governing the proceedings or if the date is not otherwise specified, the decision is final on the date it is made. If there is a provision for reconsideration, the decision is final upon the expiration of the period during which such reconsideration can be sought; provided that if reconsideration is sought pursuant to such provision, the decision is final for the purposes of this section on the date that reconsideration is rejected. 
D.  Preparation of the Record. The complete record of the proceedings Shall be prepared by the City officer or agent who made the decision and Shall be delivered to the petitioner within ninety days after a written request is filed by said petitioner and received by the City. The City May recover from the petitioner its actual costs for transcribing and otherwise preparing the record. 
E.  Extension. If the petitioner files a request for the record within ten days after the date the decision becomes final, the time within which a petition, pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure, may be filed Shall be extended to not later than the thirtieth day following the date on which the record is either personally delivered or mailed to the petitioner or the petitioner's attorney of record, if appropriate. 
F.  Notice. In making a final decision, the City Shall provide notice to the Person(s) subject to the administrative decision that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
G.  Administrative Civil Penalties. Notwithstanding the foregoing in Section 13.08.470, and pursuant to Government Code Section 54740.6, judicial review of an order of the City Council imposing administrative civil penalties pursuant to Section 13.08.425D may be made only if the petition for writ of mandate is filed not later than the thirtieth day following the day on which the order of the City Council becomes final. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
V. - ADOPTION 
 
13.08.500 - Effective Date—Annexations. 
Wherever in this chapter time limits are established or periods of compliance or extensions thereof are specified, the commencement date for computing such periods of time limits for areas annexed to the City subsequent to enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter Shall be the official annexation date. This section Shall have no application to firms or industries established in annexed areas subsequent to the annexation date. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.505 - Effective Date—City of Colton and Unincorporated Portions of San Bernardino County Served by the Colton POTW. 
The mayor will sign the ordinance codified in this chapter and the City clerk Shall attest thereto, and said ordinance Shall become effective in the City of Colton and portions of San Bernardino County served by the Colton POTW thirty days after adoption. 
(Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.510 - Conflicts. 
All ordinances or portions of ordinances in conflict herewith, and specifically Ordinance No. O-06-09 are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. O-07-15, § 2, 6-2-2015)  
Chapter 13.10 - CROSS-CONNECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.10.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is: 
A.  To protect the public potable water supply of the City from the possibility of contamination or Pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system(s) such contaminants or Pollutants which could Backflow into the public water systems; and 
B.  To promote the elimination or control of existing Cross-Connections, actual or potential, between consumer's in-plant potable water system(s) and nonpotable water system(s), plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and 
C.  To provide for the maintenance of continuing program of Cross-Connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or Pollution of all potable water systems. 
(Ord. 0-16-90 § 1.1, 1990)  
13.10.020 - Authority. 
The Director of Public Works or his authorized agent will have authority over this program. 
(Ord. 0-16-90 § 1.2, 1990)  
13.10.030 - Responsibility. 
The City Director of Public Works Shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or Pollution due to the Backflow of contaminants or Pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of said Director, an Approved Backflow prevention assembly is required (at the customer's water service connection; or within the customer's private water system) for the safety of the water system, the Director Shall give Notice in writing to said customer to install such an Approved Backflow prevention assembly(s) at specific location(s) on his Premises. The consumer Shall immediately install such Approved assembly(s) (see Section 13.10.060, Approved devices) at the consumer's own expense, and failure, refusal or inability on the Part of the consumer to install, have tested and maintain said assembly(s) Shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the Premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. 
(Ord. 0-16-90 § 1.3, 1990)  
13.10.040 - Definitions. 
As Used in this chapter: 
A.  "The City of Colton, Director of Public Works" means the Director of Public Works in charge of the Water Division of the City of Colton, invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective Cross-Connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  "Approved" means accepted by the Director or his Designated Agent, as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this chapter, or as suitable for the proposed Use. 
C.  "Auxiliary Water Supply" means any water supply on or available to the Premises other than the purveyor's Approved public water supply, considered as an Auxiliary Water Supply. These auxiliary waters May include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc. or "Used Waters" or "industrial fluids". These waters May be contaminated or polluted or they May be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. 
D.  "Backflow" means the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either Backpressure or Backsiphonage. 
E.  "Backpressure" means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source or sources other than the intended source. 
F.  "Backsiphonage" means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other than its intended source caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
G.  "Backflow Preventer" means an assembly or means designed to prevent Backflow. 
H.  "Air-Gap" means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing, fixture, or other device and the Flood level rim of said vessel. An Approved Air-Gap Shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the overflow rim of the vessel, and in no case less than one inch. 
I.  "Cross-Connection" means any physical connection or arrangement of piping of fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, Backflow May occur into the potable water system. This would include any sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy section of pipe, swivel or changeover devices or sliding multiport tube. 
J.  "Controlled Cross-Connection" means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an Approved Backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
K.  "Cross-Connection Control by Containment" means the installation of an Approved Backflow prevention assembly at the water service connection to any customer's Premises where all actual or potential Cross-Connections within the customer's water system; or, it means the installation of an Approved Backflow prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential Cross-Connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the Cross-Connection. 
L.  Hazard, Degree of. The term is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
1.  "Health Hazard" means any condition, device, or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create, or in the judgement of the Director May create a danger to the health and well-being of the water. 
2.  "Plumbing Hazard" means a plumbing type Cross-Connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by an Approved Air-Gap or Approved Backflow prevention assembly. 
3.  "Pollution Hazard" means an actual or potential threat to the physical Properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system, but which would constitute a Nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
4.  "System Hazard" means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical Properties of the public potable water system or of a Pollution or contamination which would have a protracted affect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
M.  "Industrial Fluids System" means any system containing a fluid or solution which May be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, Pollutional or Plumbing Hazard if introduced into an Approved water supply. This includes contaminated waters; all types of process waters and "Used Waters" originating from the public potable water system which May have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalines, circulating cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, etc.; oils, Gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and Gaseous fluids Used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes. 
N.  "Pollution" means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the Usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic Use. 
O.  Water Potable. "Potable Water" means any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption. 
P.  Water, Nonpotable. "Nonpotable Water" means water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability. 
Q.  Water, Service Connection. "Service Connection Water" means the Terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system; i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection Shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or any Backflow prevention assembly located at the point of delivery to the customer's water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or Emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
R.  Water, Used. "Used Water" mean any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. 
(Ord. 0-16-90 § 2, 1990)  
13.10.050 - Water system requirements. 
The water system Shall be considered as made up of two Parts: the Utility system and the customer system. 
A.  The Utility system Shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system; and Shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the Utility, up to the point where the customer's system begins. The source Shall include all Components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system. The distribution system Shall include the network of conduits Used for delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. 
B.  The customer's system Shall include those Parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the Utility distribution system which are utilized in conveying Utility delivered domestic water to points of Use. 
(Ord. 0-16-90 § 3.1, 1990)  
13.10.060 - Policy. 
A.  No water service connection to any Premises Shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by State Laws and regulations and this chapter. Service of water to any Premises Shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a Backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a Backflow prevention assembly has been removed, by-passed, or if an unprotected Cross-Connection exists on the Premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
B.  The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized Representatives of the Director to determine whether Cross-Connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including Violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the Director Shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the Premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with the State and City Statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
C.  An Approved Backflow prevention assembly Shall also be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the Property line or immediately inside the Building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the Following conditions exist: 
1.  In case of Premises having an Auxiliary Water Supply which is not or May not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the Director, the public water system Shall be protected against Backflow from the Premises by installing an Approved Backflow prevention assembly in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. 
2.  In the case of Premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system Shall be protected against Backflow from the Premises by installing an Approved Backflow prevention assembly in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This Shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the Utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
3.  In the case of Premises having (1) internal Cross-Connection that cannot be permanently corrected or controlled, or (2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the Premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous Cross-Connections exist, the public water system Shall be protected against Backflow from the Premises by installing an Approved Backflow prevention assembly in the service line. 
D.  The type of protective assembly required under the regulations Shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
1.  In the case of any Premises where there is an Auxiliary Water Supply as stated in this section and it is not subject to any of the Following rules, the public water system Shall be protected by an Approved Air-Gap separation or an Approved reduced pressure principle Backflow prevention assembly. 
2.  In the case of any Premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not Hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system Shall be protected by an Approved double check valve assembly. 
3.  In the case of any Premises where there is any Material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system Shall be protected by an Approved Air-Gap separation or an Approved reduced pressure principle Backflow prevention assembly. Examples of Premises where these conditions will exist include Sewage treatment plants, Sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, Hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
4.  In the case of any Premises where there are "uncontrolled" Cross-Connections, either actual or potential, the public water system Shall be protected by an Approved Air-Gap separation or an Approved reduced pressure principle Backflow prevention assembly at the service connection. 
5.  In the case of any Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant Cross-Connection Survey, the public water system Shall be protected against Backflow from the Premises by either an Approved Air-Gap separation or an Approved reduced pressure principle Backflow prevention assembly on each service to the Premises. 
E.  Any Backflow prevention assembly required herein Shall be a model and size Approved by the Director or his authorized Representative. The term "Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly" Shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled: "AWWA C506-84 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices" and have met completely the laboratory and Field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California established by: "Specifications for Backflow Prevention Assemblies, Section 10 of the most current issue of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control." Said AWWA and FCCC&HR standards and specifications have been adopted by the City. Final Approval Shall be evidenced by a "certificate of Approval" issued by an Approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with the said AWWA standards and FCCC&HR specifications. 
F.  The Following testing laboratory has been qualified by the Director to test and certify Backflow Preventers: 
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control 
and Hydraulic Research 
University of Southern California 
University Park 
Los Angeles, CA 90089 
Testing laboratories other than the laboratory listed above will be added to an Approved list as they are qualified by the Director. 
G.  Backflow Preventers which May be subjected to Backpressure or Backsiphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a "certificate of Approval" by said qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory's current list of "Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies" May be Used without further test or qualification. 
H.  It Shall be the duty of the customer-User at any Premises where Backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made upon installation and at least once per Year as notified by the Department of Public Works. In those instances where the Director deems the hazard to be great enough he May require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests Shall be at the expense of the water User and Shall be performed by the assembly manufacturer's Representative, or a certified tester Approved by the Director. It Shall be the duty of the Director to see that these tests are made in a timely manner. The customer-User Shall notify the Director in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that an official Representative May witness the tests if so desired. These assemblies Shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer-User whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul Shall be kept and made available to the Director. 
I.  All presently installed Backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this section, but were Approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, Shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under this chapter be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the Director is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the Utility system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the Director finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit Shall be replaced by an Approved Backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 0-16-90 § 3.2, 1990)  
Chapter 13.12 - CESSPOOL WASTES 
Sections: 
 
13.12.010 - Removing or depositing into municipal Sewage system—Restrictions. 
No Person, firm or corporation other than as mentioned in this chapter Shall directly, or indirectly pump or remove Sewage from a cesspool, septic tank, leaching pit or any other private Sewage disposal system, nor Shall any Person, firm or corporation other than is mentioned in this chapter directly, or indirectly deposit, place, or dump any Sewage or waste Material or Materials of any kind into the municipal Sewage system, including the Sewage treatment plant of the City, save and excepting through legally connected sewer connections to the system, authorized and Approved by the City. 
(Ord. 971 § 1, 1957)  
13.12.020 - Removing or depositing into municipal Sewage system—Permit—Required—Issuance—Fee. 
Any Person, firm or corporation desiring to pump or remove Sewage from a cesspool, septic tank or leaching pit or from any other private Sewage disposal system and/or to deposit, place or dump any Sewage or waste Material, or Material of any kind into the municipal Sewage system or any Part thereof, other than as mentioned in Section 13.12.010 Shall apply to the plumbing inspector for Permit to do so, and if in the opinion of the plumbing inspector, the pumping or removal of Sewage from a private disposal system and the depositing, placing or dumping thereof into the Sewage system of the City would be injurious, or likely to prove injurious, or not in the best interests to the efficient operation of the system in any manner whatsoever, the request for a Permit Shall be denied. If the plumbing inspector Shall be of the opinion that the pumping or removal of Sewage from the private Sewage disposal system is in the interest of the health and safety of the public, or that the depositing, placing or dumping thereof will not be injurious in any manner whatsoever or not effect the efficient operation thereof, the plumbing inspector Shall issue a Permit for the same upon payment of a Fee therefor in an amount as set forth in a Resolution of the City Council in reference thereto, and the Fee Shall be based upon the quality and quantity of the Material to be pumped or removed from the private disposal system and/or to be deposited, placed or dumped into the Sewage system of the City and any special circumstances that might be encountered in connection therewith. 
(Ord. 971 § 2, 1957)  
13.12.030 - Removing or depositing into municipal Sewage system—Permit—Application. 
Any Person, firm or corporation desiring a Permit for the pumping or removal of Sewage from a private Sewage disposal system and/or for the depositing, placing or dumping thereof in the sewer system of the City Shall file Application with the plumbing inspector giving the location of the private Sewage disposal system in which Sewage is to be removed and setting forth the quantity thereof. 
(Ord. 971 § 3, 1957)  
13.12.040 - Rules and regulations adoption. 
The City Council Shall, from time to time, adopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary in order that the appropriate Employees and officials of the City May properly administer and carry on the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 971 § 4, 1957)  
13.12.050 - Exemption from chapter provisions. 
This chapter Shall not apply to officials and Employees of the City in maintaining and operating the sewer system of the City. 
(Ord. 971 § 5, 1957)  
13.12.060 - Penalty for Violation. 
Any Person, firm or corporation violating this chapter or any provision or rule thereof, except as otherwise herein provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, Shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding six Months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each Day that a Violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. 971 § 8, 1957)  
Chapter 13.16 - SEWER SERVICE CHARGES 
Sections: 
 
13.16.010 - Definitions. 
"Apartment" means a Building or portion thereof containing three or more Dwelling Units. 
"City" as Used herein means the City of Colton. 
"Commercial and/or Industrial User" means any User not defined as a Residential User. 
"Duplex" means a Building containing two Dwelling Units. 
"Dwelling Group" means two or more Buildings on any one Lot, containing three or more Dwelling Units. 
"Dwelling Unit" means a suite of one or more rooms which is occupied by or intended to be occupied by one Family doing its own cooking. 
"Lot" means a Parcel of land consisting of one or more contiguous Lots of record in one ownership. 
"Outside User" means any Person responsible for payment of sewer service Fees for Premises served outside the City limits. 
"Premises" means any Lot, piece or Parcel of land, any Building or other Structure or any Part of any Building or Structure Used or Useful for human habitation or gathering or carrying on any Business or occupation. 
"Residential User" means any User whose Premises are Used solely for residential purposes as defined herein. 
"Sewerage System" means those pipelines and appurtenances constructed, maintained and operated by the City primarily for the collection of Sewage and the conveyance thereof to the Sewage plant owned and operated by the City. 
"User" means any Person responsible for payment of sewer service Fees for Premises served as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 930 § 1, 1956)  
13.16.020 - Applicability. 
Every Person whose Premises in the City are served by a connection with the Sewerage System of the City, whereby the Sewage or industrial wastes, or either or both, are disposed of by the City, either through the facilities of the Sewage treatment and Sewage disposal works owned by the City, or otherwise, Shall pay a sewer Rental charge as based in Sections 13.16.030 through 13.16.110. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 1956)  
13.16.025 - Wastewater sewer service charges. 
Wastewater sewer service charges Shall be as set forth in Exhibit A, Attached to the Ordinance codified in this chapter and on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 0-09-03 § 1, 2003: Ord. 0-14-98 § 1, 1998: Ord. 0-11-98 § 1, 1998: Ord. 0-13-96 § 1, 1996; Ord. 0-7-89 (part), 1989: Ord. 1592 §§ 1, 2, 3, 1980; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 3, 7-1-14)  
13.16.030 - Wastewater capacity charges and Discharge Permit Fees. 
Wastewater capacity charges and Wastewater Discharge Permit Fees Shall be as set forth in Exhibit B, Attached to the Ordinance codified in this chapter and on file in the office of the City Clerk. Notwithstanding the provisions of such Exhibit B, however, with regard to all residential units in existence as of July 1, 1997, where an individual Single Family residential Property Owner or a majority of the Residents in a Multifamily Residential Development qualify as low and very-low income families as determined in accord with the standards set forth in the California Health and Safety Code Sections 33000 et seq., and where a Connection Order has been issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, the residential charges and Fees Shall be subject to reduction to the extent deemed appropriate by Application to and Approval of the City Council after review and upon the recommendation of the Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. 0-10-97 § 1, 1997: Ord. 0-13-96 § 2, 1996; Ord. 0-7-89 (part), 1989: Ord. 930 § 2(a), 1956)  
13.16.035 - Wastewater capacity charges—Use generally. 
The Wastewater revenues Shall be solely Used to pay for the public secondary and tertiary Wastewater facilities (operations and maintenance, expansions and upgrades). 
(Ord. 0-13-96 § 3 (part), 1996: Ord. 0-7-89 (part), 1989: Ord. 930 § 2(b), 1956)  
13.16.040 - Wastewater capacity charges—Administration and Use. 
On or about March of each Year, the Water and Wastewater Director Shall determine the portion of Wastewater service charges and capacity charges which have been paid, to determine if there is a reasonable relationship between said charges and said purposes. The estimated cost for needed public secondary and tertiary Wastewater facilities' operations and maintenance, expansions and upgrades Shall be updated annually. 
(Ord. 0-13-96 § 3 (part), 1996: Ord. 0-7-89 (part), 1989: Ord. 930 § 2(c), 1956)  
13.16.045 - Wastewater capacity charges—Annual report by Public Works Department. 
Each Year the Water and Wastewater Director Shall report the findings to the City Council, and if deemed appropriate, recommend any adjustments or other action, as May be needed, to the Wastewater service charges and capacity charges. 
(Ord. 0-13-96 § 3 (part), 1996: Ord. 0-7-89 (part), 1989: Ord. 930 § 2(d), 1956)  
13.16.110 - Special situations—Determination of charges. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, herein stated, the Council Shall have the power to establish, by agreement or Resolution, the rate or rates to be charged for furnishing sewer services to governmental agencies and to any other Person, firm or corporation either within or without the municipal limits of the City when the circumstances and conditions relating to the Use of said services are of an unusual, unique, abnormal or special situation or character upon such terms and rates as the City Council in its sole opinion deems reasonable. 
(Ord. 930 § 2(i), 1956)  
13.16.120 - Collection—City Collector's duties—Billing—Deposit. 
A.  It Shall be the duty of the City Collector to collect all charges herein Approved for. 
B.  The charges herein fixed for any Premises Shall be collected with the charges and rates for water and disposal service furnished by the City to the Premises. The charges herein fixed Shall be billed upon the same bill as is prepared for charges for water and disposal service, and Shall be billed monthly at the same time that such charges for water and disposal services are due and payable. The amount due for all such services May be set forth on one statement or separately on the same bill, at the discretion of the City Collector. 
C.  The City Council Shall, by Resolution, when it deems the same necessary, provide for the payment in advance of a reasonable deposit with the City Collector to insure collection of any charge herein fixed. 
(Ord. 930 § 3, 1956)  
13.16.130 - Persons responsible for payment—Assumption of liability. 
The Owner of Record of any Premises using the services provided herein Shall be primarily responsible for the payment of such services and the acceptance thereof Shall be deemed consent to pay for same as provided herein; provided, however, the Tenant or any other Person, firm or corporation May assume liability therefor by requesting the service and signing the Application therefor or by using the service for their own Use and benefit and by the requesting and/or Use of such services, it Shall be deemed that the Party or parties by said Acts agree to be also primarily liable for such charges jointly and severally with the record Owner of the Premises and the City Shall collect the same from either or both the record Owner and the other parties as the City deems most convenient. 
(Ord. 930 § 4, 1956)  
13.16.140 - Excessive Biochemical Oxygen Demand—Service rate adoption authority. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the City Council Shall have the power to adopt by Resolution rates for services referred to herein in excess of those provided herein and to make such other terms and conditions as it May deem advisable for the proper Use of the Sewerage System in the case of any Person, firm or corporation using such services that produces Sewage which has a five-Day Biochemical Oxygen Demand in excess of six hundred Parts per million by weight and said rates May be graduated and such terms and conditions May vary amongst such Users depending upon the increase of such Biochemical Oxygen Demand. 
(Ord. 930 § 5(a), 1956)  
13.16.150 - Excessive Biochemical Oxygen Demand—Depositing in sewer—Permit—Required. 
No Person, firm or corporation Shall deposit Sewage in the Sewerage System that produces a five-Day Biochemical Oxygen Demand in excess of six hundred Parts per million by weight without obtaining a Permit allowing such deposit from the City Engineer or his Designee. 
(Ord. 0-16-05 § 4, 2005: Ord. 930 § 5(b), 1956)  
13.16.160 - Excessive Biochemical Oxygen Demand—Permit—Application contents. 
Application for a Permit to Discharge such wastes into the Sewerage System Shall be in writing and Shall contain the Following information: 
A.  Name and address of Applicant; 
B.  Proposed location of connection; 
C.  Estimated gallonage of wastes proposed to be Discharged, estimated time of Discharge, time of peak loads, and other similar data; 
D.  Character of waste proposed to be Discharged; 
E.  Other information as May be deemed necessary by the City Engineer or his Designee. 
(Ord. 0-16-05 § 5, 2005; Ord. 930 § 5(c), 1956)  
13.16.170 - Excessive Biochemical Oxygen Demand—Permit—Issuance. 
Upon receipt of an Application as provided, the City Engineer or his Designee Shall promptly make such investigation as he Shall deem necessary. In the event that the City Engineer finds and determines: 
A.  That the sanitary waste pipeline in which the connection is to Discharge has sufficient unused carrying capacity for the disposition of these wastes; 
B.  That the character of the wastes proposed to be Discharged by the Applicant is such that they can successfully be treated in the Sewage facilities of the City; 
C.  That such wastes will not result in damage to the Sewage treatment facilities or Sewerage System, then the City Engineer or his Designee Shall issue a Permit to the Applicant as requested. 
(Ord. 0-16-05 § 6, 2005: Ord. 930 § 5(d), 1956)  
13.16.180 - Excessive Biochemical Oxygen Demand—Permit—Partial granting—Conditions. 
The City Engineer or his Designee, at his discretion, and toward the end of fulfilling the intent and purposes of Sections 13.16.140 through 13.16.190, May grant a Permit in Part only and May thereupon prescribe conditions with respect to Discharge of such waste into such systems and May require treatment thereof, the maintenance of individual screens to collect waste products and/or May require the construction and Use of tanks designed to equalize flow and reduce peak load. 
(Ord. 0-16-05 § 7, 2005: Ord. 930 § 5(e), 1956)  
13.16.190 - Excessive Biochemical Oxygen Demand—Permit—Revocation—Report and test. 
A.  In the event that after the granting of a Permit, as provided for in Sections 13.16.140 through 13.16.180, it Shall develop, by reason of increased flow, change of character of Discharge or for any cause whatsoever that it becomes necessary or desirable to change the conditions prescribed at the time of issuing the Permit, then the City Engineer or his Designee May revoke the Permit, or May impose further conditions with respect thereto, toward the end of remedying such conditions. 
B.  The Applicant Shall upon demand supply to the City at the cost of the Applicant a report and test satisfactory to the City determining the five-Day Biochemical Oxygen Demand that the Applicant's Sewage produces upon such terms and conditions and at such times as the official deems reasonable. 
(Ord. 0-16-05 § 8, 2005; Ord. 930 § 5(f), 1956)  
13.16.200 - Nonpayment—Service cut off—Reinstatement charge—Waiver. 
In the event that any Person fails to pay any charge herein provided when the same becomes due, the City may, in addition to any other remedies it has, cut off any of the services and facilities referred to in this chapter, including the service of water, and Shall not resume the same until all delinquent charges together with any charges necessitated by resumption of such services and facilities have been fully paid. Failure to receive a bill for the sewer service does not relieve the consumer of the liability. When sewerage service has been discontinued for failure of payment of a sewerage service bill, the consumer Shall pay a service charge of five dollars or such other sums as the City Council by Resolution Shall determine; provided, however, the reinstatement charge May be waived by the City when it has been shown, to the satisfaction of said official, that the Person, firm or corporation requesting the reinstated service was not liable for such delinquent charges and the record Owner had no Notice or opportunity to pay same before the service was disconnected. 
(Ord. 930 § 6(a), 1956)  
13.16.210 - Nonpayment—Liable to City action. 
Any amount due for sewerage Rental under this chapter is deemed a debt to the City, and any Person, firm or corporation failing, neglecting or refusing to pay the indebtedness Shall be liable to an action in the name of the City in any Court of competent jurisdiction for the amount thereof including Court costs and Attorney Fees incurred by the City in collecting the same. 
(Ord. 930 § 6(b), 1956)  
13.16.220 - Effective date. 
The effective date of this chapter is the first Day of February, 1957, on which date the charges for the services mentioned herein Shall commence. 
(Ord. 930 § 7, 1956)  
13.16.230 - Sewer service account established—Use of moneys. 
All funds and moneys received from the collection of sewer service charges as herein established Shall be deposited with the City Treasurer and placed in the General Fund of the City. The accounting office Shall maintain a separate account in the General Fund known as the sewer service account. All funds and moneys received from the collection of sewer service charges as herein established Shall be credited to this account. The money of such account Shall be Used only for the acquisition, management, operation, maintenance, and reconstruction of sanitary or sewerage facilities; and to repay principal and interest on bonds heretofore or hereafter issued for the construction or reconstruction of such Sewage facilities; provided however, that such revenue Shall not be Used for the acquisition or construction of new Local Street sewers or laterals as distinguished from main, trunk, interceptor and outfall sewers. 
(Ord. 930 § 8(a), 1956)  
13.16.240 - Rules and regulations adoption. 
The City Council May by Resolution hereafter amend or change, from time to time as circumstances and conditions May warrant, any and all rates, charges and payments of every nature set forth in Sections 13.16.020 through 13.16.230, and the City Council May hereafter adopt such rules and regulations as it deems advisable for the proper administration of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 930 § 8(b), 1956)  
Chapter 13.20 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY INSTALLATIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.20.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are Used, they Shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the Following definitions: 
A.  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the State. 
B.  "Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and Employees. 
C.  "Poles, Overhead Wires and Associated Overhead Structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, Attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a District and Used or Useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
D.  "Underground Utility District" or "District" means that area in the City within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead Structures are prohibited as such area is described in a Resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.20.030 of this chapter. 
E.  "Utility" includes all Persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical Materials or devices. 
(Ord. 1325 § 1, 1968)  
13.20.020 - Determination of necessity—Hearing—Notice. 
The Council May from time to time call Public Hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of Poles, Overhead Wires and Associated Overhead Structures within Designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The City Clerk Shall notify all affected Property Owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten Days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing Shall be open to the public and May be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all Persons interested Shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The Decision of the Council Shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 1325 § 2, 1968)  
13.20.030 - Districts Designated by Council Resolution. 
If, after any such Public Hearing the Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a Designated area, the Council Shall, by Resolution, declare such Designated area an Underground Utility District and order such removal and underground installation. Such Resolution Shall include a description of the area comprising such District and Shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation Shall be accomplished and within affected Property Owners Must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time Shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, Materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as May be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 1325 § 3, 1968)  
13.20.040 - Maintenance of overhead facilities—Unlawful Acts. 
Whenever the Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders the removal of Poles, Overhead Wires and Associated Overhead Structures therein as provided in Section 13.20.030 hereof, it is unlawful for any Person or Utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate Poles, Overhead Wires and Associated Overhead Structures in the District after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such Resolution, except as the overhead facilities May be required to furnish service to an Owner or Occupant of Property prior to the performance by such Owner or Occupant of the underground work necessary for such Owner or Occupant to continue to receive Utility service as provided in Sections 13.20.090 through 13.20.150 hereof, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1325 § 4, 1968)  
13.20.050 - Maintenance of overhead facilities—Exceptions—Emergency or unusual circumstances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities May be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten Days, without authority of the Council in order to provide Emergency Service. The Council May grant special Permission, on such terms as the Council May deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any Person or Utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, Use or operate Poles, Overhead Wires and Associated Overhead Structures. 
(Ord. 1325 § 5, 1968)  
13.20.060 - Maintenance of overhead facilities—Exceptions—Additional Designated. 
In any Resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030 hereof, the City May authorize any or all of the Following exceptions: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer; 
B.  Poles, or electroliers Used exclusively for Street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting Structures) crossing any portion of a District within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to Buildings on the perimeter of a District, when such wires originate in an area from which Poles, Overhead Wires and Associated Overhead Structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, Overhead Wires and Associated Overhead Structures Used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts; 
E.  Overhead wires Attached to the exterior surface of a Building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the Building to another location on the same Building or to an adjacent Building without crossing any Public Street; 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting Structures, Used by a Utility for furnishing Communication Services; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted Terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated-overhead Structures Used or to be Used in conjunction with construction Projects. 
(Ord. 1325 § 6, 1968)  
13.20.070 - Notice to affected Property Owners and Utility companies. 
Within ten Days after the effective date of a Resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030 hereof, the City Clerk Shall notify all affected utilities and all Persons owning Real Property within the District created by the Resolution of the adoption thereof. The City Clerk Shall further notify such affected Property Owners of the necessity that, if they or any Person occupying such Property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such Occupant Shall provide all necessary Facility changes on their Premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying Utility or utilities at a new location. 
Notification by the City Clerk Shall be made by mailing a Copy of the Resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030, together with a Copy of this chapter, to affected Property Owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 1325 § 7, 1968)  
13.20.080 - Utility company's responsibility. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide Utility service within a District created by any Resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030, the supplying Utility Shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. 
(Ord. 1325 § 8, 1968)  
13.20.090 - Property Owner's responsibility—Notice to install. 
Every Person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or Renting a Building or Structure within a District Shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his Property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.20.080 and the termination Facility on or within the Building or Structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any Person within the time provided for in the Resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.20.030, the City Engineer Shall give Notice in writing to the Person in possession of such Premises, and a Notice in writing to the Owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten Days after receipt of such Notice. 
(Ord. 1325 § 9(a), 1968)  
13.20.100 - Notice to install—Mailing procedure. 
The Notice to provide the required underground facilities May be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such Persons, the Notice Must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the Person in possession of such Premises at such Premises, and the Notice Must be addressed to the Owner thereof as such Owner's name appears, and Must be addressed to such Owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Colton. If Notice is given by mail, such Notice Shall be deemed to have been received by the Person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If Notice is given by mail to either the Owner or Occupant of such Premises, the City Engineer Shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a Copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the Premises. 
(Ord. 1325 § 9(b), 1968)  
13.20.110 - Notice to install—Contents. 
The Notice given by the City Engineer to provide the required underground facilities Shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and Shall state that if the work is not completed within thirty Days after receipt of such Notice, the City Engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the Property benefited and become a lien upon such Property. 
(Ord. 1325 § 9(c), 1968)  
13.20.120 - Work done by City—Unoccupied Premises—City Engineer's authority—Assessment costs—Hearing. 
If upon the expiration of the thirty-Day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the City Engineer Shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such Premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the City Engineer Shall in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying Utility service to the Property. Upon completion of the work by the City Engineer, he Shall file a Written report with the City Council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the Property against which such cost is to be assessed. The Council Shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such Premises, which time Shall not be less than ten Days thereafter. 
(Ord. 1325 § 9(d), 1968)  
13.20.130 - Assessment—Hearing—Notice—Contents. 
The City Engineer Shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a Notice in writing to the Person in possession of such Premises, and a Notice in writing thereof to the Owner thereof, in the manner provided for the giving of the Notice as set out in Sections 13.20.070 through 13.20.110 to provide the underground facilities, of the time and place that the Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such Notice Shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
(Ord. 1325 § 9(e), 1968)  
13.20.140 - Assessment—Hearing—Determination. 
Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council Shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
(Ord. 1325 § 9(f), 1968)  
13.20.150 - Assessment—Nonpayment—Lien. 
If any assessment is not paid within five Days after its confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment Shall become a lien upon the Property against which the assessment is made by the City Engineer, and the Engineer is directed to turn over to the Assessor and Tax Collector a Notice of lien on each of the Properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the Assessor and Tax Collector Shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the Premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment Shall be due and payable at the same time as the Property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, Shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per Year. 
(Ord. 1325 § 9(g), 1968)  
13.20.160 - City's responsibility. 
The City Shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the Owner or User of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the Resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.20.030 hereof. 
(Ord. 1325 § 10, 1968)  
13.20.170 - Time extension. 
In the event that any Act required by this chapter or by a Resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030 hereof, cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of Materials, war, restraint by public authorities, Strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such Act will be accomplished Shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 1325 § 11, 1968)  
13.20.180 - Penalty for Violations. 
It is unlawful for any Person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any Person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof Shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding six Months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such Person is guilty of a separate offense for each Day during any portion of which any Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or Permitted by such Person, and Shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1325 § 12, 1968)  
Chapter 13.24 - TELEPHONIC DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
13.24.010 - Automatic dialing into City line prohibited. 
No Person Shall install, Use or cause to be Used any telephonic device which is activated electronically to automatically dial a public telephone line of the City. 
(Ord. 1396 § 1, 1971)  
13.24.020 - Live answering service. 
Any automatic telephonic dialing system Shall dial to, and the message Shall be received by, a live answering service, such as a private alarm dispatch center. In no event Shall any automatic direct dialing be Permitted into a public telephone line to the City. 
(Ord. 1396 § 2, 1971)  
13.24.030 - Installation—License required. 
All Persons engaged in Business of this nature Must first obtain a Business License from the City Manager as provided in Section 103A of Ordinance No. 412. 
(Ord. 1408 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1972; Ord. 1396 § 3(1), 1971)  
13.24.040 - Installation—Permit—Required—Request review. 
No Person Shall install, Use or cause to be Used any telephone device which is activated electronically to automatically dial a telephone within the City without first obtaining a Permit from the Chief of Police or Fire Chief to install and Use such telephonic device. The Chief of Police Shall review all requests for telephonic burglar alarms, and the Fire Chief Shall review all requests for telephonic fire alarms. 
(Ord. 1396 § 3(2), 1971)  
13.24.050 - Installation—Permit—Issuance conditions. 
Before a Permit May be issued, the Following requirements Shall first be complied with: 
A.  The current Subscriber of the telephone which contains an automatic device, the telephone number and the location of such telephone Shall be on file at the Police Department of the City. 
B.  The current Subscriber of the telephone which receives codes from an automatic telephone dialing system, the telephone number, and the location of such telephone Shall be on file at the Police Department and Fire Department of the City. 
(Ord. 1396 § 3(3), 1971)  
Chapter 13.28 - WATER CONSERVATION PLAN 
 
13.28.010 - Intent. 
Pursuant to Article X, section 2 of the California Constitution, the City Council declares that the waters of the State are to be put to maximum beneficial use, that the waste or unreasonable use, or unreasonable method of use of water be prevented, and that the conservation of such water must occur to protect the people and property of the State. This chapter establishes the City of Colton Water Conservation Plan. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.28.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt a water conservation plan that establishes water conservation measures that conserve City water supplies for the greatest public benefit and reduce the quantity of water used by the City's water customers. The Water Conservation Plan is hereby established to extend and preserve the available water resources required for the basic needs of human consumption, sanitation and fire protection. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.28.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter 13.28, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
"City" means the City of Colton. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the city or his authorized designee. 
"Customer" means a person who, according to the city's records, receives water service to a parcel of property. 
"Department" means the City's Water/Wastewater Department. 
"Director" means the Director of the City Water/Wastewater Department or his authorized designee. 
"Enforcement Officer" means any individual employed or otherwise charged by the City to inspect or enforce codes, ordinances, mandates, regulations, resolutions, rules or other laws adopted by the City Council or other regulatory bodies. 
"Notice of Violation" means a notice provided by the City to any person who as violated any provisions of this Chapter 13.28. 
"Person" means any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, public or private association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, public or private agency, government agency or institution, school district, college, university, any other user of water provided by the City, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them or any other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties. 
"Water Conservation Plan" means the water conservation plan established pursuant to this chapter. 
"Water shortage emergency" means a condition existing within the city in which the ordinary water demands and requirements of persons within the city cannot be satisfied without depleting the water supply of the city to the extent that there would be insufficient water for human consumption, sanitation, and fire protection. A water shortage emergency includes both an immediate emergency, in which the city is unable to meet current water needs of persons within the city, as well as a threatened water shortage, in which the city determines that its supply cannot meet an increased future demand. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.28.040 - Application. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, customers, and property served water by the City, and shall also apply to all property and facilities owned, maintained, operated, or otherwise under the jurisdiction of the City. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.28.050 - General prohibition. 
No water user shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water supplied by the City for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental or any other use in the manner contrary to this chapter. Waste or the unreasonable or non-beneficial use of water is prohibited in the City. Service may be terminated to any customer who knowingly and willfully violates any provision of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.28.060 - Stage criteria. 
The Director shall recommend guidelines for adoption by the City Council setting forth the criteria to determine when water supply conditions in the City require the implementation or termination of each water conservation stage. Such guidelines shall be updated when the Director determines availability of water so requires. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.28.070 - Determination of water conservation stages. 
A.  The Department shall monitor the projected supply and demand for water by its customers on a daily basis during the months of June, July, August, September, and October and shall recommend to the City Manager the extent of conservation required through the implementation and/or termination of particular conservation stages to allow the Department to prudently plan for and supply water to its customers. Thereafter, the City Manager may recommend to the City Council the implementation or termination of the appropriate stage of water conservation in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The City Council may implement or terminate the appropriate conservation stage pursuant to Section 13.28.070 of this chapter. Notice of the implementation of successive stages of water conservation shall be given to water users immediately both by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within ten days after adoption, and by notice enclosed with the next regular city invoice for water utility service or delivered by U.S. Mail. 
C.  If the City Council cannot meet in time to act to protect the public interest pursuant to this chapter, the City Manager or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to implement such provisions of this chapter upon his or her written determination that the City cannot supply adequate water to meet the ordinary demands of water consumers, and that such implementation is necessary to protect the public health or safety. Such written determination shall be presented to the City Council at its next meeting for review, revocation, or ratification. Such meeting shall be held as soon as possible. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.28.080 - Water conservation stages and implementation. 
A.  Stage I, Normal Conditions. Water Conservation Stage I applies during periods when the City is able to meet all of the water demands of its customers. Water Conservation Stage I is in effect at all times unless the City Council otherwise declares that another water conservation stage is in effect pursuant to this chapter. The following water conservation measures apply during Stage I: 
1.  The following water uses are recommended: 
a.  Water conservation should be practiced within homes and business at all times. 
b.  Sprinklers and irrigation systems should be adjusted to avoid overspray, runoff in excess of five minutes, or other waste. 
c.  Use of potable water for irrigating or watering turf, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants utilizing individual sprinkler systems should only be done between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. (agricultural accounts are excluded from the time of irrigation restrictions). Drip irrigation and hand watering with a handheld hose or faucet filled bucket are exempt from this recommendation. 
d.  All restaurants are requested not to serve water to their customers unless specifically requested by the customer. 
2.  The following uses of water are hereafter considered non-essential to the public health, safety and welfare, constitute the waste of water, and are hereby prohibited at all times: 
a.  Use of potable water to clean sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, patios, porches, verandas, tennis courts, or other paved, concrete, or other hard surface areas, except where necessary for the benefit of public health or safety. 
b.  Use of potable water to clean, fill, or maintain decorative fountains, lakes, or ponds, unless such water is recycled. 
c.  Permitting potable water to escape from leaks within the customer's plumbing system. All water leaks from a customer's plumbing system shall be repaired in a timely manner. 
d.  Washing of automobiles, boats, trailers, aircraft, or other vehicles by hose without a shutoff nozzle and bucket, except to wash such vehicles at commercial or fleet vehicle washing facilities. Provided, however, such washings are exempt from these regulations when health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food or perishables. 
B.  Stage II, Water Alert. Stage II applies during periods when the City will not be able to meet all of the water demands of its customers. The following mandatory conservation measures shall apply during Stage II: 
1.  All measures listed under Stage I, Subsection 13.28.080A. 
The use of potable water for irrigating or watering turf, groundcover, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants utilizing individual sprinkler systems shall only be permitted between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Agricultural accounts are excluded from the time of irrigation restrictions. Drip irrigation and hand watering with a handheld hose with a positive shutoff nozzle or faucet filled bucket are exempt from these restrictions. 
2.  No restaurant, hotel, cafe, cafeteria or other public place where food is sold, served, or offered for sale, shall serve drinking water to any customer unless expressly requested. 
3.  Washing of automobiles, boats, trailers, aircraft, and other types of mobile equipment shall be prohibited unless done with a hand-held bucket or hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. This section does not apply to the washing of the above-listed vehicles or mobile equipment when conducted at a commercial car wash utilizing a recycling system. Provided, however, such washings are exempt from these regulations when the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food or perishables. 
4.  Golf course customers and commercial nursery customers shall curtail all non-essential water use and shall irrigate or water turf, groundcover, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., where possible. These customers shall reduce their potable water consumption by fifteen percent of their prior year's consumption for the comparable billing period. 
5.  Outdoor irrigation and watering of turf, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants utilizing individual sprinkler systems in parks, schools, publicly-owned property, and the public rights-of-way shall be permitted only between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. These customers shall reduce their potable water consumption by fifteen percent of their prior year's consumption for the comparable billing period. 
6.  The use of potable water for compaction, dust control, and other types of construction shall be allowed only pursuant to a permit issued by the Department. Use of potable water for such purposes shall be limited to the conditions of the permit or may be prohibited as determined by the Director or his designee. 
C.  Stage III, Water Warning. Stage III applies during periods when the City will not be able to meet all of the water demands of its customers. The following mandatory Conservation measures Shall apply during Stage III: 
1.  All measures listed under Stage I (Section 13.28.080A) and Stage II (Section 13.28.080B). 
2.  Washing of automobiles, boats, trailers, aircraft, and other types of mobile equipment is prohibited. Washing of the above-listed vehicles or mobile equipment Shall only be allowed at a commercial car wash utilizing recycling systems. Provided, however, such washings are exempt from these regulations when the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food or perishables. 
3.  New water service connections May be permitted, but the use of potable water for any new service connection before occupancy of any premises Shall be permitted only for essential construction and testing of landscape irrigation systems. The installation of new landscaping for any new development and/or project must be approved by the Department. 
4.  Outdoor irrigation or watering of turf, groundcover, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants by commercial nursery customers Shall be permitted only on even numbered days between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m., and only with a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle or with drip irrigation. Commercial nursery customers Shall reduce their potable water consumption by twenty-five percent of the customer's prior year's consumption for the comparable billing period. 
5.  Outdoor irrigation or watering of turf, groundcover, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants by all golf course customers Shall be permitted only on odd numbered days, between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m., unless the applicable irrigation system is equipped with an electronic moisture sensor control system, a weather based irrigation controller and/or drip irrigation system. Irrigation Shall be allowed to run for no more than fifteen minutes per station per occurrence. Golf course customers Shall reduce their potable water consumption by twenty-five percent of their prior year's comparable billing period. 
6.  Outdoor irrigation or watering of turf, groundcover, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants at schools Shall be permitted only on odd numbered days, between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m., unless the applicable irrigation system is equipped with an electronic moisture sensor control system, a weather based irrigation controller and/or drip irrigation system. Irrigation Shall be allowed to run for no more than fifteen minutes per station per occurrence. Water consumption at all school property Shall be reduced by twenty-five percent of the customer's prior year's comparable billing period. 
7.  Outdoor irrigation or watering of turf, groundcover, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants at all publicly-owned property Shall be permitted only on even numbered days, between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m., unless the applicable irrigation system is equipped with an electronic moisture sensor control system, a weather based irrigation controller and/or drip irrigation system. Irrigation Shall be allowed to run for no more than fifteen minutes per station per occurrence. Water consumption at all publicly-owned property Shall be reduced by twenty-five percent of the customer's prior year's comparable billing period unless they are using reclaimed water. 
8.  Outdoor irrigation or watering of turf, groundcover, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants for all other customers Shall only be permitted as follows: 
i.  Customers with addresses ending in an even number Shall be permitted to irrigate or water on Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays only, customers with addresses ending in an odd number Shall water on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays only. Such restrictions Shall not apply to any customer whose property is equipped with an electronic moisture sensor control system, a weather based irrigation controller and/or drip irrigation system. 
ii.  All watering Shall be permitted only between the hours of eight p.m. and six a.m. 
iii.  Irrigation Shall be allowed to run for no more than ten minutes per station per occurrence. 
9.  The application of potable water, by any customer type, to outdoor landscapes during and within forty-eight hours after measurable rainfall is prohibited, unless the property is equipped with an electronic moisture sensor control system and/or a weather based irrigation controller. 
10.  Water being used during repair or maintenance of a customer's watering system Shall be exempt from this section. 
11.  Swimming pools, ornamental pools, fountain and artificial lakes Shall not be filled or refilled after being drained, unless prior approval is obtained from the Department. 
12.  Water used for compaction, dust control, and other types of construction Shall only be authorized by a permit issued by the Department and Shall be limited to the conditions of the permit or May be prohibited as determined by the Director or his designee. 
13.  All agricultural customers Shall irrigate or water only at times approved by the Department. 
14.  Operators of hotels and motels Shall provide guests with the option of choosing not to have towels and linens laundered daily. The hotel or motel Shall prominently display notice of this option in each guestroom using clear and easily understood language. 
D.  Stage IV, Water Emergency. Stage IV shall apply when the ordinary demands and requirements of City water customers cannot be satisfied without depleting the City water supply to the extent that there would be insufficient water for human consumption, sanitation and fire protection. A water shortage emergency includes both an immediate emergency, in which the City is unable to meet current water needs of persons within the City, as well as a threatened water shortage, in which the City determines that its supply cannot meet an increased future demand. The following mandatory conservation measures shall apply during Stage IV: 
1.  All measures listed under Stage I (Section 13.28.080A), Stage II (Section 13.28.080B), and Stage III (Section 13.28.080C). 
2.  No potable water shall be used for construction purposes. All construction meters shall be locked off or removed. 
3.  Commercial nursery customers shall water only on designated irrigation days (based on property address number) between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and only with a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle or with a drip irrigation system. 
4.  Outdoor irrigation or watering of turf, groundcover, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants shall be prohibited for all other customers. 
5.  The filling, refilling, or adding of water to uncovered swimming or wading pools and spas shall be prohibited at all times. 
6.  The operation of any ornamental fountain or similar structure shall be prohibited. 
7.  The issuance of new water service connections and meters shall be prohibited. 
8.  Washing of vehicles or mobile equipment used for purposes such as garbage collection or transporting foods shall only be allowed when health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning, and shall be authorized only pursuant to a permit issued by the Department. 
9.  The use of water shall be limited to essential household, commercial, manufacturing, or processing uses only, except where other uses may be allowed pursuant to a permit issued by the Department. 
10.  Other restrictions may be necessary during a declared Water Shortage Emergency, to safeguard the adequacy of the water supply for domestic, sanitation, fire protection, and environmental requirements. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014; Ord. No. O-08-15, § 2, 6-2-2015)  
13.28.090 - Exemptions. 
A.  No exemption shall be granted to any person for any reason in the absence of a showing that the restrictions herein would: 
1.  Cause an unnecessary and undue hardship to the person or the public; or 
2.  Cause an emergency condition affecting the health, sanitation, fire protection or safety of the person or of the public. 
B.  The City Manager may grant exemptions for uses of water otherwise prohibited by the regulations set forth in Chapter 13.28. Any person requesting an exemption from the provisions of Chapter 13.28 shall submit to the Department an application for an exemption stating the justified circumstances. The application shall be in a form prescribed by the Department. If the exemption is not granted, the person may submit an appeal in writing pursuant to Section 13.28.120. 
C.  Inconvenience or the potential for damage to landscaping shall not be considered for exemption from any section of this chapter. 
D.  When a Stage II or III has been declared and is in effect, a thirty-day exemption will be granted for the installation of drought tolerant landscaping, new construction or re-landscaping of property, only by a permit issued by the Department. No exemption shall be granted or permit issued when a Stage IV has been declared and is in effect. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.28.100 - Enforcement. 
A.  Violations—In addition to the remedy of criminal prosecution available to the City as described in Subsection 13.28.100, a violation of any water use restrictions of this Chapter 13.28 currently in effect may result in the imposition of fines, water use restrictions, and/or termination of water service as set forth below: 
1.  First Violation—Notice of Non-compliance. A written warning, accompanied by a copy of this chapter, will be delivered by U.S. Mail and/or hung on customer's door. Any such notice of violation shall specify a reasonable period to achieve compliance, and shall be directed to the customer of record for the premises where the noncompliance was observed. 
2.  Second Violation—Warning. A written warning and notice of the future imposition of a fine to be collected on the customer's utility bill will be issued. Any such notice of violation shall require compliance within three calendar days, and shall be directed to the customer of record for the premises where the noncompliance was observed. Delivery will be made by Certified U.S. Mail and/or by personal delivery with a declaration of delivery returned to the City Manager. 
3.  Third Violation (within one year). A citation will be issued and a fine of one hundred dollars will be imposed and collected on the customer's next regular utility bill. 
4.  Fourth Violation (within one year of the first violation). A citation will be issued, a fine of two hundred dollars will be imposed and collected on the customer's next regular utility bill, and a flow restricting device will be installed on the meter serving the customer's property for a minimum of ninety-six hours. The restricted flow shall meet minimum County Health Department standards, if any have been established. If the ninety-six hour period ends on a weekend or holiday, full service will be restored during the next business day. 
5.  Fifth Violation (within one year of the first violation). A citation will be issued, a fine of five hundred dollars will be imposed, and service will be terminated for such period as the City Manager determines to be appropriate under the circumstances. Prior to termination of service, the customer may submit an appeal pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 13.28.120. Written notice of a hearing to consider any appeal shall be mailed to the customer at least ten calendar days before the hearing. 
6.  Any person subject to a fine pursuant to this Section 13.28.100 may file an appeal pursuant to Section 13.28.120. 
B.  Fines, Additional Charges. Any fine imposed pursuant to Chapter 13.28 shall be in addition to the basic water rates and other charges of the Department for the account and shall appear on and be payable with the billing statement for the period during which the violation occurred; non-payment shall be subject to the same remedies available to the Department as for non-payment of basic water rates. 
In addition to any surcharge, a customer violating this chapter shall be responsible for payment of the Department's charges for installing and/or removing any flow restricting device and for disconnecting and/or reconnecting service per the Department's Water Rules and Rate Schedule then in effect. Such charges shall be paid prior to the removal of the flow restrictor or reconnection of service, whichever the case may be. 
C.  Non-liability for Damage. The customer or resident who violates this chapter assumes responsibility for injury to the customer and/or other residents/occupants receiving service, including emotional distress and/or damage to the customer's private water system and/or to other real or personal property owned by the customer or by a third party resulting from the installation and operation of a flow restricting device or from termination of service; said customer shall thereby be deemed to have: 
1.  Waived any claim for injury or for damage to the customer's property which the customer may have otherwise have against the City; and 
2.  Agreed to indemnify, defend, and hold the City harmless from claims by third parties for injury or property damage arising or claimed to arise out of the City's installation and/or operation of a flow restricting device or termination of water service. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.28.110 - Authority—Misdemeanor. 
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 375 of the California Water Code. Any second or subsequent violation of this Chapter 13.28 after notice is provided as specified in Section 13.280.100 may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.28.120 - Appeals. 
A.  The City Manager, or his designated Enforcement Officer, shall determine when any violation of this Chapter 13.28 has occurred and shall issue a Notice of Violation. Any person receiving notice of a second or subsequent violation pursuant to Section 13.28.100 of this chapter shall have a right to a hearing by the City Manager. The customer's written request for a hearing must be received within ten calendar days of mailing or other delivery of the notice of violation. Any Notice of Violation not timely appealed shall be final. Upon receipt of a timely appeal, a hearing shall be scheduled within fifteen calendar days. Written notice of the hearing shall be mailed at least eight calendar days before the date of said hearing. 
B.  The customer's written request for a hearing within the ten calendar day period shall automatically stay the imposition of monetary fines on the customer's utility bill until the City Manager renders his or her decision. The decision of the City Manager shall be final and not subject to further appeal pursuant to this code. 
C.  Pending receipt of a written appeal or pending a hearing pursuant to an appeal, the City Manager or the Enforcement Officer may take appropriate steps to prevent the unauthorized use of water as appropriate to the nature and extent of the violation and the current declared water condition. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.28.130 - City Manager delegation. 
The City Manager may delegate all duties and responsibilities hereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.28.140 - Severability. 
If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter, or the application of same to any person or set of circumstances is held to be unconstitutional, void, or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter which shall remain in full force and effect, and all provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.28.150 - Incompatible provisions. 
To the extent any provision of this chapter is incompatible with or at variance with any prior adopted ordinance or resolution, the provisions of this chapter shall take precedence, and all prior ordinances and resolutions shall be interpreted to harmonize with and not change the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.28.160 - Exemption from California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
The City Council determines that the adoption of this chapter and implementation of the measures set forth herein are exempt from review under the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 because they constitute a project undertaken as immediate action necessary to prevent or mitigate a water shortage emergency, and to protect natural resources. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
Chapter 13.30 - WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-12-15, adopted Jan. 16, 2016, amended Ch. 13.30 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 13.30, §§ 13.30.010—13.30.250, and Ch. 13.30, App. A, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. O-08-14, § 1(490—494), (App. A), adopted Aug. 5, 2014. 
Note— Appendices referenced herein are on file and available for review in the offices of the city. 
 
13.30.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The State Legislature has found: 
1.  That the waters of the state are of limited supply and are subject to ever increasing demands; 
2.  That the continuation of California's economic prosperity is dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses; 
3.  That it is the policy of the State to promote the conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource; 
4.  That landscapes are essential to the quality of life in California by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development; 
5.  That landscape design, installation, maintenance and management can and should be water efficient; 
6.  That Section 2 of Article X of the California Constitution specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the beneficial use to be served and the right does not and shall not extend to waste or unreasonable method of use. 
B.  Consistent with the legislative findings, the purpose of this model ordinance is to: 
1.  Promote the values and benefits of landscaping practices that integrate and go beyond the conservation and efficient use of water; 
2.  Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects by encouraging the use of a watershed approach that requires cross-sector collaboration of industry, government and property owners to achieve the many benefits possible; 
3.  Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes; 
4.  Use water efficiently without waste by setting a Maximum Applied Water Allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount; 
5.  Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances with neighboring local and regional agencies; 
6.  Encourage local agencies and water purveyors to use economic incentives that promote the efficient use of water, such as implementing a tiered-rate structure; and 
7.  Encourage local agencies to designate the necessary authority that implements and enforces the provisions of the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance or its local landscape ordinance. 
C.  Landscapes that are planned, designed, installed, managed and maintained with the watershed based approach can improve California's environmental conditions and provide benefits and realize sustainability goals. Such landscapes will make the urban environment resilient in the face of climatic extremes. Consistent with the legislative findings and purpose of the Ordinance, conditions in the urban setting will be improved by: 
1.  Creating the conditions to support life in the soil by reducing compaction, incorporating organic matter that increases water retention, and promoting productive plant growth that leads to more carbon storage, oxygen production, shade, habitat and esthetic benefits. 
2.  Minimizing energy use by reducing irrigation water requirements, reducing reliance on petroleum based fertilizers and pesticides, and planting climate appropriate shade trees in urban areas. 
3.  Conserving water by capturing and reusing rainwater and graywater wherever possible and selecting climate appropriate plants that need minimal supplemental water after establishment. 
4.  Protecting air and water quality by reducing power equipment use and landfill disposal trips, selecting recycled and locally sourced materials, and using compost, mulch and efficient irrigation equipment to prevent erosion. 
5.  Protecting existing habitat and creating new habitat by choosing local native plants, climate adapted non-natives and avoiding invasive plants. Utilizing integrated pest management with least toxic methods as the first course of action. 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65593, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Sections 65591, 65593 and 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 490), 1-16-2016)  
13.30.020 - Applicability. 
A.  After December 1, 2015, and consistent with Executive Order No. B-29-15, this chapter shall apply to all of the following landscape projects: 
1.  New construction projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review; 
2.  Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review; 
3.  Existing landscapes limited to Sections 493, 493.1 and 493.2; and 
4.  Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to Sections 492.4, 492.11, and 492.12; and existing cemeteries are limited to Sections 493, 493.1, and 493.2. 
B.  For local land use agencies working together to develop a regional water efficient landscape ordinance, the reporting requirements of this chapter shall become effective December 1, 2015 and the remainder of this chapter shall be effective no later than February 1, 2016. 
C.  Any project with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this chapter or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in Appendix D. 
D.  For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than two thousand five hundred square feet of landscape and meets the lot or parcel's landscape water requirement (Estimated Total Water Use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to Appendix D section (5). 
E.  This chapter does not apply to: 
1.  Registered local, state or federal historical sites; 
2.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
3.  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or 
4.  Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 490.1), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1,2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.030 - Definitions. 
The terms used in this chapter have the meaning set forth below: 
"Applied water" means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape. 
"Automatic irrigation controller" means a timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data. 
"Backflow prevention device" means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
"Certificate of Completion" means the document required under Section 492.9. 
"Certified irrigation designer" means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation Association's Certified Irrigation Designer program. 
"Certified landscape irrigation auditor" means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense irrigation auditor certification program and Irrigation Association's Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor program. 
"Check valve" or "anti-drain valve" means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off. 
"Common interest developments" means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1351. 
"Compost" means the safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth. 
"Conversion factor (0.62)" means the number that converts acre/inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year. 
"Distribution uniformity" means the measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area. 
"Drip irrigation" means any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
"Ecological restoration project" means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
"Effective precipitation" or "usable rainfall" (Eppt) means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth. 
"Emitter" means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil. 
"Established landscape" means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. 
"Establishment period of the plants" means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may need three to five years for establishment. 
"Estimated Total Water Use" (ETWU) means the total water used for the landscape as described in Section 492.4. 
"ET adjustment factor" (ETAF) means a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) Special Landscape Areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8. 
"Evapotranspiration rate" means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time. 
"Flow rate" means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second. 
"Flow sensor" means an inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter. 
"Friable" means a soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded. 
"Fuel Modification Plan Guideline" means guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building structures in a fire hazard severity zone. 
"Graywater" means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. "Graywater" includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12. 
"Hardscapes" means any durable material (pervious and non-pervious). 
"Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. 
"Infiltration rate" means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour). 
"Invasive plant species" means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database. 
"Irrigation audit" means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association's Landscape Irrigation Auditor Certification program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency "Watersense" labeled auditing program. 
"Irrigation efficiency" (IE) means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems. 
"Irrigation survey" means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system. 
"Irrigation water use analysis" means an analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data. 
"Landscape architect" means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California Business and Professions Code, Section 5615. 
"Landscape area" means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the Maximum Applied Water Allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include foot-prints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation). 
"Landscape contractor" means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems. 
"Landscape Documentation Package" means the documents required under Section 492.3. 
"Landscape project" means total area of landscape in a project as defined in "landscape area" for the purposes of this chapter, meeting requirements under Section 490.1. 
"Landscape water meter" means an inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to a totalizer to record water use. 
"Lateral line" means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve. 
"Local agency" means a city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is responsible for adopting and implementing the ordinance. The local agency is also responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, including but not limited to, approval of a permit and plan check or design review of a project. 
"Local water purveyor" means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service. 
"Low volume irrigation" means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
"Main line" means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet. 
"Master shut-off valve" is an automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed water will not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve. 
"Maximum Applied Water Allowance" (MAWA) means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 492.4. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET Adjustment Factor, and the size of the landscape area. The Estimated Total Water Use shall not exceed the Maximum Applied Water Allowance. Special Landscape Areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)] 
"Median" is an area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses. 
"Microclimate" means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces. 
"Mined-land reclamation projects" means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. 
"Mulch" means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion. 
"New construction" means, for the purposes of this chapter, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building. 
"Non-residential landscape" means landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas. 
"Operating pressure" means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate. 
"Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems" or "overhead spray irrigation systems" means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors). 
"Overspray" means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area. 
"Parkway" means the area between a sidewalk and the curb or traffic lane. It may be planted or unplanted, and with or without pedestrian egress. 
"Permit" means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes. 
"Pervious" means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
"Plant factor" or "plant water use factor" is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this chapter, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this chapter are derived from the publication "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species". Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). 
"Project applicant" means the individual or entity submitting a Landscape Documentation Package required under Section 492.3, to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the local agency. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee. 
"Rain sensor" or "rain sensing shutoff device" means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains. 
"Record drawing" or "as-builts" means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor. 
"Recreational area" means areas, excluding private single family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters or golf course tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and greens. 
"Recycled water," "reclaimed water," or "treated sewage effluent water" means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
"Reference evapotranspiration" or "ETo" means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix A, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the Maximum Applied Water Allowances so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. 
"Regional Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance" means a local Ordinance adopted by two or more local agencies, water suppliers and other stakeholders for implementing a consistent set of landscape provisions throughout a geographical region. Regional ordinances are strongly encouraged to provide a consistent framework for the landscape industry and applicants to adhere to. 
"Rehabilitated landscape" means any relandscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of Section 490.1, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet. 
"Residential landscape" means landscapes surrounding single or multifamily homes. 
"Run off" means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, run off may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope. 
"Soil moisture sensing device" or "soil moisture sensor" means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event. 
"Soil texture" means the classification of soil based on its percent-age of sand, silt, and clay. 
"Special Landscape Area" (SLA) means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or water features using recycled water. 
"Sprinkler head" or "spray head" means a device which delivers water through a nozzle. 
"Static water pressure" means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing. 
"Station" means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously. 
"Swing joint" means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage. 
"Submeter" means a metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter. 
"Turf" means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warmseason grasses. 
"Valve" means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. 
"Water conserving plant species" means a plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor. 
"Water feature" means a design clement where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation. 
"Watering window" means the time of day irrigation is allowed. 
"WUCOLS" means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension and the Department of Water Resources 2014. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 491), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Sections 65592 and 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.040 - Provisions for New Construction or Rehabilitated Landscapes. 
A.  A local agency may designate by mutual agreement, another agency, such as a water purveyor, to implement some or all of the requirements contained in this chapter. Local agencies may collaborate with water purveyors to define each entity's specific responsibilities relating to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1,2015).  
13.30.050 - Compliance with Landscape Documentation Package. 
A.  Prior to construction, the local agency shall: 
1.  Provide the project applicant with the ordinance and procedures for permits, plan checks or design reviews; 
2.  Review the Landscape Documentation Package submitted by the project applicant; 
3.  Approve or deny the Landscape Documentation Package; 
4.  Issue a permit or approve the plan check or design review for the project applicant; and 
5.  Upon approval of the Landscape Documentation Package, submit a copy of the Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet to the local water purveyor. 
B.  Prior to construction, the project applicant shall: 
1.  Submit a Landscape Documentation Package to the local agency. 
C.  Upon approval of the Landscape Documentation Package by the local agency, the project applicant shall: 
1.  Receive a permit or approval of the plan check or design review and record the date of the permit in the Certificate of Completion; 
2.  Submit a copy of the approved Landscape Documentation Package along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or his/her designee; and 
3.  Submit a copy of the Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet to the local water purveyor. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.1), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595. Government Code. Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
13.30.060 - Penalties. 
A.  A local agency may establish and administer penalties to the project applicant for non-compliance with the ordinance to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.2), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code. Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
13.30.070 - Elements of the Landscape Documentation Package. 
A.  The Landscape Documentation Package shall include the following six elements: 
1.  Project information; 
a.  Date 
b.  Project applicant 
c.  Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s)) 
d.  Total landscape area (square feet) 
e.  Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed) 
f.  Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well 
g.  Checklist of all documents in Landscape Documentation Package 
h.  Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner 
i.  Applicant signature and date with statement, "I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance and submit a complete Landscape Documentation Package". 
2.  Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet; 
a.  Hydrozone information table 
b.  Water budget calculations 
i.  Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA) 
ii.  Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU) 
3.  Soil management report; 
4.  Landscape design plan; 
5.  Irrigation design plan; and 
6.  Grading design plan. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.3), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code. Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
13.30.080 - Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet. 
A.  A project applicant shall complete the Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet in Appendix B which contains information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, exclusive of Special Landscape Areas. The ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The Maximum Applied Water Allowance is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the MAWA. 
1.  In calculating the Maximum Applied Water Allowance and Estimated Total Water Use, a project applicant shall use the ETo values from the Reference Evapotranspiration Table in Appendix A. For geographic areas not covered in Appendix A, use data from other cities located nearby in the same reference evapotranspiration zone, as found in the CIMIS Reference Evapotranspiration Zones Map, Department of Water Resources, 1999. 
B.  Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements: 
1.  The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants. 
2.  All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone. 
3.  All Special Landscape Areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as shown in Appendix B. 
4.  ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) Special Landscape Areas shall not exceed 1.0. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.4), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.090 - Soil Management Report. 
A.  In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or his/her designee, as follows: 
1.  Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations. 
a.  Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants. 
b.  The soil analysis shall include: 
i.  Soil texture; 
ii.  Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table; 
iii.  pH; 
iv.  Total soluble salts; 
v.  Sodium; 
vi.  Percent organic matter; and 
vii.  Recommendations. 
c.  In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e. production home developments) a soil sampling rate of one in seven lots or approximately fifteen percent will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven lots. 
2.  The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall comply with one of the following: 
a.  If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the local agency as part of the Landscape Documentation Package; or 
b.  If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the local agency as part of the Certificate of Completion. 
3.  The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans. 
4.  The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the local agency with Certificate of Completion. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.5), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.100 - Landscape Design Plan. 
A.  For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package. 
1.  Plant Material. 
a.  Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the Estimated Total Water Use in the landscape area does not exceed the Maximum Applied Water Allowance. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following: 
i.  Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation; 
ii.  Selection of water-conserving plant, tree and turf species, especially local native plants; 
iii.  Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance; 
iv.  Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances or tree shading guidelines, and size at maturity as appropriate for the planting area; and 
v.  Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists. 
vi.  Selection of plants from local Fuel Modification Plan Guidelines. 
b.  Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in Section 13.30.110.A.2.(d). 
c.  Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following: 
i.  Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate; 
ii.  Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure [e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines]; allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth; and 
iii.  Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain. 
d.  Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty-five percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where twenty-five percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run times one hundred equals slope percent). 
e.  High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians. 
f.  A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per Public Resources Code Section 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches. Refer to the local Fuel Modification Plan guidelines. 
g.  The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the California Invasive Plant Council, is strongly discouraged. 
h.  The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group. 
2.  Water Features. 
a.  Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features. 
b.  Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features. 
c.  Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation. 
d.  Pool and spa covers are highly recommended. 
3.  Soil Preparation, Mulch and Amendments. 
a.  Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement. 
b.  Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see Section 13.30.090). 
c.  For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four cubic yards per one thousand square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent organic matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling. 
d.  A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five percent of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such. 
e.  Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet current engineering standards. 
f.  The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement. 
g.  Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local Fuel Modification Plan Guidelines or other applicable local ordinances. 
B.  The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall: 
1.  Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method; 
2.  Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation; 
3.  Identify recreational areas; 
4.  Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants; 
5.  Identify areas irrigated with recycled water; 
6.  Identify type of mulch and application depth; 
7.  Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity; 
8.  Identify type and surface area of water features; 
9.  Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious); 
10.  Identify location, installation details, and twenty-four-hour retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project applicants shall refer to the local agency or regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and examples are provided in Section 13.30.200. 
11.  Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies as discussed in Section 13.30.200 and their twenty-four-hour retention or infiltration capacity; 
12.  Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system components and area(s) of distribution; 
13.  Contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan"; and 
14.  Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agriculture Code.). 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.6), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; Section 1351, Civil Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.110 - Irrigation Design Plan. 
A.  This section applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment period. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers' recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package. 
1.  System. 
a.  Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private submeter, shall be installed for all non-residential irrigated landscapes of one thousand square feet but not more than five thousand square feet (the level at which Water Code 535 applies) and residential irrigated landscapes of five thousand square feet or greater. A landscape water meter may be either: 
i.  A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the local water purveyor, or 
ii.  A privately owned meter or submeter. 
b.  Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing non-volatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems. 
c.  If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range for optimal performance. 
i.  If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system. 
ii.  Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation. 
d.  Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain. 
e.  Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair. 
f.  Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements. 
g.  Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are required for all on non-residential landscapes and residential landscapes of five thousand square feet or larger. 
h.  Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shut down features. 
i.  The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures. 
j.  Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems. 
k.  The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan. 
l.  The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in Section 13.30.080 regarding the Maximum Applied Water Allowance. 
m.  All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers'/International Code Council's (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard, All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014. 
n.  It is highly recommended that the project applicant or local agency inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system. 
o.  In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone. 
p.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer's recommendations. 
q.  Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer's recommendations. 
r.  Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic areas of turfgrass. 
s.  Check valves or anti-drain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur. 
t.  Areas less than ten feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray. 
u.  Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty-four inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow non-spray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if: 
i.  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or 
ii.  The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or 
iii.  The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the Landscape Documentation Package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in Section 13.30.110.A.1.(i). Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
v.  Slopes greater than twenty-five percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding three-quarter inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the Landscape Documentation Package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
2.  Hydrozone. 
a.  Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use. 
b.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone. 
c.  Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing irrigation for the tree. 
d.  Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if: 
i.  Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or 
ii.  The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations. 
e.  Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted. 
f.  On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the Hydrozone Information Table (see Appendix B Section A). This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller. 
B.  The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain: 
1.  Location and size of separate water meters for landscape: 
2.  Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices; 
3.  Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply; 
4.  Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station; 
5.  Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Section 13.30.180; 
6.  The following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan"; and 
7.  The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. (See Sections 5500.1,5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agricultural Code.) 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.7), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.120 - Grading Design Plan. 
A.  For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other local agency permits satisfies this requirement. 
1.  The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including: 
a.  Height of graded slopes; 
b.  Drainage patterns; 
c.  Pad elevations; 
d.  Finish grade; and 
e.  Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable. 
2.  To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants: 
a.  Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain on to non-permeable hardscapes; 
b.  Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and 
c.  Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas. 
3.  The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan" and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.8), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code. Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
13.30.130 - Certificate of Completion. 
A.  The Certificate of Completion (see Appendix C for a sample certificate) shall include the following six elements: 
1.  Project information sheet that contains: 
a.  Date; 
b.  Project name; 
c.  Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address; 
d.  Project address and location; and 
e.  Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address; 
2.  Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved Landscape Documentation Package; 
a.  Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these "as-built" or record drawings shall be included with the certification; 
b.  A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes. 
3.  Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see Section 13.30.140); 
4.  Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see Section 13.30.150); 
5.  Irrigation audit report (see Section 13.30.160); and 
6.  Soil analysis report, if not submitted with Landscape Documentation Package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations (see Section 13.30.090). 
B.  The project applicant shall: 
1.  Submit the signed Certificate of Completion to the local agency for review; 
2.  Ensure that copies of the approved Certificate of Completion are submitted to the local water purveyor and property owner or his or her designee. 
C.  The local agency shall: 
1.  Receive the signed Certificate of Completion from the project applicant; 
2.  Approve or deny the Certificate of Completion. If the Certificate of Completion is denied, the local agency shall provide information to the project applicant regarding reapplication, appeal, or other assistance. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.9), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596. Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1,2015).  
13.30.140 - Irrigation Scheduling. 
A.  For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers. 
2.  Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between eight p.m. and ten a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. 
3.  For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the Estimated Total Water Use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data. 
4.  Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following: 
a.  The plant establishment period; 
b.  The established landscape; and 
c.  Temporarily irrigated areas. 
5.  Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply: 
a.  Irrigation interval (days between irrigation); 
b.  Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff); 
c.  Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff; 
d.  Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis; 
e.  Application rate setting; 
f.  Root depth setting; 
g.  Plant type setting; 
h.  Soil type; 
i.  Slope factor setting; 
j.  Shade factor setting; and 
k.  Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.10), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code. Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
13.30.150 - Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance Schedule. 
A.  Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the Certificate of Completion. 
B.  A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; auditing, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; topdressing with compost, replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. 
C.  Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater efficiency. 
D.  A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape industry sustainable Best Practices for all landscape maintenance activities. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.11), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.160 - Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, and Irrigation Water Use Analysis. 
A.  All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a local agency landscape irrigation auditor or a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the landscape or installed the landscape. 
B.  In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e. production home developments) an auditing rate of one in seven lots or approximately fifteen percent will satisfy this requirement. 
C.  For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after December 1, 2015, as described in Section 13.30.020: 
1.  The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the Certificate of Completion to the local agency that may include, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or run off that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure and any other factors necessary for accurate programming; 
2.  The local agency shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation surveys for compliance with the Maximum Applied Water Allowance. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.12), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596. Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.170 - Irrigation Efficiency. 
A.  For the purpose of determining Estimated Total Water Use, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip system devices. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.13), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.180 - Recycled Water. 
A.  The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water. 
B.  All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and State laws. 
C.  Landscapes using recycled water are considered Special Landscape Areas. The ET Adjustment Factor for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) Special Landscape Areas shall not exceed 1.0. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.14), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596. Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.190 - Graywater Systems. 
A.  Graywater systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in on-site landscape irrigation. All graywater systems shall conform to the California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16) and any applicable local ordinance standards. Refer to Section 13.30.020.D. for the applicability of this chapter to landscape areas less than two thousand five hundred square feet with the Estimated Total Water Use met entirely by graywater. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.15), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.200 - Stormwater Management and Rainwater Retention. 
A.  Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site rainwater retention and infiltration are encouraged. 
B.  Project applicants shall refer to the local agency or Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. 
C.  All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to maximize water retention and infiltration. Refer to Section 13.30.100.A.3. 
D.  It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious surfaces (i.e. roof and paved areas) from either: the one inch, twenty-four-hour rain event or (2) the eighty-fifth percentile, twenty-four-hour rain event, and/or additional capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, state or federal regulation. 
E.  It is recommended that storm water projects incorporate any of the following elements to improve on-site storm water and dry weather runoff capture and use: 
1.  Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to drain to vegetated areas. 
2.  Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof and concrete driveways. 
3.  Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff. 
4.  Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse. 
5.  Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or catchment systems. 
6.  Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and drywells to capture storm water and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the soil. 
7.  Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize excess flow, and filter pollutants. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.16), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.210 - Public Education. 
A.  Publications. Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design, installation, management and maintenance that save water is encouraged in the community. 
1.  A local agency or water supplier/purveyor shall provide information to owners of permitted renovations and new, single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes based on a water budget. 
B.  Model Homes. All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this chapter. 
1.  Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme. Signage shall include information about the site water use as designed per the local ordinance; specify who designed and installed the water efficient landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as using native plants, graywater systems, and rainwater catchment systems. 
2.  Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.17), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1,2015).  
13.30.220 - Environmental Review. 
A.  The local agency must comply with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 492.18), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 21082, Public Resources Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Sections 21080 and 21082, Public Resources Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.230 - Provisions for Existing Landscapes. 
A.  A local agency may by mutual agreement, designate another agency, such as a water purveyor, to implement some or all of the requirements contained in this chapter. Local agencies may collaborate with water purveyors to define each entity's specific responsibilities relating to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 493), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.240 - Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, and Irrigation Water Use Analysis. 
A.  This Section 13.30.240, shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before December 1, 2015 and are over one acre in size. 
1.  For all landscapes in Section 13.30.240.A. that have a water meter, the local agency shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the Maximum Applied Water Allowance for existing landscapes. The Maximum Applied Water Allowance for existing landscapes shall be calculated as: MAWA = (0.8) (ETo) (LA) (0.62). 
2.  For all landscapes in Section 13.30.240.A., that do not have a meter, the local agency shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste. 
B.  All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 493.1), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1,2015).  
13.30.250 - Water Waste Prevention. 
A.  Local agencies shall prevent water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from leaving the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures. Penalties for violation of these prohibitions shall be established locally. 
B.  Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if: 
1.  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or 
2.  The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 493.2), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65594, Government Code. Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
13.30.260 - Effective Precipitation. 
A.  A local agency may consider Effective Precipitation (twenty-five percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and may use the following equation to calculate Maximum Applied Water Allowance: 
MAWA = (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.55 x LA) + (0.45 x SLA)] for residential areas. 
MAWA = (ETo-EPPT) (0.62) [(0.45 x LA) + (0.55 x SLA)] for non-residential areas. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 494), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
13.30.270 - Reporting. 
A.  Local agencies shall report on implementation and enforcement by December 31, 2015. Local agencies responsible for administering individual ordinances shall report on their updated ordinance, while those agencies developing a regional ordinance shall report on their existing ordinance. Those agencies crafting a regional ordinances shall also report on their new ordinance by March 1, 2016. Subsequently, reporting for all agencies will be due by January 31st of each year. Reports shall be submitted to the Department of Water Resources. 
B.  Local agencies are to address the following: 
1.  State whether you are adopting a single agency ordinance or a regional agency alliance ordinance, and the date of adoption or anticipated date of adoption. 
2.  Define the reporting period. The reporting period shall commence on December 1, 2015 and the end on December 28, 2015. For local agencies crafting regional ordinances with other agencies, there shall be an additional reporting period commencing on February 1, 2016 and ending on February 28, 2016. In subsequent years, all local agency reporting will be for the calendar year. 
3.  State if using a locally modified Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (WELO) or the MWELO. If using a locally modified WELO, how is it different than MWELO, is it at least as efficient as MWELO, and are there any exemptions specified? 
4.  State the entity responsible for implementing the ordinance. 
5.  State number and types of projects subject to the ordinance during the specified reporting period. 
6.  State the total area (in square feet or acres) subject to the ordinance over the reporting period, if available. 
7.  Provide the number of new housing starts, new commercial projects, and landscape retrofits during the reporting period. 
8.  Describe the procedure for review of projects subject to the ordinance. 
9.  Describe actions taken to verify compliance. Is a plan check performed; if so, by what entity? Is a site inspection performed; if so, by what entity? Is a post-installation audit required; if so, by whom? 
10.  Describe enforcement measures. 
11.  Explain challenges to implementing and enforcing the ordinance. 
12.  Describe educational and other needs to properly apply the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(§ 495), 1-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code; and sections 11 and 30 Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015). Reference: Section 65596, Government Code; and section 11, Governor's Exec. Order No. B-29-15 (April 1, 2015).  
Appendix A - Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) Table. 
Appendix A - Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) Table* 
County and City 
SAN BERNARDINO 	Jan 	Feb 	Mar 	Apr 	May 	Jun 	Jul 	Aug 	Sep 	Oct 	Nov 	Dec 	Annual ETo 
Baker 	2.7 	3.9 	6.1 	8.3 	10.4 	11.8 	12.2 	11.0 	8.9 	6.1 	3.3 	2.1 	86.6 
Barstow NE 	2.2 	2.9 	5.3 	6.9 	9.0 	10.1 	9.9 	8.9 	6.8 	4.8 	2.7 	2.1 	71.7 
Big Bear Lake 	1.8 	2.6 	4.6 	6.0 	7.0 	7.6 	8.1 	7.4 	5.4 	4.1 	2.4 	1.8 	58.6 
Chino 	2.1 	2.9 	3.9 	4.5 	5.7 	6.5 	7.3 	7.1 	5.9 	4.2 	2.6 	2.0 	54.6 
Crestline 	1.5 	1.9 	3.3 	4.4 	5.5 	6.6 	7.8 	7.1 	5.4 	3.5 	2.2 	1.6 	50.8 
Lake 
Arrowhead 	1.8 	2.6 	4.6 	6.0 	7.0 	7.6 	8.1 	7.4 	5.4 	4.1 	2.4 	1.8 	58.6 
Lucerne Valley 	2.2 	2.9 	5.1 	6.5 	9.1 	11.0 	11.4 	9.9 	7.4 	5.0 	3.0 	1.8 	75.3 
Needles 	3.2 	4.2 	6.6 	8.9 	11.0 	12.4 	12.8 	11.0 	8.9 	6.6 	4.0 	2.7 	92.1 
Newberry Springs 	2.1 	2.9 	5.3 	8.4 	9.8 	10.9 	11.1 	9.9 	7.6 	5.2 	3.1 	2.0 	78.2 
San Bernardino 	2.0 	2.7 	3.8 	4.6 	5.7 	6.9 	7.9 	7.4 	5.9 	4.2 	2.6 	2.0 	55.6 
Twentynine Palms 	2.6 	3.6 	5.9 	7.9 	10.1 	11.2 	11.2 	10.3 	8.6 	5.9 	3.4 	2.2 	82.9 
Victorville 	2.0 	2.6 	4.6 	6.2 	7.3 	8.9 	9.8 	9.0 	6.5 	4.7 	2.7 	2.1 	66.2 
 
* The values in this table were derived from: 
1.  California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS); 
2.  Reference EvapoTranspiration Zones Map, UC Dept. of Land, Air and Water Resources and California Dept. of Water Resources 1999; 
3.  Reference Evapotranspiration for California, University of California, Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources (1987) Bulletin 1922; and 
4.  Determining Daily Reference Evapotranspiration, Cooperative Extension UC Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources (1987), Publication Leaflet 21426. 
(Ord. No. O-12-15, Att.(App. A), 1-16-2016)  
Title 14 - STORM DRAINS AND FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
Chapters:  
Chapter 14.01 - AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, POLICY AND DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
14.01.010 - Authority. 
The Ordinance codified in this title is enacted pursuant to authority conferred to the City under Article II, Section 7 of the Constitution of the State of California, California Government Code Sections 54300 et seq., California Health and Safety Code Section 5471, and Article XI, Sections 5 and 7 of the Constitution of the State of California to establish a system for controlling Discharges into the City's Storm Drain System and to establish necessary Fees and charges to fund Storm Drainage Improvements and the operation and maintenance thereof. 
(Ord. 0-20-96 § 1, 1996: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.01.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this title is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City by controlling Discharges into the City's Storm Drain System. This will be accomplished by eliminating all nonPermitted Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewers, controlling the Discharge to the municipal separate storm sewers from spills, dumping or disposal of Materials other than Stormwater, and reducing Pollutants in Stormwater Discharges to the maximum extent practicable. The intent of this title is to protect and enhance the water quality of our Watercourses, water bodies, groundwater and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with Federal, State and Local Laws and regulations. This title is intended to be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1342 et seq.] and Acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations, and any existing or future municipal NPDES Permits and any amendments or revisions thereto or reissuance thereof. 
(Ord. 0-04-00 § 1, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.01.030 - Definitions. 
As Used in this title: 
"Approved Construction Plans," means construction plans that have been Approved by the City. 
"Average Storm Drainage" means the average amount of Storm Drainage which enters the City Storm Drainage system from a Parcel, based on Runoff Factors established by the County Flood Control District. 
"Basic Benefit Unit" or "BBU" means the proportionate Stormwater runoff from the average Single Family Residential Parcel. The average Single Family Residential Parcel has an area of 0.1666 acres and a Runoff Factor of 0.40. The product of these numbers is 0.0666 and is defined as one Basic Benefit Unit. 
"Basic Benefit Unit Factor" or "BBU Factor" means a measure of equivalency between the proportionate Stormwater runoff from any Parcel to the average Single Family Residential Parcel of 0.1666 acres. 
"Basic Fee" or "BF" means the Fee/charge imposed by the City for the Discharge of one BBU. 
"Best Management Practice (BMP)" means any prohibitions, practices, procedures, programs or other measures designed to prevent or reduce the direct or indirect Discharge of Pollutants into waters of the United States. BMPs Shall include, but are not limited to, those measures specified in the California Storm Water Best Management Practice Handbook for Municipal, Industrial/Commercial and Construction Activity, and those identified by the Director. 
"City Permit" means a Permit issued by the City to allow a Discharge into the City's Storm Drain System or Facilities. 
"Commercial User" means any Business or Commercial enterprise that contributes Pollutants to the waters of the United States from any conveyance or source regulated under the Clean Water Act or its regulations. 
"Construction Activity" means any activity as defined by the State Water Resources Control Board or the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, whichever is more restrictive, that necessitates Securing an NPDES Permit or submitting an NOI for Construction Activity. 
"Director" means the City Engineer, or his or her Designee. 
"Discharge/Discharger" means any addition of any Pollutant to waters of the United States from any conveyance or source regulated under the Clean Water Act or its regulations; any Person who contributes any Pollutant to the waters of the United States from any conveyance or source regulated under the Clean Water Act or its regulations. 
"General Construction Permit" means any construction Permit issued by the City. 
"Illegal Discharge" means any unPermitted Discharge to the City Stormwater Drainage System. 
"Illicit Connection" means any connection to the City Storm Drainage System that is directly or indirectly associated with an Illegal Discharge. 
"Industrial Discharge/User" means any industrial source of nondomestic Pollutants regulated under the Clean Water Act or its regulations, which are Discharged to the waters of the United States. 
"NPDES" means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
"NPDES Permit" means a Permit issued pursuant to the NPDES program under the Federal Clean Water Act, or any of the current general Stormwater Discharge Permits issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, or the State Water Resource Control Board in compliance with the Clean Water Act. 
"NOI" means a Notice of Intent to comply with one or more NPDES general Stormwater Permits. 
"Nonstormwater" means any Discharge to the City Storm Drain System that is not entirely composed of Stormwater. 
"Owner" means the legal Owner of a Parcel of Real Property, except when the legal Owner of the Real Property is such due to the holding of a mortgage, note or other security, in which case the "Owner" Shall be deemed to be the beneficial Owner of the Parcel of Real Property. 
"Parcel" means the smallest, separately segregated Lot, unit or Plot of land having an identified Owner, boundaries and surface area which is documented for Property tax purposes and given an Assessor's identification number by the County Tax Assessor. 
"Parcel Billing Units" or "PBU," means the number of Basic Benefit Units for a particular Parcel. 
"Parcel Size" means the size of a Parcel measured in acres. 
"Person" means any natural Person, firm, association, club, organization, corporation, partnership, Business trust, public agency, company or other entity, which is recognized by Laws as the subject of rights or duties. 
"Pollutant" means anything, which causes the deterioration of water quality such that it impairs subsequent and/or competing Uses of the water. Pollutants May include but are not limited to paints, oil and other automotive fluids, soil, silt, dirt, Rubbish, trash, Garbage, debris, Refuse, waste, fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus, enterococcus, heavy metals, Hazardous Waste, chemicals, fresh concrete, Yard waste from commercial Landscaping operations, animal waste, Materials that result from the process of constructing a Building or Structure, nauseous or offensive Matter of any kind, dredged spoil, incinerator residue, filter backwash, Sewage sludge, munitions, biological Materials, radioactive Materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste Discharged into water. 
"Receiving Water" means all waters of the United States into which a Pollutant is or May be Discharged. 
"Runoff Factor" means the number that represents the amount of Average Storm Drainage from a Parcel for a particular land Use. The Runoff Factor Shall be derived from the Runoff Factors utilized by the San Bernardino County Flood Control District, a Copy of which Shall be maintained on file with the City Clerk's Office. 
"Single Family Residential Parcel" means a developed Parcel with one Single Family detached housing unit. 
"Storm Drain System" means any of the Property owned or leased by the City and Used directly or indirectly in the collection, conveyance, storage or disposal of Stormwater, and including, but not limited to, conduits, natural or artificial drains, and channels, basins and water courses, together with appurtenances, pumping stations and equipment. 
"Stormwater" means Stormwater runoff, snowmelt, snowmelt runoff and surface runoff and drainage. 
"Stormwater" or "Storm Drainage" means the water that enters the City Storm Drainage System. From a standpoint of source, it May be a combination of the runoff from residences, Commercial Buildings, industrial plants and Institutions, together with any ground water and surface water that May be present. 
"Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)" means the plan as described in the most recent general Permit for Discharges of Stormwater associated with Construction Activity as issued by the State Water Resources Control Board, or any amendment, modification or replacement thereto. 
"Swimming Pool" means any body of water created by artificial means, designed or Used for swimming, immersion or therapeutic purposes. 
"User" means any Person who contributes, causes or Permits the contribution of Pollutants to waters of the United States from any conveyance or source regulated under the Clean Water Act. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 1, 2004; Ord. 0-04-00 § 2, 2000: Ord. 0-20-96 § 2, 1996; Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.01.040 - City's right of revision. 
The City Council May establish by Ordinance and/or Resolution, more stringent limitations and requirements related to Discharges into the City's Storm Drain System if deemed necessary. 
(Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.01.050 - Stormwater management charges, collection and adjustments. 
A.  Stormwater Management User Fees. There is imposed on each and every Parcel in the City, and its Owner, a Stormwater management User Fee. This Fee is necessary to pay for (i) the operation, administration, maintenance, Improvement, environmental restoration and replacement of the existing and future City Storm Drainage System; (ii) improving the quality of Stormwater; (iii) complying with Local, State, and Federal Stormwater regulations; and (iv) or secure the payment of, any indebtedness incurred for the above purposes. All of the proceeds of these Fees are in payment for Use of the City's Storm Drain System by developed and undeveloped Parcels and their Owners. This Fee Shall not exceed the reasonable costs of providing the services, facilities or regulatory activity for which the Fee is charged. 
1.  The Basic Fee for Stormwater services Shall be established by Resolution of the City Council. 
2.  The Stormwater management User Fee for each Parcel Shall be established by Resolution of the City Council and Shall be calculated by applying the Following formula: 
Annual Fee = Parcel Billing Units (PBUs) multiplied by the Basic Fee (BF). 
B.  Stormwater Management Fund. There is established a special fund in the City Treasury entitled "Stormwater management fund," hereinafter referred to as the "fund." All revenues from the Stormwater management User Fees established pursuant to this section Shall be deposited into the fund. Moneys deposited into the fund Shall only be expended for storm drain and Storm Drainage related purposes as described in Title 14 of this Code. Appropriation Shall be made as provided for by the City Council. Moneys in the fund, which are received by the City subject to any limitations of Use, May only be expended in accordance with those limitations. 
C.  Collection. The Stormwater management User Fee Shall be collected by and be payable to the County Tax Collector for the 1996-97 fiscal Year, and each subsequent fiscal Year, along with the general taxes, Fees and charges collected by the Tax Collector. The Stormwater management User Fee Shall be an obligation of the record Owner of each Parcel billed for storm drain service. The Fee Shall be due and payable on the date that County tax payments are due. 
1.  The Fee Shall be considered delinquent if payment is not received within thirty Days of the date the payment is due and payable. The City Shall impose a ten percent nonpayment penalty on all delinquent accounts. An additional one percent penalty Shall be imposed for each additional thirty-Day period the amount remains unpaid. 
2.  If the bill is not paid within sixty Days of the date the payment is deemed delinquent, the amount owing Shall constitute a lien against the Parcel receiving the service, and the City Shall notify the assessee of the lien as provided for in Health and Safety Code Section 5473.11. The lien Shall remain in effect for three Years unless released upon payment of the delinquent amount plus all penalties associated therewith or otherwise Discharged. 
3.  If any portion of the collection or expenditure of the Stormwater management User Fee provided for in this chapter is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining collection or expenditure of the Stormwater management User Fee Shall not be affected but Shall remain in full force and effect. 
D.  Adjustment and Appeals. The Director Shall have the power to provide for adjustments which reflect, insofar as determined reasonably possible by the Director, that receipt of quantities of Storm Drainage from particular Properties or sources which May be substantially different than from the Average Storm Drain. Any User May apply in writing to the Director for an adjustment within thirty Days from the date the tax bill is mailed with respect to the period for which the User seeks adjustment. 
1.  The Director Shall provide for action to be taken and a determination to be made upon each Application for adjustment within thirty Days from the date the Application is filed, whenever reasonably possible, and Shall cause the Applicant to be immediately notified in writing of any determination on the Application for adjustment. Production of additional information May be required of the Applicant, and if the Applicant fails to produce the requested information within fifteen Days from the date of mailing the request therefor, the adjustment proceedings May be terminated or such other action taken as May be deemed appropriate by the Director. 
2.  Any Person who has filed an Application for adjustment and has received a determination thereon, or anyone who has otherwise complied with the procedures of this section, May request an administrative hearing within the time and in the manner set forth in Section 14.06.040. No hearing Shall be held unless, within the time period to request a hearing, the Person has first paid the disputed Fee. 
3.  The filing of an Application for adjustment or a request for a hearing before an Administrative Hearing Officer Shall not stay any continued and further Stormwater billing coming due before or during the proceedings. Any such continued and further billing will be adjusted, if appropriate, at the termination of the proceedings in conformance with the determination therein. Acceptance of any payment by the County Tax Collector on behalf of the City subsequent to the Application for adjustment Shall not preclude billing and collection different from or in excess of such payments and in conformance with the final determination. 
4.  Where a determination or adjustment has become final as provided in this section, future tax bills Shall reflect such adjustment, unless otherwise determined by the Director. 
E.  Annual Review. The Director Shall annually review the Stormwater management User Fee and make recommendations to the City Council relative to any necessary rate adjustments to insure that each User will pay his or her proportionate share of the costs of Storm Drainage services. 
(Ord. 0-04-00 § 3, 2000: Ord. 0-20-96 § 3, 1996)  
Chapter 14.02 - GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PROHIBITIONS 
Sections: 
 
14.02.010 - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Director Shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this title. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Director May be delegated in writing by the Director to Persons acting in the beneficial interest of, or in the employ of, the City. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.02.020 - Notice. 
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any Notice required to be given by the Director under this title Shall be in writing and served in Person or by first-class or by registered or certified mail. Notice Shall be deemed to have been given at the time of deposit, postage prepaid, in a Facility regularly serviced by the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.02.030 - Connections—Storm drain modification. 
A.  No Person Shall establish, Use, maintain or continue illicit drainage connections to the City Storm Drain System, or commence or continue any illicit Discharges to the City Storm Drain System. This prohibition is retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a Permit or other authorization or whether permissible under the Law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection. 
B.  The Discharge of Nonstormwater is permissible only when connection to the Storm Drain System is made in accordance with a valid City Permit, Approved Construction Plan, or a NPDES Permit and/or NOI; and the Discharge is exempt under the provisions of Section 14.02.060. 
C.  City Permits are required for the construction or modification of any storm drain or conveyor of Storm Drainage water and appurtenant Structures within: 
1.  Dedicated Easements, rights-of-way or other Public Places or facilities; 
2.  Private Property so as to allow Nonstormwater to directly or indirectly Discharge into the City Storm Drain System. Indirect Discharges include, but are not limited to, Discharges to Sidewalk drains and Driveway approaches and unrestricted Street flow. 
(Ord. 0-04-00 § 4, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.02.040 - Protection of the Storm Drain System. 
Without prior Written Approval of the Director, no Person Shall construct or modify or cause to be constructed or modified any Structure, Facility or appurtenant items which May alter the normal functioning of the Storm Drain System, including actions which May alter the capacity, fall or structural integrity of a storm drain, channel or related Structure. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.02.050 - Prohibited Discharges and actions. 
No Person Shall make Nonstormwater Discharges to the City Storm Drain System, unless such Discharge is in compliance with an NPDES Permit issued for the Nonstormwater Discharge. Prohibited Discharges include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Any Discharge directly or indirectly into the City Storm Drain System of any solid, liquid or Gaseous Matter in Violation of any Law, rule, regulation, Permit, order or other requirement of any Federal, State, County, municipal or other governmental agency or entity; 
B.  Any Discharge that would result in or contribute to a Violation of the City's NPDES Permit and any amendment, revision, reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other Discharges; 
C.  Any Refuse, Rubbish, Garbage or other discarded or Abandoned objects, articles or accumulations thrown, deposited, left, maintained, kept or Permitted to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained in or upon any Street, Alley, Sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage Structures, place of Business, or public or private Lot of land within the City so that the same May or does become a Pollutant which May or does enter the City Storm Drain System; or 
D.  Any Refuse, Rubbish, Garbage or other discarded or Abandoned objects, articles or accumulations thrown, deposited, left, maintained, kept or Permitted to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained in or upon any fountain, lake, stream or any body of water in a Park or anywhere else in the City. 
In addition, no Person Shall fail or refuse to implement any BMPs imposed by the Director. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 5, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.02.060 - Exceptions to the prohibited Discharges. 
The Following Discharges are exempt from the prohibited Discharges listed in Section 14.02.050: 
A.  Waterline flushing and other Discharges from potable water sources; provided, that the chlorine residual in any heavily chlorinated water Used to disinfect water storage facilities or water mains is thoroughly dechlorinated prior to contacting Receiving Waters; 
B.  Landscape irrigation, lawnwatering and irrigation water; 
C.  Diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, infiltration or separate storm drains, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
D.  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation; 
E.  Individual residential car washings, dechlorinated Swimming Pool Discharges; 
F.  Flows from firefighting. 
(Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.02.070 - Notification of intent and compliance with general Permits. 
Each industrial Discharger, Discharger associated with Construction Activity, or other Discharger engaging in any activities regulated by any general Stormwater Permit adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, Shall provide NOI and comply with and undertake all other activities required by any general NPDES Stormwater Permit applicable to such Discharges. Each Discharger identified in one or more individual NPDES Permits or Discharge orders relating to Stormwater Discharges Shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such Permits or orders. 
(Ord. 0-04-00 § 6, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.02.080 - Compliance with Best Management Practices. 
Any Person undertaking any activity or operation that causes or contributes to illegal or Nonstormwater Discharges or Stormwater Pollution Shall comply with any and all applicable Best Management Practices (BMPs) which will cause the illegal or Nonstormwater Discharges or Stormwater Pollution to be reduced or cease. The Director is authorized to impose BMPs on any Person using the Storm Drain System, and the failure of any Person using the Storm Drain System to implement such BMPs Shall be a Violation of this title. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 7, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.02.090 - Spill Containment. 
A.  No Person Shall store potential Pollutants, including but not limited to, motor Vehicle or machine Parts which May leak Grease, oil, or other toxic substances, in unsealed containers or otherwise cause or Permit any dumpster, solid waste bin, or similar container to leak such that any Pollutant is Discharged into any Street, Alley, Sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage Structures, place of Business, or upon any public or private land in the City. To contain the spillage of Nonstormwater Discharges from any container, the City May require the installation of a Spill Containment system. 
B.  Spill Containment systems, as May be required by Law, by BMPs or otherwise, Shall conform to any requirements established by Law or by the Director. No Person Shall operate a Spill Containment system that allows incompatible liquids to mix or spill, thereby creating a Hazardous or toxic substances in the event of failure of one or more containers. Spill Containment systems Shall consist of a system of dikes, Walls, barriers, Berms or other devices designed to contain liquid spillage. Spill Containment systems Shall be constructed of impermeable Materials that are nonreactive to the liquid being contained. Spilled or leaked waste and accumulated precipitation Shall be removed from the Spill Containment system in as timely a manner as is necessary to prevent overflow of the collection system. Unless otherwise Approved in writing by the Director, all chemicals or wastes Discharged within the collection area Shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and Local Laws and regulations and are not to be Discharged to a Public Sewer, the storm drain or the ground. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 8, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.02.100 - Prevention of accidental Discharge. 
Any Person exercising control over or in charge of Pollutants or other harmful Materials is responsible for protecting against the accidental Discharge of such Pollutants or Materials to the City Storm Drain System. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures utilized to provide necessary protection to the City Storm Drain System Shall be submitted to the City for review. Construction that May lead to the accidental Discharge of Pollutants or other harmful Material May not proceed unless and until the Director has Approved such plans. All existing nondomestic City Storm Drain System Users Shall complete such a plan. City review and Approval of such facilities and operating procedures Shall not relieve the User from the responsibility to modify the User's facilities as necessary to continue to meet the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 9, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.02.110 - Notification of accidental Discharge. 
All Persons in charge of commercial and industrial facilities and Establishments or other Premises, including but not limited to employers and managers, are responsible to train Facility personnel on how to recognize and notify the City of any suspected, confirmed or unconfirmed release of Material, Pollutants or waste creating a risk of unPermitted Discharge to the Storm Drain System. Except as otherwise specified in this title, in the event of an accidental Discharge, it is the responsibility of the User to immediately notify the City, the County Health Department, the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, and other applicable Federal and State Offices as soon as possible Following the accidental Discharge and in all cases within the time required by Law. A Notice Shall be permanently posted in a prominent place advising Employees whom to contact in the event of an accidental Discharge. The Person(s) in charge of the Material, Pollutant or waste accidentally Discharged Shall submit a Written report to the Director. The report Shall describe in detail the type, volume and cause of the Discharge, corrective actions taken and measures to be taken to prevent future recurrences. Such notification Shall not relieve the User of paying any fines or civil penalties incurred by the User or the City as a result of such event, or any other liability which May be imposed by this title or other applicable Laws. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 10, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.02.120 - Authority to inspect. 
A.  Whenever it is necessary to conduct an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this title, or whenever the Director, or his or her Designated Representative, has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any Building or upon any Premises any condition which constitutes a Violation of the provisions of this title, such inspector May enter such Building or Premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the inspector by this title; provided that (i) if such Building or Premises are occupied, he or she Shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and (ii) if such Building or Premises are unoccupied, he or she Shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the Owner or other Persons having charge or control of the Building or Premises and request entry. Any such request for entry Shall be accompanied by a statement to the effect that the Property Owner or Occupant has the right to refuse entry and, except as provided in subsection C of this section, that in the event such entry is refused, inspection May be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the event the Owners and/or Occupant refuse(s) entry after such request has been made, the Director is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any Court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
B.  Routine or area inspections Shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as May be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this title. The Director Shall be authorized to determine compliance with the provisions of this title and have the right to take any necessary action including but not limited to: 
1.  Conducting individualized inspections, sampling, monitoring and/or performing other authorized activities to enforce the provisions of this title; 
2.  Reviewing any records, reports, test results or other information required to enforce the provisions of this title. Such review includes the right to photograph, videotape or Copy any applicable information; or 
3.  Inspecting any wastes, chemicals, storage areas, storage containers, waste-generating processes, treatment facilities and Discharge locations. Such inspection includes the right to photograph or videotape any applicable wastes, chemicals, storage areas, storage containers, treatment facilities and Discharge locations. 
C.  If the Director has reasonable cause to believe that Nonstormwater Discharge conditions on or emanating from the Premises are so Hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the public health or safety, the Director Shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect the Property, and May Use any reasonable means required to effect such an entry and make such inspection, whether the Property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not formal Permission to inspect has been obtained. 
D.  Where a User has instituted security measures requiring proper identification and clearance before entry onto the Premises, the User Shall make all necessary arrangements with its security guards in order that, upon presentation of such identification, duly Designated City personnel Shall be Permitted to enter the Premises without delay for the purpose of performing their authorized duties. For facilities requiring special clearances to conduct inspections, it Shall be the responsibility of the User to obtain all necessary clearances on behalf of the City so that City inspections are not impaired. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 §§ 11, 12, 2000; Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.02.130 - Requirement to test or monitor. 
A.  The Director May direct any Person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any Premises which May cause or contribute to Stormwater Pollution or contamination, illicit Discharges, and/or Discharge of Nonstormwater to the City Stormwater System, to undertake such monitoring activities and/or analyses and furnish such reasonable reports as the Director May specify. The burden, including costs, of these activities, analyses and reports Shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analyses and reports and the benefits to be obtained. The recipient of such request Shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analyses and/or reports requested. 
B.  In the event the Owner or Operator of Premises subject to a monitoring and/or Analysis Order fails to conduct required monitoring and/or analyses and furnish the required reports in the form required, the Director May cause such monitoring and/or analysis and the cost, including the reasonable additional administrative costs incurred by the City, to be borne by the Owner of the Premises. If an invoice demanding payment is not paid within sixty Days of the issuance thereof, the costs May be imposed as a lien upon and against so long as the California Government Code provisions related to the filing and imposition of liens are followed, and such lien Shall continue in existence until the same is paid. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 13, 2000)  
Chapter 14.03 - RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
14.03.010 - Parking Lot and pavement maintenance. 
Persons owning or operating a Parking Lot, Gas station or other enterprise containing large areas of pavement Shall clean such pavement or any similar Structures as frequently and as thoroughly as practicable in a manner that does not result in, and serves to minimize future Discharge of Pollutants to the City Storm Drain System. The Director is authorized to impose BMPs on Persons owning or operating such facilities, and the failure to implement those BMPs Shall be a Violation of this title. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 14, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.03.020 - Prohibitions. 
By adoption of residential and commercial activity Stormwater regulations or by the issuance of residential and commercial activity Stormwater Permits, or both, the Director May impose reasonable limitation as to the quality of Stormwater (including without limitations the Designations of maximum levels of Pollutants) Discharged directly or indirectly into the Storm Drain System from site of residential or commercial activity. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.03.030 - Exemptions. 
See Section 14.04.020. 
(Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.03.040 - Best Management Practices. 
It is the User's responsibility to adopt and implement appropriate Best Management Practices (BMPs), which will effectively prevent the direct or indirect Discharge of Pollutants from the User's Property into the City's Storm Drain System. Such Best Management Practices May include, but are not limited to, Best Management Practices set forth in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, the Municipal Activities Pollution Prevention Strategy Handbook, the General Industrial Permit BMP Handbook, those developed by the San Bernardino NPDES Coordinating Committee, or other BMPs adopted or recommended by Federal, State or Local agencies for prevention of Pollutant Discharge from specific sources. Although it is the User's responsibility to adopt and implement BMPs, the Director is authorized to impose BMPs on Users and the failure to implement such BMPs Shall be a Violation of this title. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 15, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.03.050 - Permits required. 
Any User engaging in or intending to engage or engaging in Construction Activity covered by the State Water Resources Control Board's general Permit for Discharges associated with Construction Activity or industrial activity covered by State Water Resources Control Board's industrial Stormwater general Permit, or any revisions, modifications, or replacements thereto, Shall comply with the applicable order; comply with Section 14.02.070 of this title; and provide evidence of compliance prior to obtaining any City-issued grading or construction Permits. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 16, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.03.060 - Existing Development. 
Existing Development Shall control Stormwater runoff and Nonstormwater so as to prevent any deterioration of water quality that would impair subsequent or competing Uses of the water. The Director has the right to identify the BMPs that Shall be implemented to prevent such deterioration and the right to identify the manner of implementation. Failure to implement any BMPs identified by the Director Shall be a Violation of this title. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 17, 2000)  
Chapter 14.04 - INDUSTRIAL REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
14.04.010 - Specified prohibitions. 
By adoption of industrial activity Stormwater regulations or by the issuance of industrial activity Stormwater Permits, or both, the Director May impose reasonable limitations as to the quality of Stormwater (including without limitations the Designation of maximum levels of Pollutants) Discharged directly or indirectly into the Storm Drain System from sites of industrial activity. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.04.020 - Exemptions. 
Reserved for future Use. 
(Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.04.030 - Best Management Practices. 
It is the User's responsibility to adopt and implement appropriate Best Management Practices as set forth in Section 14.03.040. Although it is the User's responsibility to adopt and implement appropriate BMPs, the Director is authorized to impose BMPs on Industrial Users, and the failure to implement such BMPs Shall be a Violation of this title. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 18, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.04.040 - Permits required. 
Any Person engaging in or intending to engage in industrial activity covered by the State Water Resources Control Board's industrial Stormwater general Permit, or any revision, modification, reissuance or replacement thereto, Shall comply with the applicable order; comply with Section 14.02.070 of this title; and provide evidence of compliance prior to obtaining any City-issued grading or construction Permits. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 19, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 14.05 - CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
14.05.010 - Nonstormwater Discharges. 
The Following Nonstormwater Discharges are allowed under the City's General Construction Permit so long as they comply with BMPs as described in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP), do not contain Pollutants therein, are infeasible to eliminate, do not require a Nonstormwater Permit from the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, are not prohibited by the basin plan and do not cause or contribute to Violations of any water quality standards or Federal, State or Local Law or regulation: 
A.  Landscape irrigation or erosion control measures; 
B.  Waterline flushing and testing as provided for in Section 14.02.060; 
C.  Street cleaning; 
D.  Tree watering; 
E.  Dust control; and 
F.  Soil compaction. 
(Ord. 0-04-00 § 20, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.05.020 - Best Management Practices. 
It is the User's responsibility to adopt and implement appropriate Best Management Practices as set forth in Section 14.03.040. Although it is the User's responsibility to adopt and implement appropriate BMPs, the Director is authorized to impose BMPs on all Construction Activity, and the failure to implement such BMPs Shall be a Violation of this title. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 21, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.05.030 - Permits required. 
Any Person intending to engage or engaging in Construction Activity covered by the State Water Resources Control Board's general Permit for Discharges of Stormwater associated with Construction Activity, or any revision, modification, reissuance or replacement thereto, Shall comply with the applicable order; comply with Section 14.02.070 of this title; and provide evidence of compliance prior to obtaining any City-issued grading or construction Permits. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 22, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.05.040 - New Development and redevelopment. 
A.  Contractors and Owners constructing new Development or Redevelopment Projects subject to the State Water Resources Control Board's general Permit for Discharges of Stormwater associated with Construction Activity, or any revision, modification, reissuance or replacement thereto, Shall develop and implement a SWPPP prior to disturbing the proposed construction site. All such contractors and Owners Shall control Stormwater runoff so as to prevent any deterioration of water quality that would impair subsequent or competing Uses of the water. All such contractors and Owners Shall develop and implement a monitoring program with the inspection Components required by the State Water Resources Control Board. The Director May identify the BMPs that Shall be implemented to prevent such deterioration and Shall identify the manner of implementation. The BMPs may, among other things, require new Developments or redevelopments to do one or more of the Following: 
1.  Increase permeable areas by leaving highly porous soil and low-lying areas undisturbed; by incorporating Landscaping and Open Space into the Project design; by using porous Materials for or near Driveways and walkways; and by incorporating detention ponds and infiltration pits into the Project design; 
2.  Direct Stormwater runoff to permeable areas by directing it away from swales, Berms, green strip filters, gravel beds, and french drains; by installing rain gutters oriented towards permeable areas; by modifying the Grade of the Property to divert flow to permeable areas and minimize the amount of Stormwater runoff leaving the Property; and by designing Curbs, Berms or other Structures such that they do not isolate permeable or landscaped areas; or 
3.  Maximize Stormwater storage for reuse by using retention Structures, subsurface areas, cisterns or other Structures to store Stormwater runoff for reuse or slow release. 
B.  Construction activities, which cause or contribute to a Violation of water quality standards, Must be corrected immediately. Within fourteen calendar Days of the Violation, the contractor or Owner Must provide a report to the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region and to the City of the corrective action taken. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 23, 2000)  
Chapter 14.06 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
14.06.010 - Notice of Violation. 
Whenever the Director finds that any Person or User has violated or is violating any provisions of this title, a NPDES Permit or a City Permit, or finds that a Violation of such provisions or Permits is likely to take place, the Director may, before, simultaneously with, or after taking one of the other enforcement actions authorized by this title, serve upon the violator a Written Notice stating the nature of the Violation and stating the penalties for continued noncompliance. If required by the Notice, the User Shall submit to the Director, within a prescribed period specified in the Notice, which period Shall not be less than ten Working Days unless an Emergency situation dictates a shorter period, a plan indicating the cause of the Violation, corrective actions which will be taken to prevent recurrence and, if required, a proposed compliance schedule indicating the dates those corrective actions will be completed. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 24, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.06.020 - Violations deemed a Public Nuisance—Abatement. 
In addition to the criminal, civil and other administrative penalties established by this title, any condition caused or Permitted to exist in Violation of any provisions of this title which is a threat to public health, safety or welfare Shall be declared and deemed a Public Nuisance, provided such threat meets the standards and requirements of California Law relevant to Public Nuisances. The Director, in his or her discretion, May summarily abate the Public Nuisance and/or restore and remediate the subject Property. As set forth in Section 14.06.060, the City Attorney May concurrently or alternatively file a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such Nuisance. The cost of such abatement, remediation and/or restoration Shall be borne by the Owner of the Property causing the Violation. Provided the requirements of the State and Federal constitutions regarding due process are met, and the California Government Code provisions relating to the filing and imposition of liens are followed, such cost Shall be a lien upon and against the Property and Shall continue in existence until fully paid. If the lien is not satisfied by the Owner of the Property within the legally prescribed amount of time after the City's removal or abatement of the Public Nuisance, and/or restoration and remediation of the Property to its original condition, the Property may, so long as otherwise Permitted by Law, be sold in satisfaction of the lien in a like manner as other Real Property is sold under execution. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 25, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.06.030 - Enforcement charges and Fees. 
In addition to the Stormwater management User Fees and other charges set forth in Section 14.01.050, and the other charges and Fees set forth in this Code, the City May recover costs for the implementation and enforcement of this title. These Fees Must relate exclusively to Matters covered by this title and are separate from all other Fees chargeable by Resolution of the City Council. The City enforcement charges and Fees May include, but are not limited to, Fees and charges for the Following: 
A.  Monitoring, inspection, surveillance procedures and laboratory costs; 
B.  Reviewing plans and construction inspection; 
C.  Noncompliance and enforcement. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 27, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.06.040 - Administrative hearing and administrative penalties. 
In addition to the other enforcement options set forth in this title, the Director May enforce this title through the administrative fines and penalties procedures contained in Chapter 8.12 of this Code. Any User May also request in writing, or the Director May order, an administrative hearing at which a Person who causes or allows, or who has caused or allowed, a Violation of this title to occur, Shall show cause why proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The City Manager will act as the Administrative Officer and preside over the administrative hearing at which each Party, including the User and the director, Shall have the right to present evidence; provided, however, that if the City Manager is directly and substantially involved in enforcing this title as against the alleged violator, the City Manager Shall appoint another City Employee not involved in the enforcement action to act as the administrative Hearing Officer. A Notice Shall be served on the Person specifying the time and place of the hearing regarding the Violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken and the proposed enforcement measures, directing the Person to show cause before the Hearing Officer why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The Notice of hearing Shall be served personally or by registered mail, with return receipt requested, at least ten Working Days before the hearing. Service May be made on any agent or Officer of the alleged violator. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 28, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.06.050 - Administrative Order and administrative penalties. 
A.  The Director May require compliance with this title, a NPDES Permit or a City Permit by issuing Written Administrative Orders or by directly seeking Court action. The Director May also enforce this title through the provisions of Chapter 8.12 of this Code. Administrative Orders May include Stop-work Orders, Cease and Desist Orders, Termination of Service Orders, Administrative Penalties, Immediate Termination of Service Orders, and the imposition of administrative penalties. 
1.  Stop-work Order. The Director May serve a Written Stop-Work Order on any Person engaged in doing or causing to be done New Construction, or Tenant Improvement, Alterations or additions, if: 
a.  A City Permit is required and no Permit has been granted by the City; 
b.  Work has begun without necessary prior Written Approval by the Director; or 
c.  Violations of this title are found at the site of the New Construction, or Tenant Improvement, Alterations or additions. 
Any Person served a Stop-Work Order Shall Stop such work forthwith until Written authorization to continue is received from the City Manager. 
2.  Cease and Desist Order. When the Director finds that any Person has violated or threatens to violate any provisions of this title, a NPDES Stormwater Permit or a City Permit, the Director May issue an order to cease and desist such Discharge or practice and direct the violator or potential violator to: 
a.  Comply immediately; 
b.  Comply in accordance with the time schedule in the Cease and Desist Order; or 
c.  Take appropriate remedial or preventative action to prevent the Violation from recurring, including but not limited to requiring the immediate removal of any oil, dirt, earth, grass, weeds, dead trees or bushes, tin cans, Rubbish, Refuse, waste or other Material which does or May result in an increase in Pollutants entering the City Storm Drain System, the City Street System, or natural Watercourse. 
A Cease and Desist Order May include modifications in the frequency of monitoring, testing and submission of self-monitoring reports. 
3.  Termination of Service. When the Director finds that any Industrial User or commercial User has violated an Administrative Order, the Director May terminate storm drain service to the User. The User Shall be liable for all costs, and any legally available damages attendant thereto, for termination of storm drain service incurred by the User and the City. This provision is in addition to other statutes, rules or regulations authorizing termination of service for delinquency of payment, or for any other reason. Storm drain service Shall be reinstituted by the water utilities manager after the User has complied with all the provisions of the Administrative Order. The User Shall also be liable for all costs for reinstituting the storm drain service. 
4.  Immediate Termination of Service. The Director May immediately suspend storm drain service and any City Permit when such suspension is necessary in the opinion of the Director to Stop an actual or threatened Discharge which presents or May present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health, safety or welfare of Persons or the environment, or which causes significant Pollution to the receiving groundwaters and water courses of the City. Any Industrial User or commercial User notified that storm drain service, a NPDES Permit or a City Permit has been suspended Shall immediately Stop and eliminate the applicable contribution to the Storm Drain System. In the event of failure to comply voluntarily with the Suspension Order, the Director Shall take steps as deemed necessary, as allowed by Law, including immediate severance of storm drain connections. The Industrial User or Commercial User Shall be liable for all costs incurred by the City in terminating storm drain service. Storm drain service May be reinstituted by the Director after the actual or threatened Discharge has been eliminated. A detailed Written statement, prepared by the Industrial User or Commercial User, describing the cause of the harmful contribution and the measures to prevent any future recurrence Shall be submitted to the Director within fifteen Working Days of the date of the storm drain termination. 
B.  The Director May adopt a proposed compliance schedule submitted by the User, or May adopt a revised compliance schedule if, in the opinion of the Director, the User's compliance schedule would allow the User to cause harm to the Receiving Waters and/or to City Storm Drain Facilities. The Director will notify the User of the adopted compliance schedule in a timely manner. The Director Shall not adopt a compliance schedule which extends beyond applicable Federal or State guidelines. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 29, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.06.060 - Legal action. 
A.  If any Person violates the provisions of this title, Federal or State NPDES Permit, City Permit requirement or any order of the City, the City Attorney May commence an action for appropriate legal, equitable or injunctive relief in the municipal or superior Court of the County. 
B.  In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, the City May recover all reasonable Attorney's Fees, Court costs, Court reporter Fees, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit of Law against the Person(s) found to have violated any of the provisions of this title, NPDES Permit, City Permit or the orders, rules, regulations and Permits issued thereunder. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.06.070 - Civil and administrative penalties. 
In addition to the other enforcement options set forth in this title, the Director May enforce this title through the provisions of Chapter 8.12 of the code. Any User of the Storm Drain System who violates any provision of this title is subject to a fine hereunder or pursuant to Chapter 8.12 not to exceed one thousand dollars for each offense. Each Violation Shall be considered a separate and distinct offense, and each Day on which a Violation Shall occur or continue Shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, the City May recover all reasonable Attorney's Fees, Court costs, Court reporter Fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit of Law against the Person found to have violated this title, NPDES Permit, City Permit or the rules, regulations and Permits issued under this title. The Business License of any industrial/Commercial User who is found to have violated an Administrative Order to comply with any provision of this title, NPDES Permit or City Permit and the orders, rules, regulations and Permits under this title May be revoked. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.06.080 - Criminal penalties. 
Any Person who wilfully violates any provision of this title or any Permit condition, who knowingly violates any Stop-Work Order, Cease and Desist Order, Termination or Immediate Termination Order, prohibition or Effluent limitation, who knowingly makes false statements, representations or certifications in any Application, record, report, or other document filed with or returned to the City or to be maintained pursuant to this title or to a NPDES Permit, who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly causes inaccuracy in any monitoring device or method required or authorized under this title, or who causes, Permits, aids, abets or conceals a Violation of any provision of this title, is guilty of a misdemeanor, which upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for a period for not more than six Months, or both. Each such Person Shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every Day during which any Violation of any provision of this title is committed, continued or Permitted by such Person, and Shall be punishable for that Violation as provided by this section. 
(Ord. 0-04-00 § 30, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.06.090 - Compensation for damages—Indemnification. 
Any Person who damages monitoring equipment, detrimentally affects the water quality of the United States, significantly increases maintenance of, requires nonroutine inspection or sampling of, causes Blockages of, damages to or Interference with storm drain facilities, or causes any other damages, including the imposition of fines or penalties on the City by Federal, State or Local regulatory agencies, Shall be liable to the City for all damages and additional costs, including fines and penalties, occasioned thereby. Liability for any such Discharge Shall be the responsibility of the Person(s) causing or responsible for the Discharge, and such Person(s) Shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its elected officials, Officers, Employees and agents, in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such Discharge. An administrative Fee, which Shall be fixed by the Director based on the City's current overhead cost Application percentage, Shall be added to these charges and Shall be payable to the City within thirty calendar Days of the invoicing. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-04-00 § 31, 2000: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
14.06.100 - Appeals. 
Any Decision of the Director or the Administrative Hearing Officer May be Appealed to a Court of competent jurisdiction. The imposition of fines or penalties Shall be stayed during the Appeal period unless the Director or Administrative Hearing Officer, as applicable, determines that such a stay would threaten the public safety, health or welfare. 
(Ord. 0-07-04 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 0-17-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION  
Chapter 15.04 - CODES ADOPTION[1] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-26-16, § 3, adopted December 20, 2016, amended chapter 15.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 15.04, §§ 15.04.010, 15.04.020, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from O-04-15, § 3, 4-7-2015. 
 
15.04.010 - Codes adoption. 
The 2016 California Building Code, incorporating the "International Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2", 2015 Edition, including all appendices thereto; the 2016 California Residential Code, incorporating the "International Residential Code", 2015 Edition, including all appendices thereto; the 2016 California Mechanical Code, incorporating the "Uniform Mechanical Code", 2015 Edition; including all appendices thereto; the 2016 California Plumbing Code, incorporating the "Uniform Plumbing Code", 2015 Edition, including all appendices thereto; the 2016 California Electrical Code, incorporating the " National Electrical Code ", 2014 Edition; including all annexes thereto; 2016 California Green Building Standards Code; are hereby adopted by reference in their entirety and amended in Chapters 15.06, 15.07, 15.08, 15.09, 15.10, 15.11, 15.12, and 15.13 herein, shall comprise the Building and Construction Regulations of the City of Colton." 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 3, 12-20-2016)  
15.04.020 - Violations. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the City, or cause the same to be done, contrary to, or in violation of , any of the provisions of the codes. 
B.  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of the code is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any such violation is committed, continued, or permitted, is a separate offense. Any such violation shall be punishable by such fines and penalties as described in Chapter 8.12 of the Colton Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 3, 12-20-2016)  
Chapter 15.06 - BUILDING CODE[2] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, adopted December 20, 2016, amended chapter 15.06 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 15.06, §§ 15.06.005—15.06.310, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from O-04-15, § 4, 4-7-2015. 
 
15.06.005 - Section [A] 101.4 of Chapter 1, Division II amended—Referenced codes. 
Sections [A] 101.4.1, 101.4.2, 101.4.3 and 101.4.4 of the California Building Code are deleted. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.010 - Section [A] 105.2 of Chapter 1, Division II amended—Work exempt from permit. 
Section [A] 105.2 of the California Building Code is hereby amended by amending item 2, and adding a new item 14, to read as follows: 
2.  Chain-link, plastic, or similar fences not over 6 feet in height or masonry, wood, wrought iron concrete fence not over 4 feet in height above the lowest adjacent grade unless supporting a surcharge or impounding class I, II or III-A liquids. 
4.  Retaining walls that are not over 3 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or IIIA liquid 
14.  Flag pole not to exceed 20 feet in height above ground in a residential lot 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.020 - Section [A] 105.5 of Chapter 1, Division II amended—Expiration. 
Section [A] 105.5 of the California Building Code is hereby amended by adding a sentence at the end of the section to read as follows: 
Building permits issued to repair under Chapter 8.04 or 8.05 of this code shall expire in sixty (60) days from the date such permit is issued unless the Code Enforcement and Housing Appeals Board authorizes a longer period of time in which to complete the work in which event such permit will expire at the end of such longer period of time. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.030 - Section [A] 105.3 of Chapter 1, Division II added—Permit Issuance. 
Section [A] 105.3 of the California Building Code is amended to add subsection to read as follows: 
Building permits may be issued to either: 
a)  . Persons holding a valid license issued by State of California State Contractor's License Board, related to the specialty of the work being performed, or 
b)  . Persons providing bona fide proof of ownership of the Property and Buildings for which the Permit is being issued or their authorized Representative. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.040 - Section [A] 113.1 and [A] 113.3 of Chapter 1, Division II amended—Board of appeals. 
Sections [A] 113.1 and [A] 113.3 of Chapter 1, Division II of the California Building Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A]  113.1 General. 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determination made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals consisting of 3 members and 2 alternates who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The Building Official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as Secretary to said Board but shall have no vote on any matter before the Board. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official. 
[A]  113.3 Qualifications. Deleted. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.050 - Section [A] 114.1 and [A] 114.2 of Chapter 1, Division II amended—Violations. 
Sections [A] 114.1 and [A] 114.2 of Chapter 1, Division II of the California Building Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A]  114.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish, occupy or maintain any building, structure or equipment regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. 
[A]  114.2 Notice of violation. The Building Official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving removal, demolition, maintaining or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.060 - Section 903 is amended—Fire protection systems. 
Section 903.2 amended. Section 903.2 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings or structures shall be provided in locations described in this section regardless of fire resistive separation walls. In all existing structures and occupancies not equipped with an automatic sprinkler system, the following requirements shall apply: 
1.  For existing buildings smaller than 5,000 square feet in gross floor area, when an addition causes the structure to exceed 5,000 square feet and such addition is equal to or greater than 50% of the existing square footage, the entire structure shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system. 
2.  For existing buildings larger than 5,000 square feet in gross floor area, when an addition is equal to or greater than 10% of the existing square footage, the entire structure shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system. 
3.  For existing buildings larger than 5,000 square feet in gross floor area, when extensive renovation or remodeling is done to more than 50% of the gross floor area, and when a change of use that, in the opinion of the fire code official using the guidance of this Code, increases the likelihood of, or increases the danger to occupants in a fire incident, the entire area shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.070 - Section 903.2.1 amended. 
Section 903.2.1 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1 Group A. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings and portions thereof used a Group an occupancies as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.080 - Section 903.2.1.1 amended. 
Section 903.2.1.1 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-1 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more; 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge; or 
4.  The fire area contains a multi-theater complex. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.090 - Section 903.2.1.2 amended. 
Section 903.2.1.2 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-2 occupancies where one of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more; or 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.100 - Section 903.2.1.3 amended. 
Section 903.2.1.3 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-3 occupancies where one of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more; or 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.110 - Section 903.2.1.4 amended. 
Section 903.2.1.4 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-4 occupancies where one of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more; or 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.120 - Section 903.2.2 amended. 
Section 903.2.2 of the California Building Code is hereby amended by adding the following: 
903.2.2.1 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all buildings containing a Group B occupancy with a fire area of 5,000 square feet or greater. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.130 - Section 903.2.3 amended. 
Section 903.2.3 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group E occupancies as follows: 
1.  Throughout all Group E fire areas 5,000 square feet or greater in area. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.140 - Section 903.2.4 amended. 
Section 903.2.4 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.4 Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group F-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Where the fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; or 
2.  Where the fire area is located more than three stories above grade. 
3.  A Group F-1 occupancy used for the manufacture of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.150 - Section 903.2.4.1 amended. 
Section 903.2.4.1 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.4.1 Woodworking operations. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group F-1 occupancy that contains woodworking operations in excess of 2,500 square feet and which generate finely divided combustible waste or which use finely divided combustible materials. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.160 - Section 903.2.4.2 added. 
Section 903.2.4.1 is hereby added to the California Building Code to read as follows: 
903.2.4.2 Group F-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group F-2 occupancy where one of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Where the fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; or 
2.  Where the fire area is located more than three stories above grade. 
3.  A Group F-2 occupancy used for metal products for either fabrication and/or assembly exceeds 2,500 square feet. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.170 - Section 903.2.7 amended. 
Section 903.2.7 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Where the fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; or 
2.  Where the fire area is located more than 3 stories above grade. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.180 - Section 903.2.9 amended. 
Section 903.2.9 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; or 
2.  The fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane. 
3.  A Group S-1 occupancy used for the manufacture of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.190 - Section 903.2.9.1 amended. 
Section 903.2.9.1 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.9.1 Repair garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in all buildings containing repair garages in accordance with the Building Code as follows: 
1.  Where the fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
Section 903.2.10 amended. Section 903.2.10 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.2.10 Group S-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing an enclose parking garage in accordance with Section 406.6 of the California Building Code where one of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Where the fire area of the enclosed garage exceeds 5,000 square feet; or 
2.  Where the enclosed parking garage is located beneath other groups. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.200 - Table 1505.1 amended—Minimum roof covering classification. 
Table 1505.1 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: Table 1505.1 Minimum Roof Covering Classification for different types of construction for new buildings, re-roofs or additions. 
IA 	IB 	IIA 	IIB 	IIIA 	IIIB 	IV 	VA 	VB 
A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	B* 	B* 	B* 
 
*See Section 1505.1.1 for Class A Roof Coverings in Very-High Fire Hazard Severity 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.210 - Section 1609.3 amended—Basic wind speed. 
Section 1609.3 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to by adding a sentence at the end of the section to read as follows: 
For the City of Colton, new structures shall be designed for a minimum wind speed as follows: 
Risk Category I - 100 mph, Vult'. - Exposure "C" 
Risk Category II - 110 mph, Vult'. - Exposure "C" 
Risk Category III & IV - 115 mph, Vult'. - Exposure "C" 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.220 - Appendix Chapters adopted. 
Appendices chapters C, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, in the California Building Code are hereby Adopted. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.230 - Section J101-1 of Appendix J amended—Scope. 
Section J101.1 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
J101.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter apply to grading, excavation and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments. Where conflicts occur between the technical requirements of this chapter and the geotechnical report, the geotechnical report shall govern. In addition, the designs of the work as described above need to meet the recognized and accepted civil and geotechnical engineering practices and principles. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.240 - Section J101 of Appendix J amended—Special requirements for hazardous conditions. 
Section J101, a second paragraph is added to the California Building Code to read as follows: 
J101 General. Whenever the Building Official determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the Building Official, shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment to eliminate the hazard and to be in conformance with the requirements of this code. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.250 - Section J103.2 of Appendix J—Amended—Exemptions. 
Section J103.2 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
J103.2 Exemptions: 
A grading permit is not required for the following: 
1.  When approved by the Building Official, grading in an isolated, self-contained area if there is no danger to private or public property. 
2.  An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation or exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than 5 feet (1524mm) after the completion of such structure. 
5.  Excavations for wells or tunnels or utilities. 
6.  Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay where established and provided for by law, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property. 
7.  Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.270 - Section J105.1 of Appendix J amended—General. 
Section J105.1 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
J105.1 General. Inspections shall be governed by Section 110, Chapter 1, Division II of this code and requirements established, by approved policies and procedures of the Engineering Division. An engineer shall provide grading inspections and certifications for the work. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
15.06.280 - Section J109.4 of Appendix J amended—Drainage across property lines. 
Section J109.4 of the California Building Code is amended to have the following sentences added at the end of the section: 
For Single Family Lot Drainage 
1.  Whenever possible, drainage from single family lots shall flow directly to a street or an approved location 
2.  If it should be determined necessary to allow offside drainage to flow through a single family lot (to preserve down lot views, esthetics, accept flow from offsite property, etc.), the following shall apply: 
a.  Drainage from only one lot shall flow through only one other lot. 
b.  A drainage easement shall be provided/obtained over the lot accepting the drainage. 
c.  The drainage shall be contained within either a concrete/rock lined swale or a reinforced concrete pipe. 
d.  The drainage facility shall be designed with excess capacity to account for the probable lack of necessary maintenance. Therefore, it shall be designed to convey two times the runoff from a 100 year storm with the minimum diameter for a pipe being 12 inches. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 4, 12-20-2016)  
Chapter 15.07 - RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE[3] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-26-16, § 5, adopted December 20, 2016, amended chapter 15.07 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 15.07, §§ 15.07.010—15.07.090, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from O-04-15, § 5, 4-7-2015. 
 
15.07.010 - Section 1.8.8 of Chapter 1, Division I amended—Board of appeals. 
Section 1.8.8 of Chapter 1, Division I of the California Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
1.8.8.1 General. 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determination made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals consisting of 3 members and 2 alternates who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The Building Official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as Secretary to said Board but shall have no vote on any matter before the Board. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 5, 12-20-2016)  
15.07.020 - Section R105.2 of Chapter I, Division II amended—Work exempt from permit. 
Section 105.2 of the California Residential Code is hereby amended by amending item 2 and 3 and adding a new item 11 to read as follows: 
2  Chain-link, plastic, or similar fences not over 6 feet in height or masonry, Wood, wrought iron and concrete fences not over 4 feet in height above the lowest adjacent grade unless supporting a surcharge or impounding class I, II or III-A liquids 
3  Retaining walls that are not over 3 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or IIIA liquids 
11.  Flag pole not to exceed 20 feet in height above ground in a residential lot. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 5, 12-20-2016)  
15.07.030 - Section R105.5 of Chapter 1, Division II amended—Expiration. 
Section R105.5 of the California Residential Code is hereby amended by adding a sentence at the end of the section to read as follows: 
Building permits issued to repair under Chapter 8.04 or 8.05 of this code shall expire in sixty (60) days from the date such permit is issued unless the Code Enforcement and Housing Appeals Board authorizes a longer period of time in which to complete the work in which event such permit will expire at the end of such longer period of time. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 5, 12-20-2016)  
15.07.040 - Section R113.1 and R113.2 of Chapter I, Division II—Amended—Violations. 
Section of R113.1 and R113.2 of Chapter 1, Division II of the California Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R113.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish, occupy or maintain any building, structure or equipment regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. 
R113.2 Notice of violation. The Building Official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition, maintaining or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 5, 12-20-2016)  
15.07.050 - Section R301.2.1 amended—Wind design criteria. 
Section R301.2.1 of the California Residential Code is hereby amended by adding a sentence at the end of the section to read as follows: 
For the City of Colton, new structures shall be designed for a minimum wind speed Vult' of 110 miles per hour 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 5, 12-20-2016)  
15.07.070 - Section R902.1 amended—Roofing covering materials. 
Section R902.1 of the California Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. A minimum Class A or B roofing shall be installed in areas designated by this section. Classes A or B roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E 108. 
Minimum Roof Covering Classification for different types of construction for new buildings, re roofs or additions except for the construction of roofs in very High Fire Hazard Zones. 
IA 	IB 	IIA 	IIB 	IIIA 	IIIB 	IV 	VA 	VB 
A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	B* 	B* 	B* 
 
*See Section 902.1.1 for Class A Roof Coverings in Very-High Fire Hazard Severity 
The remaining section of the code remains the same. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 5, 12-20-2016)  
15.07.080 - Appendices adopted. 
Appendices A, B, C, D, E, F, I, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, & U of the California Residential Code are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 5, 12-20-2016)  
Chapter 15.08 - MECHANICAL CODE[4] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-26-16, § 6, adopted December 20, 2016, amended chapter 15.08 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 15.08, §§ 15.04.010—15.04.040, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from O-04-15, § 6, 4-7-2015. 
 
15.08.010 - Section 108.1 of Chapter 1, Division II amended—General. 
Section 108.1 of the California Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
108.1 General. 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determination made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals consisting of 3 members and 2 alternates who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The Building Official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as Secretary to said Board but shall have no vote on any matter before the Board. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building and Safety Services Director. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 6, 12-20-2016)  
15.08.020 - Section 114.2 of Chapter 1, Division II amended—Permit fees. 
Section 114.2 of the California Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
114.2 Permit Fees. 
The fee for each permit shall be as established by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 6, 12-20-2016)  
15.08.030 - Section 114.3 of Chapter 1, Division II amended—Plan review fees. 
Section 114.3 of the California Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
114.3 Plan Review Fees. 
When Section 114.2 requires submittal documents, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. Said plan review fee shall be as set forth by Resolution of the City Council. 
Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 6, 12-20-2016)  
15.08.040 - Table 114.1 deleted—Mechanical permit fees. 
Table 114.1 Mechanical Permit Fees of the California Mechanical Code is hereby deleted. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 6, 12-20-2016)  
15.08.050 - Appendix Chapters adopted. 
Appendices B, C, D, E, F, and G, of the California Mechanical Code are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 6, 12-20-2016)  
Chapter 15.09 - PLUMBING CODE[5] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-26-16, § 7, adopted December 20, 2016, amended chapter 15.09 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 15.09, §§ 15.09.010—15.09.080, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. O-04-15, § 7, 4-7-2015. 
 
15.09.010 - Section 102.3 of Chapter 1, Division II amended—Board of appeals. 
Section 102.3 is hereby added to the California Plumbing Code read as follows: 
102.3. Board of appeals 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determination made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals consisting of 3 members and 2 alternates who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The Building Official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as Secretary to said Board but shall have no vote on any matter before the Board. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 7, 12-20-2016)  
15.09.020 - Section 103.4 amended—Permit fees. 
Section 103.4 of the California Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
103.4 Permit Fees. 
The fee for each permit shall be as established by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 7, 12-20-2016)  
15.09.030 - Section 103.4.1 amended—Plan review fees. 
Section 103.4.1 of the California Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
103.4.1 Plan Review Fees. 
When a plan or other data is required to be submitted by 103.2.2, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. Said plan review fee shall be as set forth by Resolution of the City Council. 
Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional review, an additional review fee shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 7, 12-20-2016)  
15.09.040 - Table 103.4 deleted—Plumbing permit fees. 
Table 103.4 of the California Plumbing Code is hereby deleted. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 7, 12-20-2016)  
15.09.050 - Appendix Chapters adopted. 
Appendices chapters A, B, C, D, G, H, I, J, and K. In the California plumbing Code are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 7, 12-20-2016)  
15.09.060 - Section 609.3.1 of Chapter 6 added—Copper tubing. 
Section 609.3.1 is hereby added to Section 609.3.1 of the California Plumbing Code to read as follows: 
609.3.1 Copper tubing serving plumbing fixtures within dwelling unit shall be installed without joints and the installation shall satisfy the following requirements. 
(1)  The copper tubing shall be installed within a watertight continuous sleeve that prevents direct contact between the copper tubing and under-slab soils. 
(2)  During construction the protective sleeve shall be capped at both ends until the copper tubing is installed and released for service. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 7, 12-20-2016)  
Chapter 15.10 - ELECTRICAL CODE[6] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-26-16, § 8, adopted December 20, 2016, amended chapter 15.10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 15.10, § 15.10.010, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from O-04-15, § 8, 4-7-2015. 
 
15.10.010 - Section 80.15 of Annex H amended and approved—Board of appeals. 
Section 80.15 Annex H of the California Electrical Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
80.15. Board of appeals. 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determination made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals consisting of 3 members and 2 alternates who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. O-26-16, § 8, 12-20-2016)  
Chapter 15.11 - GREEN BUILDING CODE 
Section: 
 
15.11.010 - Reserved. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 9, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. O-26-16, § 9, 12-20-2016)  
Chapter 15.12 - HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE 
Section: 
 
15.12.010 - Reserved. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 10, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. O-26-16, § 10, 12-20-2016)  
Chapter 15.13 - EXISTING BUILDING CODE 
Section: 
 
15.13.010 - Reserved. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 11, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. O-26-16, § 11, 12-20-2016)  
15.16 - FIRE CODE[7] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-13, § 5, adopted December 17, 2013, amended chapter 15.16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 15.16, §§ 15.16.010—15.16.340, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
15.16.010. - Adoption of the International Fire Code and the California Fire Code. 
There is hereby adopted by reference by the City of Colton for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life, environment and property from fire or explosion, the 2013 California Fire Code, as compiled and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission (California Code of Regulations, Title 24), and the whole of the 2012 International Fire Code published by the International Code Council, including Chapter 1 and Appendix Chapters 4, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and H, save and except such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended by this Ordinance of which not less than three copies have been and are now filed in the office of the Clerk of the City of Colton and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated fully as if set out at length herein. From the date on which this Ordinance Shall take effect, the provisions thereof Shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Colton. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.020. - Establishment of limits required by the California Fire Code. 
A.  Storage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids. Pursuant to Subsections 5704.2.9.6 and 5706.2.4.4 of the California Fire Code, the storage of flammable and combustible liquids in outside above-ground unprotected tanks and below-grade vaulted tanks is prohibited in all commercial occupancy areas, developed residential areas, and other areas where the fire code official having jurisdiction determines that the installation of flammable and combustible liquid above-ground storage tanks or below-grade vaulted tanks will create a hazard to occupants and property owners in the area. Deviation from these requirements May be allowed only upon specific findings by the fire code official that the installation of said storage or vaulted tanks are compatible with the surrounding area. 
B.  Storage of Flammable Cryogenic Fluids. The limits referred to in Subsection 5806.2 of the California Fire Code, in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: flammable cryogenic fluids Shall not be stored, dispensed or used unless in the opinion of the fire code official, such storage will not create an unacceptable threat to the occupants and property owners. 
C.  Bulk Storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gases. Pursuant to Section 6104.2 of the California Fire Code, the aggregate capacity of any one installation for the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases shall not exceed two thousand water gallons in residential areas. In non-residential areas, when, in the opinion of the fire code official having jurisdiction, the location of bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases would create a threat to the occupants and property owners, the aggregate storage capacity of liquefied petroleum gas Shall also be limited to two thousand water gallons. The fire code official shall be guided by the appropriate City or County Development Code when permitting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas in excess of two thousand water gallons at any one installation. 
D.  Storage of Explosives and Blasting Agents. Pursuant to Subsection 5601.1 of the California Fire Code, the storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited in residential areas, principal business districts, closely-built commercial areas and heavily-populated areas, except as permitted by local City or County ordinances with the Approval of the Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. O-26-16, § 12, 12-20-2016)  
15.16.030. - Section 101.1 amended. 
Section 101.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Colton, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.035. - Section 103.2 amended. 
Section 103.3 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follow: 
103.2 Appointment. The fire code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.040. - Section 104 amended. 
Section 104 of the California Fire Code is amended by adding the following: 
104.12 Cost Recovery. Fire Suppression, Investigations and Rescue or Emergency Medical Costs are recoverable in accordance with Health and Safety Code Sections 13009 and 123009.1. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.050. - Section 105.6 of Chapter 1 amended. 
Section 105.6 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following subsections: 
105.6.3.1 Battery Systems. An operational permit is required for a stationary storage battery system as regulated by section 608 of the Fire Code. 
105.6.15.1 Fixed Hood and Duct Extinguishing Systems. An operational permit is required to utilize commercial cooking appliances, as defined in section 202 , with a fixed hood, duct and cooking appliance fire extinguishing system. 
105.6.33.1 Pallet Yards. An operational permit is required to store, manufacture, refurbish or otherwise handle >200 cubic ft of combustible pallets at one site. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.060. - Section 109.3 of Chapter 1 amended. 
Section 109.4 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any such violation is committed, continued, or permitted, is a separate offense. Any such violation shall be punishable by such fines and penalties as described in Chapter 8.12 of the Colton Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.070. - Section 111.4 of Chapter 1 amended. 
Section 111.4 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for penalties as described in Chapter 8.12 of the Colton Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.080. - Section 301 amended. 
Section 301 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following: 
301.3 Abatement of Fire Hazards. In the event that a fire hazard exists, as determined by the fire code official and in accordance with this chapter, the fire code official may give notice to the owner of the property upon which a hazardous condition exists to abate such condition. In the event that abatement is not performed within the timeframes granted by such notices or other written documentation, the fire code official may cause abatement to be done in accordance with public nuisance abatement procedures and make the expense of such abatement a lien upon the property at which such condition exists. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.090. - Section 305 amended. 
Section 305 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following: 
305.5 Spark Arresters. Each chimney used in conjunction with a fireplace or other heating appliance, in which solid or liquid fuel is used, shall be maintained with an approved spark arrester. The spark arrester shall be constructed of 24 gauge stainless steel, 12 gauge copper or brass, or 19 gauge woven galvanized wire mesh, or of materials with equivalent heat and corrosion resistance. Openings in the arrester screen shall not permit the passage of spheres of one-half inch maximum and shall not block the passage of spheres three-eighths inch minimum. The screen shall be mounted in or over all outside flue openings in a vertical and near vertical position, adequately supported to prevent movement and visible from the ground. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.100. - Section 503.2.1 amended. 
Section 503.2.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 26 feet, except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of 14 feet, 6 inches, unless mitigating protection measures are applied and approved by the fire code official. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.110. - Section 503.2.3 amended. 
Section 503.2.3 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus and shall be surfaced so as to provideall-weather driving capabilities with the appropriate thickness of concrete or asphalt. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.120. - Section 503.2.7 amended. 
Section 503.2.7 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
503.2.7 Grade. The grade of the fire apparatus access road shall be within the limits established by the fire code official based on the fire department's apparatus to a maximum of twelve percent (12%), unless mitigating protection measures are applied and approved by the fire code official. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.130. - Section 503.4 amended. 
Section 503.4 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances established in Section 503.2.1 shall be maintained at all times. Any condition that serves as an impediment to fire access, or any vehicle or other obstruction to fire access may be removed at the orders of the Fire Department or other governing agency in cooperation with the Fire Department, with the expense of such removal to be paid by the owner of the roadway, or of said vehicle or obstruction. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.140. - Section 505.1 amended. 
Section 505.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
505.1 Address numbers. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. New residential dwelling unit addresses shall have minimum 4 inch numbers, with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch, and shall be internally illuminated by means of a low voltage power source during the hours of darkness. Where building setbacks exceed 100 feet from the named roadway, additional non-illuminated numbers 4 inch high shall be displayed at the property entrance. Multi-family, commercial and industrial use buildings less than 100,000 square feet shall have numbers a minimum of 8 inches high and with a minimum stroke of 1 inch. Multi-family, commercial and industrial use buildings 100,000 square feet or larger shall have numbers a minimum of 12 inches high with a minimum stroke of 1.5 inches. Such address numbers shall be electrically illuminated by an internal or external source during the hours of darkness. Where building setbacks exceed 200 feet from the named roadway, additional non-illuminated 6 inch high numbers shall be displayed at the property entrance. In addition, minimum 4 inch high contrasting suite address numbers or letters shall be placed on the front and rear doors of tenant areas in buildings where applicable. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.150. - Section 507.5.1 amended. 
Section 507.5.1 of the California Fire Code and International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
507.5.1 Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 300 feet from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official. 
Exception: 
1. For Group R-3 and Group U occupancies, the distance requirement shall be 400 feet. This distance may be further modified by the fire code official for such occupancies when buildings are equipped throughout with an approved fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with sections 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3 . 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.160. - Section 509 amended. 
Section 509 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following: 
509.2.1 Access to equipment in multi-unit buildings. When automatic fire sprinkler systems or fire alarm systems are installed in buildings constructed for multiple tenants and these systems protect multiple tenant spaces, the main controls and control appurtenances, such as risers, fire alarm control panels, and valves for such systems, shall be located in an attached or included room or an approved weather resistant enclosure with at least one exterior access door of not less than 3'-0? by 6'-8?. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.170. - Section 901.4.2 amended. 
Section 901.4.2 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
901.4.2 Non-required fire protection systems. Any fire protection system or portion thereof not required by this code or the California Building Code shall be allowed to be furnished provided such installed system meets the requirements of this code and the California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.180. - Section 903.2 amended. 
Section 903.2 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings or structures shall be provided in locations described in this section regardless of fire resistive separation walls. 
In all existing structures and occupancies not equipped with an automatic sprinkler system, the following requirements shall apply: 
1. For existing buildings smaller than 5,000 square feet in gross floor area, when an addition causes the structure to exceed 5,000 square feet and such addition is equal to or greater than 50% of the existing square footage, the entire structure shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system. 
2. For existing buildings larger than 5,000 square feet in gross floor area, when an addition is equal to or greater than 10% of the existing square footage, the entire structure shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system. 
3. For existing buildings larger than 5,000 square feet in gross floor area, when extensive renovation or remodeling is done to more than 50% of the gross floor area, and when a change of use that, in the opinion of the fire code official using the guidance of this Code, increases the likelihood of, or increases the danger to occupants in a fire incident, the entire area shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.190. - Section 903.2.1 amended. 
Section 903.2.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1 Group A. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings and portions thereof used a Group A occupancies as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.200. - Section 903.2.1.1 amended. 
Section 903.2.1.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-1 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists: 
1. The fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; 
2. The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more; 
3. The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge; or 
4. The fire area contains a multi-theater complex. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.210. - Section 903.2.1.2 amended. 
Section 903.2.1.2 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-2 occupancies where one of the following conditions exist: 
1. The fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; 
2. The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more; or 
3. The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.220. - Section 903.2.1.3 amended. 
Section 903.2.1.3 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-3 occupancies where one of the following conditions exist: 
1. The fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; 
2. The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more; or 
3. The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.230. - Section 903.2.1.4 amended. 
Section 903.2.1.4 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-4 occupancies where one of the following conditions exist: 
1. The fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; 
2. The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more; or 
3. The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.240. - Section 903.2.2 amended. 
Section 903.2.2 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following: 
903.2.2.1Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all buildings containing a Group B occupancy with a fire area of 5,000 square feet or greater. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.250. - Section 903.2.3 amended. 
Section 903.2.3 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group E occupancies as follows: 
1. Throughout all Group E fire areas 5,000 square feet or greater in area. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.260. - Section 903.2.4 amended. 
Section 903.2.4 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.4 Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group F-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exist: 
1. Where the fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; or 
2. Where the fire area is located more than three stories above grade. 
3. A Group F-1 occupancy used for the manufacture of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.270. - Section 903.2.4.1 amended. 
Section 903.2.4.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.4.1 Woodworking operations. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group F-1 occupancy that contains woodworking operations in excess of 2,500 square feet and which generate finely divided combustible waste or which use finely divided combustible materials. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.275 - Section 903.10 added—Group F-2. 
Section 903.2.10 added to the California Fire Code to read as follows. 
903.2.10 Group F-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group F-2 occupancy where one of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Where the fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; or 
2.  Where the fire area is located more than three stories above grade. 
3.  A Group F-2 occupancy used for metal products for either fabrication and/or assembly exceeds 2,500 square feet. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 12, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. O-26-16, § 12, 12-20-2016)  
15.16.280. - Section 903.2.7 amended. 
Section 903.2.7 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing a Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions exist: 
1. Where the fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; or 
2. Where the fire area is located more than 3 stories above grade. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.290. - Section 903.2.9 amended. 
Section 903.2.9 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exist: 
1. The fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet; or 
2. The fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane. 
3. A Group S-1 occupancy used for the manufacture of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.300. - Section 903.2.9.1 amended. 
Section 903.2.9.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
903.2.9.1 Repair garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in all buildings containing repair garages in accordance with the Building Code as follows: 
1. Where the fire area meets or exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013)  
15.16.310. - Chapter 28 amended. 
Chapter 28 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following: 
2810 Pallet Storage Yards 
2810.2 Storage location. Pallets shall be stored outside or in a separate building designed for pallet storage unless stored indoors in accordance with Section 2810.3. 
2810.4 Outdoor storage. Pallets stored outside shall be stored in accordance with the following: 
1.  Stored in an orderly manner not to exceed 16 feet in height, 20 feet in width and 25 feet in length; 
2.  Pile separation shall be a minimum of 20 feet and no closer than 26 feet to property lines or exposures. 
(Ord. No. O-06-2013, § 5, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. O-26-16, § 12, 12-20-2016)  
Chapter 15.18 - CALIFORNIA MODEL BUILDING SECURITY ORDINANCE[8] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, April 7, 2015, renumbered the former Ch. 15.10, §§ 15.10.010—15.10.150 as Ch. 15.18, §§ 15.18.010—15.18.150 and amended as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
 
15.18.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard Property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of Materials, Use and Occupancy, location and maintenance of all Buildings and Structures within the City as required in Section 14051 of the California Penal Code relating to Building security. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
15.18.020 - Scope. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter Shall apply to New Construction and to Buildings or Structures to which additions or Alterations are made except as specifically provided by this chapter. When additions or Alterations made within any twelve-month period exceed fifty percent of the value of the existing Buildings or Structures, such Buildings or Structures Shall be made to conform to the security requirements for new Buildings and Structures. 
B.  Existing multiple-Family Dwelling Units which are converted to privately owned Family units (Condominiums) Shall comply with the provisions of Section 15.10.120 of this chapter. 
C.  Any existing Structure which converts from its original Occupancy group as Designated in the Uniform Building Code, Shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Any Building as defined in the Uniform Building Code and Title 19 of the California Administrative Code, requiring special type releasing, Latching, or Locking Devices, other than described herein, Shall be exempt from the provisions hereof relating to Locking Devices of interior and/or exterior doors. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
15.18.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows: 
"Approved" means certified as meeting the requirements of this chapter by the Enforcing Authority or its authorized agents, or by other officials Designated by Law to give Approval on a particular Matter dealt with by the provisions of this section with regard to a given Material, mode of construction, piece of equipment or device. 
"Auxiliary Locking Device" means a secondary locking system added to the primary locking system to provide additional security. 
"Bolt" is a metal bar which, when actuated, is Projected (or thrown) either horizontally or vertically into a retaining member, such as a Strike plate, to prevent a door or window from moving or opening. 
"Bolt Projection" or "Bolt Throw" is the distance from the edge of the door, at the Bolt center line, to the farthest point on the Bolt in the Projected position. 
"Burglary Resistant Glazing" means those Materials as defined in U.L. Bulletin 972. 
"Commercial Building" means a Building, or portion thereof, Used for a purpose other than Dwelling. 
"Component," as distinguished from a Part, is a sub-assembly which combines with other Components to make up a total door or Window Assembly. For example, the primary Components of a Door Assembly include: door, Lock, hinges, Jamb/Wall, Jamb/Strike, and Wall. 
"Cylinder" means the sub-assembly of a Lock containing the Cylinder Core, tumbler mechanism and the keyway. A double Cylinder Lock is one which has a key-actuated Cylinder on both the exterior and interior of the door. 
"Cylinder Core or Cylinder Plug" is the central Part of a Cylinder containing the keyway, which is rotated by the key to operate the Lock mechanism. 
"Cylinder Guard" means a tapered or flush metal ring or plate surrounding the otherwise exposed portion of a Cylinder Lock to resist cutting, drilling, prying, pulling, or wrenching with common tools. 
"Deadbolt" is a Lock Bolt which does not have a spring action as opposed to a Latch Bolt, which does. The Bolt Must be actuated by a key or a key and a knob or thumbturn and when Projected becomes locked against return by end pressure. 
"Dead Latch" or "Deadlocking Latch Bolt" means a spring actuated Latch Bolt having a beveled end and incorporating a plunger which, when depressed, automatically Locks the Projected Latch Bolt against return by end pressure. 
"Door Assembly" is a unit composed of a group of Parts or Components which make up a closure for an opening to control passageway through a Wall. For the purposes of this chapter, a Door Assembly consists of the Following Parts: door; hinges; Locking Device or devices; operation contacts (such as handles, knobs, push plates); miscellaneous hardware and closures; the frame, including the head, threshold and Jambs plus the anchorage devices to the surrounding Wall and a portion of the surrounding Wall extending thirty-six inches from each side of the Jambs and sixteen inches above the head. 
"Door Stop" means that Projection along the top and sides of a door Jamb which checks the door's swinging action. 
"Double Cylinder Deadbolt" means a Deadbolt Lock which can be activated only by a key on both the interior and exterior. 
"Dwelling" means a Building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential Occupancy, including Single-Family and multiple-Family Dwellings. 
"Enforcing Authority" is the Development Services Director and those Persons he May Designate from time to time. 
"Flushbolt" is a manual, key or turn operated metal Bolt normally Used on inactive door(s) and is Attached to the top and bottom of the door and engages in the head and threshold of the frame. 
"Fully Tempered Glass" means those Materials meeting or exceeding ANSI standard Z 97.1 — Safety Glazing. 
"Jamb" means the vertical members of a door frame to which the door is Secured. 
"Jamb/Wall" is that Component of a Door Assembly to which a door is Attached and Secured; the Wall and Jamb Used together are considered a unit. 
"Key-in-Knob" means a Lockset having the key Cylinder and other Lock mechanisms contained in the knob. 
"Latch or Latch Bolt" is a beveled, spring-actuated Bolt which May or May not have a deadlocking device. 
"Lock (or Lockset)" is a keyed device (complete with Cylinder, Latch or Deadbolt mechanism, and trim such as knobs, levers, thumbturns, escutcheons, etc.) for Securing a door in a closed position against forced entry. For the purposes of this chapter, a Lock does not include the Strike plate. 
"Locking Device" is a Part of a Window Assembly which is intended to prevent movement of the movable Sash, which May be the Sash Lock or Sash Operator. 
"Multiple-Family Dwelling" means a Building or portion thereof designed for Occupancy by two or more families living independently of each other, including Hotels, Motels, Apartments, Duplexes and Townhomes. 
"Panic Hardware" means a Latching device on a Door Assembly for Use when Emergency egress is required due to fire or other threat to life safety. Devices designed so that they will facilitate the safe egress of people in case of an Emergency when a pressure not to exceed fifteen pounds is applied to the releasing device in the direction of exit travel. Such releasing devices are bars or panels extending not less than two-thirds of the width of the door and placed at heights suitable for the service required, not less than thirty, not more than forty-four inches above the floor. 
"Part," as distinguished from Component, is a unit (or sub-assembly) which combines with other units to make up a Component. 
"Primary Locking Device" means the single locking system on a door or window unit whose primary function is to prevent unauthorized Intrusion. 
"Private Dwelling" or "Single-Family Dwelling" means a Building design exclusively for Occupancy by one Family. 
"Rail" means the horizontal member of a window or door. A meeting Rail is one which mates with a Rail of another Sash or a framing member of the door or window frame when the Sash is in the closed position. 
"Sash" is an assembly of Stiles, Rails, and sometimes, mullions assembled into a single frame which supports the glazing Material. A fixed Sash is one which is not intended to be opened. A movable Sash is intended to be opened. 
"Sill" is the lowest horizontal member of a window frame. 
"Single Cylinder Deadbolt" means a Deadbolt Lock which is activated from the outside by a key and from the inside by a knob, thumbturn, lever, or similar mechanism. 
"Solid Core Door" means a door composed of solid wood or composed of compressed wood equal in strength to solid wood construction. 
"Stile" is a vertical framing member of a window or door. 
"Strike" is a metal plate Attached to or mortised into a door or door Jamb to receive and to hold a Projected Latch Bolt and/or Deadbolt in order to secure the door to the Jamb. 
"Swinging Door" means a door hinged at the Stile or at the head and threshold. 
"U.L. Listed" means tested and listed by Underwriters Laboratory, Inc. 
"Window Assembly" is a unit which surrounds and supports the Sashes and is Attached to the surrounding Wall. The members include side Jambs (vertical), head Jamb (upper, horizontal), Sill and mullions. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
15.18.040 - Enforcement provisions. 
The Enforcing Authority is directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
15.18.050 - Right of entry. 
The Enforcing Authority Shall have the right, and is authorized and empowered, to enter or go on about any Building or Premises between eight a.m. and five p.m. for the purpose of inspecting the physical security of such Buildings or Premises, or for any other purposes consistent herewith. The Enforcing Authority Shall be given prompt Access to any area of the Building or Premises upon oral notification to the Responsible Person, and upon exhibiting suitable evidence of their identity and authority; provided, however, that except in an Emergency situation, an inspection warrant issued pursuant to Title 13, Part 3 of the Code of Civil Procedures (Sections 1822.50 to 1822.57 inclusive) Shall first be Secured when entry or Access thereto is refused. Refusal to admit such members when an inspection warrant is not required Shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
15.18.060 - Appeals. 
In order to prevent or lessen the unnecessary Hardship or practical difficulties in exceptional cases where it is difficult or impossible to comply with the strict letter of this chapter, the Owner or his/her Designated agent Shall have the option to apply for an exemption from any provision or this chapter to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission Shall exercise its powers on these Matters in such a way that the public welfare is Secured, and substantial justice done most nearly in accord with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
15.18.070 - Alternate Materials and methods of construction. 
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the Use of any Material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter provided any such alternate has been Approved by the Enforcing Authority, nor is it the intention of this chapter to exclude any sound method of structural design or analysis not specifically provided for in this chapter. Materials, methods of construction, or structural design limitations provided for in this chapter are to be Used unless an exception is granted by the Enforcing Authority. 
The Enforcing Authority May approve any such alternate provided they find the proposed design to be satisfactory and the Material and method of work is, for the purpose intended, at least equivalent to that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, burglary resistance, durability and safety. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
15.18.080 - Keying requirements. 
Upon Occupancy by the Owner or proprietor, each single unit in a tract or commercial Development, constructed under the same General Plan, Shall have Locks using combinations which are interchange free from Locks Used in all other separate Dwellings, proprietorship or similar distinct occupancies. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
15.18.090 - Frames—Jambs—Strikes—Hinges. 
Installation and construction of frames, Jambs, Strikes and hinges Shall be as follows: 
A.  Door Jambs Shall be installed with solid backing in such a manner that no voids exist between the Strike side of the Jamb and the frame opening for a vertical distance of six inches each side of the Strike. 
B.  In wood framing, horizontal Blocking Shall be placed between studs at door Lock height for three stud spaces each side of the door openings. Trimmers Shall be full length from the header to the floor with solid backing against sole plates and top plates. 
C.  Door Stops on wooden Jambs for In-Swinging Doors Shall be of one piece construction with the Jamb. Jambs for all doors Shall be constructed or protected so as to prevent Violation of the Strike. 
D.  The Strike plate for Deadbolts on all wood framed doors Shall be constructed of minimum sixteen U.S. gauge steel, bronze, or brass and Secured to the Jamb by a minimum of two screws, which Must penetrate at least two inches into solid backing beyond the surface to which the Strike is Attached. 
E.  Hinges for Out-Swinging Doors Shall be equipped with nonremovable hinge pins or a mechanical interlock to preclude removal of the door from the exterior by removing the hinge pins. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
15.18.100 - Windows—Sliding glass doors. 
The Following requirements Must be met for windows and sliding glass doors: 
A.  Except as otherwise specified in Sections 15.15.120 and 15.15.130 of this chapter, all openable exterior windows and sliding glass doors Shall comply with the tests as set forth in Section 15.15.140 of this chapter. 
B.  Louvered windows Shall not be Used when any portion of the window is less than twelve feet vertically or six feet horizontally from an accessible surface or any adjoining roof, balcony, landing, stair tread, platform, or similar Structure. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
15.18.110 - Garage-type doors—Rolling overhead, solid overhead, swing, sliding or accordion. 
Rolling overhead, solid overhead, swing, sliding or accordion garage-type doors Shall conform to the Following standards: 
A.  Wood doors Shall have panels a minimum of five-sixteenths inch in thickness with the locking hardware being Attached to the support framing. 
B.  Aluminum doors Shall be a minimum thickness of 0.0215 inches and riveted together a minimum of eighteen inches on center along the outside seams. There Shall be a full-width horizontal beam Attached to the main door Structure which Shall meet the pilot, or Pedestrian Access, door framing within three inches of the Strike area of the pilot or Pedestrian Access door. 
C.  Fiberglass doors Shall have panels a minimum density of six ounces per square foot from the bottom of the door to a height of seven feet. Panels above seven feet and panels in residential Structures Shall have a density not less than five ounces per square foot. 
D.  Doors utilizing a Cylinder Lock Shall have a minimum five pin tumbler operation with the locking bar or Bolt extending into the receiving guide a minimum of one inch. 
E.  Doors that exceed sixteen feet in width Shall have two Lock receiving points; or, if the door does not exceed nineteen feet, a single Bolt May be Used if placed in the center of the door with the locking point located either at the floor or door frame header; or, torsion spring counter balance type hardware May be Used. 
F.  Except in a residential Building, doors Secured by electrical operation Shall have a keyed-switch to open the door when in a closed position, or by a signal Locking Device. 
G.  Doors with slide Bolt assemblies Shall have frames a minimum of 0.120 inches in thickness, with a minimum Bolt diameter of one-half inch and protrude at least one and one-half inches into the receiving guide. A Bolt diameter of three-eighths inch May be Used in a residential Building. The slide Bolt Shall be Attached to the door with nonremovable Bolts from the outside. Rivets Shall not be Used to Attach slide Bolt assemblies. 
H.  Except in a residential Building, padlock(s) Used with exterior mounted slide Bolt(s) Shall have a hardened steel shackle locking both at heel and toe and a minimum five pin tumbler operation with nonremovable key when in an unlocked position. Padlock(s) Used with interior mounted slide Bolt(s) Shall have a hardened steel shackle with a minimum four pin tumbler operation. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
15.18.120 - Special residential Building provisions. 
A.  Except for vehicular Access doors, all exterior Swinging Doors of any residential Building and Attached garages, including the door leading from the garage area into the Dwelling Unit Shall be equipped as follows: 
1.  All wood doors Shall be of solid core construction with a minimum thickness of one and three-fourths inch, or with panels not less than nine-sixteenths inch thick. 
2.  A single or double door Shall be equipped with a double or Single Cylinder Deadbolt Lock. The Bolt Shall have a minimum Projection of one inch and be constructed so as to repel cutting tool attack. The Deadbolt Shall have an embedment of at least three-fourths inch into the Strike receiving the Projected Bolt. 
The Cylinder Shall have a Cylinder Guard, a minimum of five pin tumblers, and Shall be connected to the inner portion of the Lock by connecting screws of at least one-fourth inch in diameter. All installation Shall be done so that the performance of the Locking Device will meet the intended antiburglary requirements. A dual locking mechanism constructed so that both Deadbolt and Latch can be retracted by a single action of the inside door knob, or lever, May be substituted provided it meets all other specifications for Locking Devices. 
3.  The inactive leaf of double door(s) Shall be equipped with metal flush Bolts having a minimum embedment of five-eighths inch into the head and threshold or the door frame. 
4.  Glazing in exterior doors or within forty inches of any locking mechanism Shall be of Fully Tempered Glass or rated Burglary Resistant Glazing, except when Double Cylinder Deadbolt Locks are installed. 
5.  Except where clear vision panels are installed, all front exterior doors Shall be equipped with a wide angle (one hundred eighty degree) door viewer. 
B.  Street numbers and other identifying data Shall be displayed as follows: 
1.  All Residential Dwellings Shall display a Street number in a prominent location on the Street side of the residence in such a position that the number is easily visible to approaching Emergency Vehicles. The numerals Shall be no less than four inches in height and Shall be of a contrasting color to the background to which they are Attached. 
2.  There Shall be positioned at each entrance of a Multiple-Family Dwelling complex an illuminated diagrammatic representation of the complex which shows the location of the viewer and the unit Designations within the complex. In addition, each individual unit within the complex Shall display a prominent identification number, not less than four inches in height, which is easily visible to approaching vehicular and/or Pedestrian traffic. 
C.  Lighting in Multiple-Family Dwellings Shall be as follows: 
1.  Aisles, passageways, and recesses related to and within the Building complex Shall be illuminated with an intensity of at least twenty-five one-hundredths footcandles at the ground level during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices Shall be protected by weather and vandalism resistance covers. 
2.  Open Parking Lots and Carports Shall be provided with a maintained minimum of one footcandle of light on the parking surface during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices Shall be protected by weather and vandalism resistance covers. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
15.18.130 - Special Commercial Building provisions. 
A.  Swinging exterior glass doors, wood or metal doors with glass panels, solid wood or metal doors Shall be constructed or protected as follows: 
1.  Wood doors Shall be of solid core construction with a minimum thickness of one and three-fourths inches. Wood panel doors with panels less than one inch thick Shall be covered on the inside with a minimum sixteen U.S. gauge sheet steel, or its equivalent, which is to be Attached with screws on minimum six-inch centers. Hollow steel doors Shall be of a minimum sixteen U.S. gauge and have sufficient reinforcement to maintain the designed thickness of the door when any Locking Device is installed; such reinforcement being able to restrict collapsing of the door around any Locking Device. 
2.  Except when Double Cylinder Deadbolts are utilized, any glazing utilized within forty inches of any door locking mechanism Shall be constructed or protected as follow: 
a.  Fully Tempered Glass or rated burglary resistance glazing; or 
b.  Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighths-inch Material with a minimum two-inch mesh Secured on the inside of the glazing May be utilized; or 
c.  The glazing Shall be covered with iron bars of at least one-half-inch round or one inch by one-fourth-inch flat steel Material, spaced not more than five inches apart, Secured on the inside of the glazing. 
d.  Subsection (A)(2)(b) and (c) of this section Shall not interfere with the operation of opening windows if such windows are required to be openable by the Uniform Building Code. 
B.  All swinging exterior wood and steel doors Shall be equipped as follows: 
1.  A single or double door Shall be equipped with a double or Single Cylinder Deadbolt. The Bolt Shall have a minimum Projection of one inch and be constructed so as to repel cutting tool attack. The Deadbolt Shall have an embedment of at least three-fourths inch into the Strike receiving the Projected Bolt. The Cylinder Shall have a Cylinder Guard, a minimum of five pin tumblers, and Shall be connected to the inner portion of the Lock by connecting screws of at least one-fourth inch in diameter. The provisions of the Preceding paragraph do not apply where: (1) Panic Hardware is required, or (2) an equivalent device is Approved by the Enforcing Authority. 
2.  Double doors Shall be equipped as follows: 
a.  The inactive leaf of double door(s) Shall be equipped with metal flush Bolts having a minimum embedment of five-eighths inch into the head and threshold of the door frame. 
b.  Double doors Shall have an astragal constructed of steel a minimum of 0.125 inch thick which will cover the opening between the doors. The astragal Shall be a minimum of two inches wide, and extend a minimum of one inch beyond the edge of the door to which it is Attached. The astragal Shall be Attached to the outside of the active door by means of welding or with nonremovable Bolts spaced apart on not more than ten-inch centers. The door to which such an astragal is Attached Must be determined by the fire-safety codes adopted by the City. 
C.  Aluminum frame Swinging Doors Shall be equipped as follows: 
1.  The Jamb on all aluminum frame Swinging Doors Shall be so constructed or protected to withstand one thousand six hundred pounds of pressure in both a vertical distance of three inches and a horizontal distance of one inch each side of the Strike, so as to prevent Violation of the Strike. 
2.  A single or double door Shall be equipped with a Double Cylinder Deadbolt with a Bolt Projection exceeding one inch, or a hook-shaped or expanding dog Bolt that engages the Strike sufficiently to prevent spreading. The Deadbolt Lock Shall have a minimum of five pin tumblers and a Cylinder Guard. 
D.  Panic Hardware, whenever required by the Uniform Building Code or Title 19, California Administrative Code, Shall be installed as follows: 
1.  Panic Hardware Shall contain a minimum of two locking points on each door; or 
2.  On single doors, Panic Hardware May have one locking point which is not to be located at either the top or bottom Rails of the door frame. The door Shall have an astragal constructed of steel 0.125 inch thick which Shall be Attached with nonremovable Bolts to the outside of the door. The astragal Shall extend a minimum of six inches vertically above and below the Latch of the Panic Hardware. The astragal Shall be a minimum of two inches wide and extend a minimum of one inch beyond the edge of the door to which it is Attached. 
3.  Double doors containing Panic Hardware Shall have an astragal Attached to the doors at their meeting point which will close the opening between them, but not interfere with the operation of either door. 
E.  Horizontal sliding doors Shall be equipped with a metal guild track at top and bottom and a Cylinder Lock and/or padlock with a hardened steel shackle which Locks at both heel and toe, and a minimum five pin tumbler operation with nonremovable key when in an unlocked position. The bottom track Shall be so designed that the door cannot be lifted from the track when the door is in a locked position. 
F.  In office Buildings (multiple Occupancy), all entrance doors to individual office suites Shall meet the construction and locking requirements for exterior doors. 
G.  Windows Shall be deemed accessible if less than twelve feet above ground. Accessible windows having a pane exceeding ninety-six square inches in an area with the smallest dimension exceeding six inches and not visible from a public or private thoroughfare Shall be protected in the Following manner: 
1.  Fully Tempered Glass or Burglary Resistant Glazing; or 
2.  The Following window barriers May be Used but Shall be Secured with nonremovable Bolts: 
a.  Inside or outside iron bars of at least one-half-inch round or one by one-fourth-inch flat steel Material, spaced not more than five inches apart and securely fastened, or 
b.  Inside or outside iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth-inch Material with not more than a two-inch mesh and securely fastened. 
3.  If a side or rear window is of the type that can be opened, it Shall, where applicable, be Secured on the inside with either a slide bar, Bolt, crossbar, Auxiliary Locking Device, and/or padlock with hardened steel shackle, a minimum four pin tumbler operation. 
4.  The protective bars or grills Shall not interfere with the operation of opening windows if such windows are required to be openable by the Uniform Building Code. 
H.  All exterior transoms exceeding ninety-six square inches on the side and rear of any Building or Premises Used for Business purposes Shall be protected by one of the Following: 
1.  Fully Tempered Glass or rated Burglary Resistant Glazing; or 
2.  The Following barriers May be Used but Shall be Secured with nonremovable Bolts: 
a.  Outside iron bars of at least one-half-inch round or one by one-fourth-inch flat steel Material, spaced no more than five inches apart and securely fastened; or 
b.  Outside iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth inch with not more than a two-inch mesh and securely fastened. 
3.  The protective bars or grills Shall not interfere with the operation of opening the transoms if such transoms are required to be openable by the Uniform Building Code or Title 19, California Administrative Code. 
I.  Roof openings Shall be equipped as follows: 
1.  All skylights on the roof of any Building or Premises Used for Business purposes Shall be provided with: 
a.  Rated Burglary Resistant Glazing; or 
b.  Iron bars of at least one-half-inch round or one by one-fourth-inch flat steel Materials under the skylight and securely fastened; or 
c.  A steel grill of at least one-eighth-inch Material with a maximum two-inch mesh under the skylight and securely fastened. 
2.  All hatchway openings on the roof of any Building or Premises Used for Business purposes Shall be Secured as follows: 
a.  If the hatchway is of wooden Material, it Shall be covered on the inside with at least sixteen U.S. gauge sheet metal, or its equivalent, Attached with screws. 
b.  The hatchway Shall be Secured from the inside with a slide bar or slide Bolts. 
c.  Outside hinges on all hatchway openings Shall be provided with nonremovable pins when using pin-type hinges. 
3.  All air duct or air vent openings exceeding ninety-six square inches on the roof or exterior Walls of any Building or Premises Used for Business purposes Shall be Secured by covering the same with either of the Following: 
a.  Iron bars of at least one-half-inch round or one by one-fourth-inch flat steel Material spaced no more than five inches apart and securely fastened; or 
b.  Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth-inch Material with a maximum two-inch mesh and securely fastened. 
c.  If the barrier is on the outside, it Shall be Secured with Bolts which are nonremovable from the exterior. 
d.  The provisions of subsection (I)(3)(a) and (b) of this section Must not interfere with venting requirements creating a potentially Hazardous condition to health and safety or conflict with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code or Title 19, California Administrative Code. 
J.  Permanently affixed ladders leading to roofs Shall be fully enclosed with sheet metal to a height of ten feet. This covering Shall be locked against the ladder with a case hardened hasp, Secured with nonremovable screws or Bolts. Hinges on the cover will be provided with nonremovable pins when using pin-type hinges. If a padlock is Used, it Shall have a hardened steel shackle, locking at both heel and toe, and a minimum five pin tumbler operation with nonremovable key when in an unlocked position. 
K.  A Building located within eight feet of Utility poles or similar Structures which can be Used to gain Access to the Building's roof, windows or other openings Shall have such Access area barricaded or Fenced with Materials to deter human climbing. 
L.  The Following standards Shall apply to lighting, address identification and parking area: 
1.  The address number of every Commercial Building Shall be illuminated during the hours of darkness so that it Shall be easily visible from the Street. The numerals in these numbers Shall be no less than six inches in height and be of a color contrasting to the background. In addition, any Business which affords vehicular Access to the rear through any Driveway, Alleyway, or Parking Lot Shall also display the same numbers on the rear of the Building. 
2.  All exterior commercial doors, during the hours of darkness, Shall be illuminated with a minimum of one foot-candle of light. All exterior bulbs Shall be protected by weather and vandalism resistant cover(s). 
3.  Open Parking Lots, and Access thereto, providing more than ten Parking Spaces and for Use by the general public, Shall be provided with a maintained minimum of one footcandle of light on the parking surface from dusk until the termination of Business every operating Day. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
15.18.140 - Tests. 
A.  It Shall be the responsibility of the Owner, or his Designated agent, of a Building or Structure falling within the provisions of this chapter to provide the Enforcing Authority with a Written specification performance test report indicating that the Materials utilized meet the minimum requirements. 
B.  Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter or evidence that any Materials or any construction does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims for alternate Materials or methods of construction, the Enforcing Authority May require tests as proof of compliance to be made at the expense of the Owner or his agent by any agency which is Approved by the Enforcing Authority. 
C.  Specimens Shall be Representative, and the construction Shall be verified by assembly drawings and bill of Materials. Two complete sets of manufacturer or fabricator installation instructions and full-size or accurate scale templates for all items and hardware Shall be included. 
D.  Tests for sliding glass doors Shall be conducted as follows: 
1.  The construction and size of the test door assemblies, Jambs and headers, and all hardware Components Shall be Representative of that for which acceptance is desired. The Door Assembly and mounting in the support fixture Shall simulate the rigidity normally provided to a Door Assembly in a Building by the ceiling, floor and Walls. 
2.  Sample doors submitted for testing Shall be glazed. Panels Shall be closed and locked with the Primary Locking Device only. 
3.  Tests Shall be performed on the samples in the Following order: 
TEST A 
With the panels in the test position, a concentrated load of eight hundred pounds Shall be applied to the vertical pull Stile incorporating a Locking Device, at a point on the Stile within six inches of the Locking Device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the door. With the load removed, determine if the Primary Locking Device can be unlocked by manipulation as described in Test H. 
TEST B(1) 
With panels in the test position, a concentrated load of fifty pounds Shall be applied to the vertical pull Stile incorporating a Locking Device, at a point on the Stile within six inches of the Locking Device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the door while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of two hundred pounds is applied to the same Stile in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass toward the exterior side of the door. With the load applied, determine if the Primary Locking Device can be unlocked by manipulation as described in Test H. 
TEST B(2) 
Repeat Test B(1) substituting eight hundred pounds for the indicated fifty pounds. Perform the manipulation tests with the load removed. 
TEST C(1) 
With the panels in the test position, a concentrated load of fifty pounds Shall be applied to the vertical pull Stile incorporating a Locking Device, at a point on the Stile within six inches of the Locking Device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the door while simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of two hundred pounds is applied to the same Stile in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass toward the exterior side of the door. With the load applied, determine if the Primary Locking Device can be unlocked by manipulation as described in Test H. 
TEST C(2) 
Repeat Test C(1) substituting eight hundred pounds for the indicated fifty pounds. Perform the manipulation tests with the load removed. 
TEST D 
With the movable panel lifted upward to its full limit within the confines of the door frame, a concentrated load of eight hundred pounds Shall be applied separately to each vertical pull Stile incorporating a Locking Device, at a point on the Stile within six inches of the Locking Device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the door. With the load removed, determine if the Primary Locking Device can be unlocked by manipulation as described in Test H. 
TEST E(1) 
With the movable panel lifted upward to its full limit within the confines of the door frames, a concentrated load of fifty pounds Shall be applied to the vertical pull Stile incorporating a Locking Device, at a point on the Stile within six inches of the Locking Device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the door while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of two hundred pounds is applied to the same area of the same Stile in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass toward the interior side of the door. With load applied, determine if the Primary Locking Device can be unlocked by manipulation as described in Test H. 
TEST E(2) 
Repeat Test E(1), substituting eight hundred pounds for the indicated fifty pounds. Perform the manipulation tests with the load removed. 
TEST F(1) 
With the movable panel lifted upward to its full limit within the confines of the door panel, a concentrated load of fifty pounds Shall be applied to the vertical Stile incorporating a Locking Device, at a point on the Stile within six inches of the Locking Device, in the direction parallel to the plane of glass that would tend to open the door while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of two hundred pounds is applied to the same area of the same Stile in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass toward the exterior side of the door. With the load applied, determine if the Primary Locking Device can be unlocked by manipulation as described in Test H. 
TEST F(2) 
Repeat Test F(1) substituting eight hundred pounds for the indicated fifty pounds. Perform the manipulation tests with the load removed. 
TEST G 
For inside sliding doors, repeat Test D, while simultaneously applying a concentrated load of fifty pounds at the end of the movable bottom Rail near the meeting Stiles and outward. 
TEST H 
Lift, push, pull, or otherwise manipulate by hand the door relative to the clearances within the frame while attempting to open the door. This test Shall be conducted continuously for five minutes. 
TEST I 
With the Following tools: 
i.  A knife or spatula with a thin blade approximately one-thirty-seconds-inch thick, not more than one-inch wide, and no longer than six inches; and 
ii.  A straight or Phillips screwdriver with a maximum six-inch shaft, remove from the Door Assembly all screws, glazing beads, or other mechanical fasteners which can be removed readily from the exterior within a time limit of five minutes. Determine if the Primary Locking Device can be unlocked or entry gained by manipulation as described in test HG. 
iii.  Fixed Panels. Fixed panels Shall be fastened in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Tests Shall be performed in the Following order: 
TEST A 
With the panels in the normal position, a concentrated load of three hundred pounds Shall be applied at midspan of the fixed Jambstile in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to remove the fixed panel from the frame Jamb pocket. With the load applied, determine if entry can be gained by manipulation as described in subsection (D)(3), Test H of this section. 
TEST B 
With the panels in the normal position, a concentrated load of three hundred pounds Shall be applied at midspan of the fixed Jambstile in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to remove the fixed panel from the frame Jamb pocket while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of one hundred and fifty pounds is applied at midspan of the fixed panel interlock Stile in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass which would tend to disengage the meeting Stiles. With this load applied, determine if entry can be gained by manipulation as described in subsection (D)(3), Test H of this section. 
4.  A sliding Door Assembly Shall fail these tests if at any time during or after the test, the sliding Door Assembly does not remain engaged, intact, and in the closed and locked position or by manipulating an exposed Component; or if one can enter through displaced or damaged portions. 
5.  The report Shall include the Following: identification of the samples tested; type, size, location, and number of Locking Devices; type, location, and number of anchors; type and thickness of glazing Material and an indication of whether or not the subject passed the test. The report Shall also indicate at what point the assembly fails. The report Shall be certified to be a true Copy by the testing laboratory and Shall be forwarded direct from the laboratory to the Enforcing Authority. 
E.  For the purpose of this chapter, windows are classified as follows: 
Type A — Window assemblies incorporate one or more Sashes that open by sliding in the plane of the Wall in which the window is installed. 
Type B — Window assemblies incorporate one or more framed Sashes which are hinges at or near two corners of the individual Sash and open toward the exterior of the Wall. 
Type C — Window assemblies incorporate one or more Sashes which open toward the interior and are hinged at or near two corners of the Sash. 
Type D — Window assemblies incorporate one or more Sashes which are hinged or pivot near the center so that Part of the Sash opens into the interior Wall and Part opens toward the exterior. 
1.  Window assemblies Shall be mounted Following the manufacturer's installation instructions. Install the Window Assembly in a test fixture which simulates the Wall construction required by Chapter 25 of the Uniform Building Code. The unit Shall be fully glazed. The Sash Shall be closed and locked with the Primary Locking Device only. 
a.  Tests for Type A window assemblies Shall be performed in the Following order: 
TEST A 
With the sliding Sash in the normal position, a concentrated load of two hundred pounds Shall be applied separately to each member incorporating a Locking Device, at a point on the Sash member within six inches of the Locking Device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the window. With the load removed, apply the manipulation test described in subsection (D)(3), Test H of this section. 
TEST B 
With the sliding Sash in the normal position, a concentrated load of two hundred pounds Shall be applied separately to each Sash member incorporating a Locking Device, at a point on the Sash member within six inches of the Locking Device in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the window while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of seventy-five pounds is applied in the same area of the same Sash member in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass toward the interior side of the window. With the load removed, apply the manipulation test described in subsection (D)(3), Test H of this section. 
TEST C 
With the sliding Sash in the normal position, a concentrated load of two hundred pounds Shall be applied separately to each Sash member incorporating a Locking Device, at a point on the Sash member within six inches of the Locking Device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the window while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of seventy-five pounds is applied to the same area of the same Sash member in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass toward the exterior side of the window. With the load removed, apply the manipulation test described in subsection (D)(3), Test H of this section. 
TEST D 
With the sliding Sash lifted upward to the full limit within the confines of the window frame, a concentrated load of two hundred pounds Shall be applied separately to each Sash member incorporating a Locking Device, at a point on the Sash within six inches of the Locking Device, in the direction parallel to the plane of glass that would tend to open the window. With the load removed, apply the manipulation test described in subsection (D)(3), Test H of this section. 
TEST E 
With the sliding Sash lifted upward to the full limit within the confines of the window frame, a concentrated load of two hundred pounds Shall be applied separately to each Sash member incorporating a Locking Device, at a point on the Sash within six inches of the Locking Device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the window, while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of seventy-five pounds is applied to the same area of the same Sash member in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass towards the interior side of the window. With the load removed, apply the manipulation test described in subsection (D)(3), Test H of this section. 
TEST F 
With the sliding Sash lifted upward to the full limit within the confines of the window frame, a concentrated load of two hundred pounds Shall be applied separately to each Sash member incorporating a Locking Device, at a point on the Sash member within six inches of the Locking Device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the window while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of seventy-five pounds is applied to the same area of the same Sash member in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass toward the exterior side of the window. With the load removed, apply the manipulation test described in subsection (D)(3), Test H of this section. 
TEST G 
For inside sliding windows, repeat Test F while simultaneously applying a concentrated load of twenty-five pounds inward at the end of the movable bottom Rail near the meeting Stile opposite the Lock Stile. For outside sliding windows, repeat Test F while simultaneously applying a concentrated load of twenty-five pounds in the same direction as the perpendicular load inward at the end of the movable bottom Rail near the meeting Stile opposite the Lock Stile outward. 
TEST H 
Perform the disassembly and manipulation test as described in subsection (D)(3), Test I of this section. 
b.  The tests for Type B and C window assemblies Shall be performed in the Following order: 
TEST A 
With the swinging Sash in the normal position, apply a concentrated load of one hundred pounds within three inches of each end of the Rail or Stile which is opposite the hinged side, in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the window. 
TEST B 
Repeat Test A and simultaneously apply a concentrated load of one hundred pounds on the outside within one inch of the end of the Stile or Rail which is opposite the hinged side, in a direction parallel to the plane of the glazing which would tend to disengage the Lock. 
TEST C 
With the swinging Sash in the normal position, apply a concentrated load of two hundred pounds on the Rail or Stile containing the Locking Device within six inches of the Lock. 
TEST D 
Repeat Test B while simultaneously applying Test C. The manipulation test described in subsection (D)(3), Test H of this section, Shall be applied in Tests A, B, and D to the Sash with the load removed. 
TEST E 
Perform the disassembly and manipulation test as described in subsection (D)(3), Test I of this section. 
c.  Tests for Type D window assemblies Shall be performed in the Following order: 
TEST A 
With the Sash in the normal position, simultaneously apply a concentrated load of one hundred pounds within three inches of the ends of each Rail or Stile which is perpendicular to the pivot sides in the direction that would tend to open the Sash. 
TEST B 
With the Sash in the normal position, apply a concentrated load of one hundred pounds on the Rail or Stile containing the pivot within one inch of the pivot in a direction parallel to the pivots. 
TEST C 
Repeat Test B, applying the load to the opposite Rail or Stile. 
TEST D 
With the Sash in the normal position, apply a concentrated load of two hundred pounds on the Rail or Stile containing the Locking Device within six inches of the Lock. 
TEST E 
Repeat Test D while simultaneously applying the load specified in Test B. Repeat Test D while simultaneously applying the load specified in Test C above. The manipulation test described in subsection (D)(3), Test H of this section, Shall be applied in Tests A, B, C, and D above to the Sash with the load removed. 
TEST F 
Perform the disassembly and manipulation test as described in subsection (D)(3), Test I of this section. 
d.  A Window Assembly Shall fail these tests if at any time during or after the tests, the assembly does not remain engaged, intact, and in the closed and locked position, or by manipulating exposed Component; or if one can enter through displaced or damaged portions. 
e.  The report Shall contain a description of the results of the test performed in accordance with the test methods above. The report Shall include the Following: identification of the samples tested; type, location, and number of anchors; type and thickness of glazing Material and an indication of whether or not the subject passed the test. The report Shall also indicate at what point the assembly fails. The test report Shall be certified to be a true Copy by the testing laboratory and Shall be forwarded direct from the laboratory to the Enforcing Authority. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
15.18.150 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful for any Person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move, improve, convert or demolish, equip, Use, occupy or maintain any Building or Structure in the City or cause same to be done, contrary to or in Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any Person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and Shall be punishable for each offense, as stipulated in Title 15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 13, 4-7-2015)  
Chapter 15.20 - SEISMIC STRENGTHENING FOR UNREINFORCED MASONRY BUILDINGS[9] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-04-15, § 14, April 7, 2015, renumbered the former Ch. 15.14, §§ 15.14.010—15.14.050 as Ch. 15.20, §§ 15.20.010—15.20.050 and amended as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
 
15.20.010 - General provisions—Definitions. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and welfare by reducing the risk of death or injury that May result from the effects of earthquakes on existing Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards for structural seismic resistance. The provisions are established primarily to reduce the risk of life loss or injury. Compliance with these provisions will not necessarily prevent loss of life or injury or prevent earthquake damage to rehabilitated Buildings. 
B.  Scope. The provisions of this chapter Shall apply to all existing Buildings having at least one Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall. Except as provided herein, all other provisions of the 1988 Uniform Building Code, hereinafter referred to as the Building Code, Shall apply. 
C.  Exceptions. This chapter Shall not apply to: 
1.  Detached one- or Two-Family Dwellings and detached Apartment houses containing less than five Dwelling Units and Used solely for residential purposes; 
2.  Essential Facilities as defined in Table 23-K of the Building Code; 
3.  Hazardous Facilities as defined in Table 23-K of the Building Code; 
4.  Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings constructed of hollow concrete Blocks or hollow clay tiles, unless they do not exceed two stories in height and it can be shown by testing that the tile or Block units are of bearing type and the capacity of the Wall in bearing and shear based on Net Area in contact through bed joints is not less than those allowed for solid bricks. Bonding Shall also be verified to the satisfaction of the Local government agency. 
D.  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the applicable definitions in the Building code Shall also apply. Certain other terms are defined as follows: 
1.  "Normal Wall" means a Wall perpendicular to the direction of seismic forces. 
2.  "Open Front" means an exterior Building Wall plane on one side only without vertical elements of the lateral force resisting system in one or more stories. 
3.  "Unreinforced Masonry (URM) Wall" means a masonry Wall in which the area of reinforcing steel is less than twenty-five percent of the minimum required by the Building code for reinforced masonry. 
4.  "Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall" means a URM Wall which provides the vertical support for a floor or roof for which the total superimposed load exceeds one hundred pounds per linear foot of Wall. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 14, 4-7-2015)  
15.20.020 - Construction requirements. 
A.  General. All Buildings Shall have a seismic resisting system conforming with Section 2303(b) of the Building code, except as modified by this chapter. 
B.  Alterations and Repairs. Alterations and repairs required to meet the provisions of this chapter Shall comply with all other applicable requirements of the Building code unless specifically provided for in this chapter. 
C.  Requirements for Plans. The Following construction information Shall be included in the plans required by this chapter: 
1.  Dimensioned floor and roof plans showing existing Walls and the size and spacing of floor and roof framing meters and sheathing Materials. The plans Shall indicate all existing and new crosswalls and their Materials of construction. The location of the crosswalls and their openings Shall be fully dimensioned or drawn to scale on the plans; 
2.  Dimensioned Wall Elevations showing openings, piers, Wall classes, thicknesses, heights, Wall shear test locations, and cracks or damaged portions requiring repairs; the general condition of the mortar joints and if and where the joints require pointing. Where the exterior face is veneer, the type of veneer, its thickness and its bonding and/or ties to the structural Wall masonry Shall also be reported; 
3.  The type of interior Wall and ceiling surfaces; 
4.  The extent and type of existing Wall anchorage to floors and roof when utilized in the design; 
5.  The extent and type of Parapet corrections which were previously performed, if any; 
6.  Repair details, if any, of cracked or damaged unreinforced masonry Walls required to resist forces specified in this chapter; 
7.  All other plans, sections, and details necessary to delineate required retrofit construction including those items in Section 15.14.050. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 14, 4-7-2015)  
15.20.030 - Materials requirements. 
A.  General. All Materials Permitted by this chapter, including their appropriate allowable design values, and those existing configurations of Materials specified herein, May be utilized to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Existing Materials. All existing Materials utilized as Part of the required force resisting system Shall be in sound condition or Shall be repaired or removed and replaced with new Material. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 14, 4-7-2015)  
15.20.040 - Quality control. 
A.  Pointing. All preparation and mortar pointing Shall be performed with special inspection. 
Exception: At the discretion of the Building Official, Incidental pointing May be performed without special inspection. 
B.  Masonry Shear Tests. In-place masonry shear tests Shall comply with UBC Standard No. 24-40. 
C.  Existing Wall Anchors. Existing Wall anchors utilized as all or Part of the required tension anchors Shall be tested in pullout according to UBC Standard No. 24-41. The minimum number of anchors tested Shall be four per floor, with two tests at Walls with joists framing into the Wall and two tests at Walls with joists parallel to the Wall, but not less than ten percent of the total number of existing tension anchors at each level. 
D.  New Bolts. One-fourth of all new shear Bolts and combined tension and shear Bolts in unreinforced masonry Walls Shall be tested according to UBC Standard No. 24-41. 
Exception: Special inspection in accordance with the Building code May be provided during installation in lieu of testing. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 14, 4-7-2015)  
15.20.050 - Detailed system design requirements. 
A.  Wall Anchorage. 
1.  Anchor Locations. All unreinforced masonry Walls Shall be anchored at the roof and floor levels. Ceilings with substantial rigidity and abutting masonry Walls Shall be connected to Walls with tension Bolts at a maximum anchor spacing of six feet. Ceiling systems with substantial mass Shall be braced at the ceiling perimeter to the roof or floor diaphragms. 
2.  Anchor Requirements. Anchors Shall be tension Bolts through the Wall by an Approved equivalent at a maximum anchor spacing of six feet. All existing Wall anchors Shall be Secured to the joists to develop the required forces. 
3.  Minimum Wall Anchorage. Anchorage of masonry Walls to each floor or roof Shall resist a minimum force determined by Section 2312(g)2 of the Building code or two hundred pounds per linear foot, whichever is greater, acting normal to the Wall at the level of the floor or roof. Existing Wall anchors, installed under previous Permits, Must meet or Must be upgraded to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
4.  Anchors at Corners. At the roof and all floor levels, both shear and tension anchors Shall be provided within two feet horizontally from the inside of the corners of the Walls. 
5.  Anchors with Limited Access. When Access to the exterior face of the masonry Wall is prevented by proximity of an existing Building, Wall anchors conforming to Item 6b in Table No. A1-D May be Used. 
B.  Diaphragm Shear Transfer. Shear Bolt spacing Shall have a maximum Bolt spacing of six feet. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 14, 4-7-2015)  
Chapter 15.22 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS[10] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, April 7, 2015, renumbered the former Ch. 15.18, §§ 15.18.010—15.18.250 as Ch. 15.22, §§ 15.22.010—15.22.250 and amended as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
 
15.22.010 - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon Local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City does hereby adopt the Following Floodplain Management Regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The Flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and Property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for Flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  These Flood losses are caused by Uses that are inadequately elevated, Floodproofed, or protected from Flood damage. The cumulative effect of Obstructions in areas of special Flood hazards which increase Flood heights and velocities also contribute to the Flood loss. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.030 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to Flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly Flood control Projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with Flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged Business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and Gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and Streets and bridges located in areas of special Flood hazard; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound Use and Development of areas of special Flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by Flood damage; 
G.  Ensure that potential Buyers are notified that Property is in an Area of Special Flood Hazard; and 
H.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special Flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.040 - Methods of reducing Flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit Uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and Property due t water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or Flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that Uses vulnerable to Floods, including facilities which serve such Uses, be protected against Flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the Alteration of natural Floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel Flood Waters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other Development which May increase Flood damage; and 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of Flood barriers which will unnaturally divert Flood Waters or which May increase Flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.050 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases Used in this chapter Shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable Application. 
"Accessory Use" means a Use which is Incidental and subordinate to the principal Use of the Parcel of land on which it is located. 
"Alluvial Fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain Slopes, transported by Flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to Flash Flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
"Apex" means the point of highest Elevation on an Alluvial Fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
"Area of Shallow Flooding" means a Designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The Base Flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of Flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow May be evident. Such Flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
"Area of Special Flood Hazard", see "Special Flood Hazard Area." 
"Base Flood" means a Flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given Year (also called the "100-Year Flood"). Base Flood is the term Used throughout this chapter. 
"Basement" means any area of the Building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
"Building", see "Structure." 
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to Buildings or other Structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or Materials. 
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of Uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, Buildings, permanent Structures or Development into a Floodplain which May impede or alter the flow capacity of a Floodplain. 
"Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the Lots on which the Manufactured Homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of Streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the Floodplain Management Regulations adopted by a community. 
"Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the Lots on which the Manufactured Homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of Streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Flood, Flooding, or Flood Water" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
2.  The condition resulting from Flood-related erosion. 
"Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special Flood hazards and the Floodway. 
"Flood Hazard Boundary Map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of Flood hazards. 
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special Flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes Flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the Water Surface Elevation of the Base Flood. 
"Floodplain or Flood-Prone Area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source, see "Flooding." 
"Floodplain Administrator" is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the Floodplain Management Regulations. 
"Floodplain Management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective an preventive measures for reducing Flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the Floodplain, including but not limited to Emergency preparedness plans, Flood control works, Floodplain Management Regulations, and Open Space plans. 
"Floodplain Management Regulations" means this chapter and other Zoning Ordinance Subdivision regulations, Building codes, health regulations, special purpose Ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other Application of police power which control Development in Flood-prone areas. This term describes Federal, State or Local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing Flood loss and damage. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to Structures which reduce or eliminate Flood damage to real estate or improved Real Property, water and sanitary facilities, Structures, and their contents. (Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet Floodproofing.) 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other Watercourse and the adjacent land areas that Must be reserved in order to Discharge the Base Flood without cumulatively increasing the Water Surface Elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "Regulatory Floodway." 
"Floodway Fringe" is that area of the Floodplain on either side of the "Regulatory Floodway" where Encroachment May be Permitted. 
"Fraud and Victimization" as related to Sections 15.22.230 through 15.22.250, Variances, of this chapter, means that the Variance granted Must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City Council will consider the fact that every newly constructed Building adds to government responsibilities and remains a Part of the community for fifty to one-hundred Years. Buildings that are Permitted to be constructed below the Base Flood Elevation are subject during all those Years to increased risk of damage from Floods, while future Owners of the Property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased Flood damages bring. In addition, future Owners May purchase the Property, unaware that it is subject to potential Flood damage, and can be insured only at very high Flood insurance rates. 
"Functionally Dependent Use" means a Use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship Building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Governing Body" is the Local governing unit, i.e. County or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
"Hardship" as related to Sections 15.22.230 through 15.22.250, Variances, of this chapter means the exceptional Hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested Variance. The City Council requires that the Variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the Property involved. Mere economic or financial Hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional Hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a Variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the Property Owner to build elsewhere or put the Parcel to a different Use than originally intended. 
"Highest Adjacent Grade" means the highest natural Elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed Walls of a Structure. 
"Historic Structure" means any Structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered Historic District or a District preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered Historic District; 
3.  Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States with historic preservation programs which have been Approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a Local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an Approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without Approved programs. 
"Levee" means a man-made Structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary Flooding. 
"Levee System" means a Flood protection system which consists of a Levee, or Levees, and associated Structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
"Lowest Floor" means the Lowest Floor of the lowest enclosed area, including Basement (see "Basement" definition). 
1.  An unfinished or Flood resistant Enclosure below the Lowest Floor that is usable solely for parking of Vehicles, Building Access or storage in an area other than a Basement area, is not considered a Building's Lowest Floor provided it conforms to applicable non-Elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The wet Floodproofing standard in Section 15.22.170(C)(3); 
b.  The anchoring standards in Section 15.22.170(A); 
c.  The construction Materials and methods standards in Section 15.22.170(B); 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 15.22.180. 
2.  For residential Structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be Basements (see "Basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-Grade garages and storage areas. 
"Manufactured Home" means a Structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for Use with or without a permanent foundation when Attached to the required utilities. The term "Manufactured Home" does not include a "Recreational Vehicle." 
"Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a Parcel (or contiguous Parcels) of land divided into two or more Manufactured Home Lots for Rent or Sale. 
"Market Value" Shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the Structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the Structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the Structure Shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a Building cost estimating guide recognized by the Building Construction Industry. The amount of depreciation Shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the Structure and functional obsolescence as Approved by the Floodplain Administrator, but Shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized Building cost estimating guides May be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a Written explanation of the differences. 
"Mean Sea Level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which Base Flood Elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
"New Construction", for Floodplain Management purposes, means Structures for which the "Start of Construction" commenced on or after the effective date of Floodplain Management Regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent Improvements to such Structures. 
"New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the Lots on which the Manufactured Homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of Streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of Floodplain Management Regulations adopted by this community. 
"Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, Wall, wharf, embankment, Levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, Building, wire, Fence, rock, gravel, Refuse, fill, Structure, vegetation or other Material in, along, across or Projecting into any Watercourse which May alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
"One-Hundred-Year Flood" or "100-Year Flood", see "Base Flood." 
"Public Safety and Nuisance" as related to Sections 15.22.230 through 15.22.250, Variances, of this chapter means that the granting of a Variance Must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of Persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or Use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
"Recreational Vehicle" means a Vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal Projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for Use as a permanent Dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal Use. 
"Regulatory Floodway" means the channel of a river or other Watercourse and the adjacent land areas that Must be reserved in order to Discharge the Base Flood without cumulatively increasing the Water Surface Elevation more than one foot. 
"Remedy a Violation" means to bring the Structure or other ' into compliance with State or Local Floodplain Management Regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts May be reduced include protecting the Structure or other affected Development from Flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the Ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar Violations, or reducing State or Federal financial exposure with regard to the Structure or other Development. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
"Sheet Flow Area", see "Area of Shallow Flooding". 
"Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)" means an area in the Floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of Flooding in any given Year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH. 
"Start of Construction" includes Substantial Improvement and other proposed new Development and means the date the Building Permit was issued, provided the actual Start of Construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other Improvement was within one hundred eighty Days from the date of the Permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a Structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of Streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a Basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the Property of Accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as Dwelling Units or not Part of the main Structure. For a Substantial Improvement, the actual Start of Construction means the first Alteration of any Wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural Part of a Building, whether or not that Alteration affects the external dimensions of the Building. 
"Structure" means a Walled and roofed Building that is principally above ground; this includes a Gas or liquid storage tank or a Manufactured Home. 
"Substantial Damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a Structure whereby the cost of restoring the Structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the Market Value of the Structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial Improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new Development of a Structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the Market Value of the Structure before the "Start of Construction" of the Improvement. This term includes Structures which have incurred "Substantial Damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any Project for Improvement of a Structure to correct existing Violations or State or Local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the Local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any Alteration of a "Historic Structure", provided that the Alteration will not preclude the Structure's continued Designation as a "Historic Structure". 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which Permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
"Violation" means the failure of a Structure or other Development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A Structure or other Development without the Elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in Violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
"Water Surface Elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of Floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the Floodplains of coastal or Riverine areas. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically Designated areas in which substantial Flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.060 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter Shall apply to all areas of special Flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.070 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special Flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated September 17, 1980 and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated February 2, 1994, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a Part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and May be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at 650 N. La Cadena Dr., City Clerk's Office and the Department of Public Works. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.080 - Compliance. 
No Structure or land Shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including Violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) Shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein Shall prevent the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any Violation. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.090 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing Easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another Ordinance, Easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions Shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.100 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and Application of this chapter, all provisions Shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.110 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of Flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger Floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights May be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special Flood hazards or Uses Permitted within such areas will be free from Flooding or Flood damages. This chapter Shall not create liability on the Part of the City Council, any officer or Employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any Flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative Decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.120 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various Parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the Courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such Decision Shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.130 - Establishment of Development Permit. 
A Development Permit Shall be obtained before any construction or other Development begins within any Area of Special Flood Hazard established in Section 15.22.070. Application for a Development Permit Shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and May include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and Elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed Structures, fill, storage of Materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the Following information is required: 
A.  Site Plan, including but not limited to: 
1.  For all proposed Structures, spot ground Elevations at Building corners and twenty foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour Elevations throughout the Building Site; and 
2.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; and 
3.  If available, the Base Flood Elevation from the Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map; and 
4.  If applicable, the location of the Regulatory Floodway; and 
B.  Foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
1.  Proposed Elevation in relation to Mean Sea Level, of the Lowest Floor (including Basement) of all Structures; and 
2.  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total Net Area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.22.170(C)(3) of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93; and 
3.  For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to ninety-five percent using the standard proctor test method); and 
C.  Proposed Elevation in relation to Mean Sea Level to which any nonresidential Structure will be Floodproofed, as required in Section 15.22.170 C.2 of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93; and 
D.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.22.150 (D of this chapter; and 
E.  Description of the extent to which any Watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed Development. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.140 - Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. 
The City Manager and the City Engineer, as the Designated appointee, are hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying Development Permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.150 - Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator Shall include, but not be limited to the Following: 
A.  Permit Review. Review all Development Permits to determine that: 
1.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
2.  All other required State and Federal Permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from Flooding; and 
4.  The proposed Development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where Base Flood Elevations have been determined but a Floodway has not been Designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed Development when combined with all other existing and anticipated Development will increase the Water Surface Elevation of the Base Flood more than one foot at any point. 
B.  Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. 
1.  When Base Flood Elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.18.070, the Floodplain Administrator Shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation and Floodway data available from a Federal or State agency, or other source, in order to administer Sections 15.22.170 through 15.22.220 Any such information Shall be submitted to the City Council for adoption; or 
2.  If no Base Flood Elevation data is available from a Federal or State agency or other source, then a Base Flood Elevation Shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas, A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995 in order to administer Sections 15.22.170 through 15.22.220: 
a.  Simplified method: 
i.  100-Year or Base Flood Discharge Shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey publication, or the Discharge-drainage area method; and 
ii.  Base Flood Elevation Shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA; or 
b.  Detailed method: 
i.  100-Year or Base Flood Discharge Shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-HMS computer program; and 
ii.  Base Flood Elevation Shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-RAS computer program. 
C.  Notification of Other Agencies. In Alteration or relocation of a Watercourse: 
1.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to Alteration or relocation; 
2.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
3.  Assure that the Flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said Watercourse is maintained. 
D.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the Following: 
1.  Certification required by Sections 15.22.170(C)(1) and 15.22.200 (Lowest Floor Elevations); 
2.  Certification required by Section 15.22.170(C)(2) (Elevation or Floodproofing of nonresidential Structures); 
3.  Certification required by Section 15.22.170(C)(3) (wet Floodproofing standard); 
4.  Certification of Elevation required by Section 15.22.190(B) (subdivision standards); 
5.  Certification required by Section 15.22.220(A) (Floodway Encroachments). 
E.  Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special Flood hazard. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual Field conditions, Grade and Base Flood Elevations Shall be Used to determine the boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Area. The Person contesting the location of the boundary Shall be given a reasonable opportunity to Appeal the interpretation as provided in Sections 15.22.130 through 15.22.250. 
F.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy Violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.22.080. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.160 - Appeals. 
The City Council Shall hear and decide Appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, Decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.170 - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special Flood hazards the Following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring: 
1.  All New Construction and Substantial Improvements Shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the Structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
2.  All Manufactured Homes Shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.22.200. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. All New Construction and Substantial Improvement Shall be constructed: 
1.  With Flood resistant Materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93, and Utility equipment resistant to Flood damage; 
2.  Using methods and practices that minimize Flood damage; 
3.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the Components during conditions of Flooding; and if 
4.  Within Zones AR or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around Structures on Slopes to guide Flood Waters around and away from proposed Structures. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. (See 15.22.150 definitions for "Basement," "Lowest Floor," "New Construction," "Substantial Damage" and "Substantial Improvement".) 
1.  Residential construction, new or Substantial Improvement, Shall have the Lowest Floor, including Basement: 
a.  In an AO Zone, elevated above the Highest Adjacent Grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the Highest Adjacent Grade if no depth number is specified; 
b.  In an A Zone, elevated to or above the Base Flood Elevation; said Base Flood Elevation Shall be determined by one of the methods in Section 15.22.150(B) of this chapter; 
c.  In all other zones, elevated to or above the Base Flood Elevation. 
Upon the completion of the Structure, the Elevation of the Lowest Floor including Basement Shall be certified by a Registered Professional Engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community Building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification Shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential construction, new or Substantial Improvement, Shall either be elevated to conform with Section 15.22.170(C)(1) or together with attendant Utility and sanitary facilities: 
a.  Be Floodproofed below the Elevation recommended under Section 15.22.170(C)(l) so that the Structure is watertight with Walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural Components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a Registered Professional Engineer or architect that the standards of this Section (15.22.170(C)(2)) are satisfied. Such certification Shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
3.  All New Construction and Substantial Improvement with fully enclosed areas below the Lowest Floor (excluding Basements) that are usable solely for parking of Vehicles, Building Access or storage, and which are subject to Flooding, Shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic Flood forces on exterior Walls by allowing for the entry and exit of Floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement Shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and Must exceed the Following minimum criteria: 
a.  Have a minimum of two openings having a total Net Area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to Flooding. The bottom of all openings Shall be no higher than one foot above Grade. Openings May be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they Permit the automatic entry and exit of Floodwater; or 
b.  Be certified by a Registered Professional Engineer or Architect. 
4.  Manufactured Homes Shall also meet the standards in Section 15.22.200. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.180 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary Sewage systems Shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
1.  Infiltration of Flood Waters into the systems; and 
2.  Discharge from the systems into Flood Waters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems Shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during Flooding. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.190 - Standards for Subdivisions. 
A.  All preliminary Subdivision proposals Shall identify the Special Flood Hazard Area and the Elevation of the Base Flood. 
B.  All Subdivision plans will provide the Elevation of proposed Structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the Base Flood Elevation, the Lowest Floor and pad Elevations Shall be certified by a Registered Professional Engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
C.  All Subdivision proposals Shall be consistent with the need to minimize Flood damage. 
D.  All Subdivision proposals Shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, Gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize Flood damage. 
E.  All Subdivisions Shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to Flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.200 - Standards for Manufactured Homes. 
A.  All Manufactured Homes that are placed or substantially improved, within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located: 1) outside of a Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, 2) in a New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, 3) in an Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, or 4) in an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision on a site upon which a Manufactured Home has incurred "Substantial Damage" as the result of a Flood, Shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the Lowest Floor of the Manufactured Home is elevated to or above the Base Flood Elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
B.  All Manufactured Homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE, on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (A) of this section will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
1.  Lowest Floor of the Manufactured Home is at or above the Base Flood Elevation; or 
2.  Manufactured Home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above Grade. 
Upon the completion of the Structure, the Elevation of the Lowest Floor including Basement Shall be certified by a Registered Professional Engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community Building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification Shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.210 - Standards for Recreational Vehicles. 
A.  All Recreational Vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AR, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map will either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive Days, and be fully licensed and ready for Highway Use. A Recreational Vehicle is ready for Highway Use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is Attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently Attached additions, or 
2.  Meet the Permit requirements of Sections 15.22.130 through 15.22.160 of this chapter and the Elevation and anchoring requirements for Manufactured Homes in Section 15.22.200(A). 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.220 - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special Flood hazard established in Section 15.22.070 are areas Designated as Floodways. Since the Floodway is an extremely Hazardous area due to the velocity of Flood Waters, which carry debris, potential Projectiles, and erosion potential, the Following provisions apply. 
A.  Prohibit Encroachments, including fill, New Construction, Substantial Improvement, and other new Development unless certification by a Registered Professional Engineer is provided demonstrating that Encroachments Shall not result in any increase in (the base) Flood Elevation during the occurrence of the Base Flood Discharge. 
B.  If Section 15.22.220(A) is satisfied, all New Construction, Substantial Improvement, and other proposed new Development Shall comply with all other applicable Flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 15.22.170 through 15.22.220. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.230 - Nature of Variances. 
The Variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning Law that Variances pertain to a piece of Property and are not personal in nature. A Variance May be granted for a Parcel of Property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional Hardship to the Applicant or the surrounding Property Owners. The characteristics Must be unique to the Property and not be shared by adjacent Parcels. The unique characteristic Must pertain to the land itself, not to the Structure, its inhabitants, or the Property Owners. 
It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its citizens from Flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a Structure built below Flood level are so serious that Variances from the Flood Elevation or from other requirements in the Flood Ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing Flood loss and damage can only be met if Variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the Variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that Must be met before a Variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a Variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.240 - Appeal Board. 
A.  In passing upon requests for Variances, the City Council Shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the: 
1.  Danger that Materials May be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  Danger of life and Property due to Flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  Susceptibility of the proposed Facility and its contents to Flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual Owner and future Owners of the Property; 
4.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed Facility to the community; 
5.  Necessity to the Facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed Use which are not subject to Flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  Compatibility of the proposed Use with existing and anticipated Development; 
8.  Relationship of the proposed Use to the comprehensive plan and Floodplain Management program for that area; 
9.  Safety of Access to the Property in time of Flood for ordinary and Emergency Vehicles; 
10.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the Flood Waters expected at the site; and 
11.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after Flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, Gas, electrical, and water system, and Streets and bridges. 
B.  Any Applicant to whom a Variance is granted Shall be given Written Notice over the signature of a community official that: 
1.  The issuance of a Variance to construct a Structure below the Base Flood level will result in increased premium rates for Flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage, and 
2.  Such construction below the Base Flood level increases risks to life and Property. It is recommended that a Copy of the Notice Shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and Shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected Parcel of land. 
C.  The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all Variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such Variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
15.22.250 - Conditions for Ordinances. 
A.  Generally, Variances May be issued for New Construction, Substantial Improvement, and other proposed new Development to be erected on a Lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by Lots with existing Structures constructed below the Base Flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 15.22.130 through 15.22.220 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the Lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the Variance increases. 
B.  Variances May be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "Historic Structures" (as defined in 15.22.050 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the Structure's continued Designation as an Historic Structure and the Variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the Structure. 
C.  Variances Shall not be issued within any mapped Regulatory Floodway if any increase in Flood levels during the Base Flood Discharge would result. 
D.  Variances Shall only be issued upon a determination that the Variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the Flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of Variances to an Elevation requirement, this means the City Council need not grant Permission for the Applicant to build at Grade, or even to whatever Elevation the Applicant proposes, but only to that Elevation which the City Council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the Local Ordinance. 
E.  Variances Shall only be issued upon a: 
1.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  Determination that failure to grant the Variance would result in exceptional "Hardship" (as defined in 15.22.050 of this chapter) to the Applicant; and 
3.  Determination that the granting of a Variance will not result in increased Flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a Nuisance (as defined in Section 15.22.050, see "Public safety or Nuisance"), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 15.22.050) of the public, or conflict with existing Local Laws or Ordinances. 
F.  Variances May be issued for New Construction, Substantial Improvement, and other proposed new Development necessary for the conduct of a Functionally Dependent Use provided that the provisions of Section 15.22.250(A) through (E) are satisfied and that the Structure or other Development is protected by methods that minimize Flood damages during the Base Flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a Public Nuisance. 
G.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.22.240(A) and the purposes of this chapter, the City Council May Attach such conditions to the granting of Variances as deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter." 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 15, 4-7-2015)  
Chapter 15.23 - STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION[11] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-04-15, § 16, April 7, 2015, set out provisions to renumber and amend the former Ch. 15.20, §§ 15.20.010 and 15.20.020 as Ch. 15.24. In as much as there were already provisions so designated, Ord. No. O-04-15 has been codified as Ch. 15.23, §§ 15.23.010 and 15.23.020 and amended as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
 
15.23.010 - Adopted. 
The most current version of the "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction," prepared and promulgated by the Southern California Chapters of the American Public Works Association and the Associated General Contractors of California, are adopted and applicable to all Public Works Construction undertaken after the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 16, 4-7-2015)  
15.23.020 - Penalty for Violation. 
It is unlawful for any Person, firm, or corporation to erect, install, alter, repair, remove, convert, demolish, or construct any public works Improvements in the City or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in Violation of any of the provisions of these standard specifications. Any Person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code is guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such Person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every Day or portion thereof during which any Violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or Permitted, and upon conviction of any such Violation, such Person Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment of not more than ninety Days, or by both such fine and imprisonment." 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 16, 4-7-2015)  
Chapter 15.24 - FENCES 
 
15.24.010 - Definitions. 
The meaning of terms set forth in this chapter Shall have the meaning as defined in the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 0-13-87 § 1, 1987)  
15.24.020 - Classification. 
All Fences and Walls in the City, whether constructed or of natural growth, Shall be classified as follows: 
A.  Class 1: masonry, cement, or similar type Material; 
B.  Class 2: ornamental iron or similar type Material; 
C.  Class 3: woven wire with either wood or metal posts; 
D.  Class 4: wooden Material (or similar type Materials) where at least fifty percent of the area remains open; 
E.  Class 5: all Fences not otherwise classified directly or indirectly, including Hedges or other objects of natural growth, creating an Enclosure or sight-restrictive object. 
(Ord. 0-13-87 § 2, 1987)  
15.24.030 - Height and location. 
A.  No Fence or Wall in excess of three feet in height Shall be Permitted in the Front Yard Setback area or the Side Yard of a Corner Lot adjacent to a Key Lot of any residential Property except as provided herein. Fences of Class 3 Shall be Permitted in said Front Yard providing such Fence Shall not exceed five feet in height and the openings Shall not be obscured in any way nor designed in any way to interfere with Pedestrian or auto Driver view. 
B.  No Fences or Walls in excess of six feet Shall be Permitted in the side or Rear Yard of any Property except as follows: 
1.  Fences and Walls in a Buildable Area May exceed six feet. 
2.  Fences and Walls protecting storage Yards or a legal Business or of a public Utility Yard May exceed six feet. 
C.  No Class 3 Fence constructed of chicken wire or similar thin wire of less than twenty gauge Shall be Permitted. 
D.  No Fence Shall be Permitted in the public Right-of-Way. 
E.  No Wall or Fence Shall be Permitted where said Wall or Fence will impede the City Electric Department meter reader to physically reach the meter and be able to read it from a straight forward position within six inches from the meter face. 
(Ord. 0-13-87 § 3, 1987)  
15.24.040 - Fences required—Pools. 
A.  Any Fence or Wall which is Approved by the Zoning Ordinance May be Used to protect a pool area so long as the Fence or Wall meets the Following requirements: 
1.  That openings in the Fence/Wall not be wider than four inches; 
2.  That a ladder effect is not produced by the openings; 
3.  That the height of the Fence/Wall be a minimum of five feet as measured from the top of the outside Grade. 
B.  Said Fence/Wall Shall be maintained on the Lot or Premises upon which is situated a Swimming Pool, portable, or aboveground type pools, or other open areas of water including reservoirs, sumps, and irrigation ditches where the water level is higher than eighteen inches. 
C.  Such Fence or Structure Shall completely surround such pool or area and all Gates or doors opening through such Enclosures Shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices designed to keep such opening securely closed at all times when not in actual Use. The door of any Structure forming any Part of the required Enclosure need not be so equipped. 
(Ord. 0-14-90, 1990)  
15.24.050 - Electric and barbed wire Fences. 
A.  No Fence Shall be charged in any way with electricity or contain in whole or Part barbed wire or sharp prongs or edges except as provided in this section. 
1.  Barbed wire Fences May be placed on grazing land or along section lines. 
2.  Barbed wire May be placed atop a Fence which protects a storage or public Utility Yard. 
3.  Fences with less than twenty-four volts May be placed in Agricultural Zones for the keeping of animals. 
(Ord. 0-13-87 § 5, 1987)  
15.24.060 - Maintenance. 
All Fences Shall be kept in a state of repair so as not to be Hazardous or dangerous and those Used to protect the general public Shall be maintained so as to be sufficient and adequate for that purpose. All Fences Shall be neatly maintained so as not to be unsightly. 
(Ord. 0-13-87 § 6, 1987)  
15.24.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  The Community Development Department is specifically charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any Person erecting or constructing any Wall higher than four feet within the City Shall obtain a Permit from the City Community Development Department prior to said construction or erection. The Fee for such Permit Shall be as fixed by Resolution of the City Council. 
C.  All concrete Block Walls over four feet high Shall be built per City Standards or of Approved design to be Approved and submitted by a California State Registered Engineer or Architect. 
D.  Variances from the criteria enumerated in this chapter May be granted as prescribed in the City's Zoning Ordinance for Minor Variances. 
(Ord. 0-13-87 § 7, 1987)  
15.24.080 - Penalty. 
Any Person violating any provisions of this chapter Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not longer than six Months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 0-13-87 § 8, 1987)  
Chapter 15.28 - OVERSIZED LOADS* 
 
15.28.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and limit the Use of certain Public Streets and Public Property within the City by any Vehicle carrying Oversized Loads in order to prevent damage to Street foundations, surfaces or Structures, to protect bridges and other public or Private Property and life from damage or injury resulting from the moving, or having upon a Public Street or place an Oversized Load, and to promote the general health, welfare and safety of the citizens of this City. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.020 - Definitions. 
The Following words and phrases Shall have the meanings as set forth in this section, and if any word or phrase is not defined in this section, it Shall have the meaning set forth in the California Vehicle Code; provided, that if any such word or phrase is not defined in said Vehicle Code, it Shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage: 
"City" means the City of Colton. 
"City Engineer" means the City Engineer of the City of Colton. 
"Day" means a twenty-four hour period. 
"Department" means the Engineering Department of the City. 
"Gross Weight" means the combined weight of a Vehicle and its load. 
"Night" means that period of a Day when the sun has set and has not yet arisen, during which period there is natural darkness. 
"Oversized Load" means any Vehicle or combination of Vehicles, including any loads which it or they May bear and carry, exceeding the limitations set forth in Division 15 of the California Vehicle Code relating to height, width, length, size or weight of a Vehicle or load. 
"Person" means any Person, firm, individual, corporation, association, partnership, trust or other organization, and includes an Owner, lessee, Permittee, agent or Employee of any Person, firm, individual, corporation, association, partnership, trust or other organization. 
"Public Property" means real or Personal Property owned and controlled by the City, but does not include Easements, Encroachments and other Property that are located on the Property of the City but are not owned or controlled by the City. 
"Street" means a road, way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the Use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Street includes a Highway. 
"Vehicle" means a Vehicle as defined in Section 670 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.030 - Application to governmental bodies. 
The provisions of this chapter Shall apply to the United States, State, counties, municipal corporations, School Districts and to all other governmental bodies, agencies or instrumentalities; provided, however, that if any such governmental agency files with the City Engineer an agreement in writing to pay all damages, costs or expenses which May be suffered or incurred by the City as a result of the movement of any Oversized Load by such agency, then such agency need not pay any Permit Fee or post any deposit or policy of liability insurance required by this chapter. This exemption Shall not apply to any private contractor engaged by any governmental agency, nor to any equipment or Vehicle not operated by any Employee of the governmental agency moving the Oversized Load under the supervision and control of an officer thereof. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.040 - Permit—Requirement. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any Person to move, Permit or cause to be moved, any Oversized Load upon any Public Street or Public Place in the City, without first obtaining a Permit therefor from the City Engineer as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.050 - Permit—Types—Fees. 
A.  One-Day Permit. The City Engineer May issue a Permit to move one or more specified Oversized Loads at specific times on specifically Designated City Public Streets or places during one Day. Any number of such trips May be made as provided in the Permit by the City Engineer on the Day for which said Permit is issued. The Fee for such Permits Shall be as specified by separate Resolution of the City Council establishing Fees and charges in effect at the time the Permit is obtained, and Shall be paid prior to issuance of said Permit. 
B.  Annual Permit. The City Engineer May issue a Permit to move any number of Oversized Loads on specifically Designated City Public Streets or places at specific times by six or fewer Vehicles (provided the same route is Used for all six Vehicles), as provided in the Permit by the City Engineer during a period of time not exceeding three hundred sixty-five consecutive calendar Days, provided each of said Oversized Loads does not exceed the Following size, length, height, weight and width limitations: 
1.  The Oversized Load Shall not exceed one-half the narrowest roadway width over which such Oversized Load is to be moved. 
2.  The Oversized Load Shall not exceed eighteen feet (two hundred sixteen inches) in width, or eighteen feet (two hundred sixteen inches) in height. 
3.  The Oversized Load Shall not exceed one hundred thirty-five feet (one thousand six hundred twenty inches) overall in length. 
4.  An Oversized Load Shall not exceed one hundred tons of Gross Weight and Shall conform to the weight, axle number and wheel-loading requirements of the State as provided in California Vehicle Code Sections 35550 and 35551; provided, however, the City Engineer may, at the time of issuing such annual Permit, reduce the Gross Weight limitation stated in this section if the specifically Designated City Public Streets and places to be Used in moving said Oversized Loads would in his opinion be Materially damaged thereby. 
The Fee for such Permit Shall be as specified by separate Resolution of the City Council establishing Fees and charges in effect at the time the Permit as obtained, and Shall be paid prior to the issuance of said Permit. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.060 - Permit—Application—Contents. 
The Application for any Oversized Load Permits required under this chapter Shall be made on a form furnished by the City Engineer and Shall contain the Following information and data: 
A.  Length of time for which the Permit is requested; 
B.  A statement and map of the Public Streets or places over which Applicant desires to travel; 
C.  Sufficient information to establish that the proposed Oversized Load can be moved safely and without undue Interference with traffic or Use of the Streets and places by the public; 
D.  The date and time of Day when the Applicant desires to move the Oversized Load; 
E.  A complete description of the Vehicle or Vehicles to be operated, including the make, license number, number of axles, wheel-loading ratios, height, length, width, Gross Weight and name of the registered Owner of the Vehicle. In the case of annual Permits, or other Permits contemplating the Use of more than one Vehicle, the Permittee May substitute or add Vehicles or loads being operated or transported under such Permit upon submission to the City Engineer of the required information regarding such Vehicles and his Approval thereof by addendum to the Permit at least twenty-four hours prior to their operation or transportation; 
F.  A description of the type of load to be moved, and if the request is for an annual Permit, the number of trips contemplated for each of said type loads; 
G.  Such other information and data as the City Engineer determines is reasonably necessary and required to carry out the provisions of this chapter; and 
H.  A current certificate of insurance, which Shall be kept on file in the Engineering Department, naming the City as an additional insured, prior to issuance of any Oversized Load Permit. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.070 - Permit—Application—Processing. 
Upon receiving an Application for an Oversized Load Permit, the City Engineer Shall transmit a Copy thereof to the City's Chief of Police. The City Engineer and Chief of Police Shall cause an investigation to be made concerning whether the Oversized Loads, Vehicles, loads and activities proposed in the Application comply with State Laws and City Ordinances and Resolutions regulating Vehicles, traffic safety and congestion, and pertaining to the safety of all Property, public and private, including any public Utility which May be affected by the proposed movement of an Oversized Load on the Public Streets and places of the City. The Chief of Police Shall report the result of his investigation and findings to the City Engineer within forty-eight hours or as soon as practicable. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.080 - Displacement of public Utility Property. 
Whenever the moving of any Oversized Load requires the removal or displacement of any wire or other Property of any public Utility, it Shall be the duty of the Applicant to give Notice to the affected public Utility and make such guarantees as are required by the public Utility. Upon receipt of such Notice and guarantees, the affected public Utility Shall act in an efficient and expeditious manner to remove or displace or cause to be removed or displaced, such wire or other Property. A Copy of the Permit issued by the City Engineer Shall be sent to all public utilities that are potentially affected by transport of the Oversized Load. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.090 - Permit—Issuance—Conditions. 
If, at the completion of the investigation required in this chapter, the City Engineer finds and determines that the Oversized Load movement as proposed in the Application will not be detrimental to the public health, peace, safety and welfare, the City Engineer Shall issue a one-Day or annual Oversized Load Permit subject to such reasonable terms, provisions and conditions as he deems necessary to protect the Public Streets and places or Property of any Person and the public health, peace, safety and welfare, including but not limited to restricting the number of trips, the weight, length, width, height and size of an Oversized Load, the time of Day trips May be made, the date periods during which trips May be made, and requiring Applicant to obtain Written Approval of any Person whose Property will be unduly disturbed or endangered by the moving of an Oversized Load upon Public Streets or places. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.100 - Permit—Contents. 
A Permit to move any Oversized Load Shall set forth on its face the dates and period of time for which it is to be effective, the routes over which the Oversized Load May be moved, and any other information the City Engineer May find is necessary for proper enforcement of this chapter, including but not limited to the name of Permittee, the height, weight, length, width limitations, a description of the Oversized Load by Vehicle identification number and the nature of the load. Any Permit which fails to contain any of the above information or which purports to grant authority to move any Oversized Load contrary to the provisions of this chapter, State Laws and City Ordinances and Resolutions Shall be void. The City or any Officer or Employee Shall not be liable for any damages resulting due to such Permit failing to contain any such information. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.110 - Permit—Issuance—Denial—Suspension—Revocation—Appeals. 
A.  The City Engineer Shall issue all Oversized Load Permits pursuant to this chapter. The City Engineer May at any time suspend or revoke a Permit issued pursuant to this chapter when he has probable cause to believe a Permittee has violated or is causing or Permitting a Violation of this chapter or any pertinent Laws of the State, County or of the City, or when it has been shown to his satisfaction that the activities so Permitted are being conducted in a manner detrimental to the public health, peace, safety or welfare of the City. The City Engineer May also suspend or revoke any Permit under this chapter if he has probable cause to believe a Permittee, or any agent, official or Employee of the Permittee has misrepresented, falsified or concealed any Material fact in the Application upon which such Permit was issued. 
B.  Any Applicant being denied a Permit as provided herein or having a Permit suspended or revoked Shall be entitled to an Appeal hearing before the City Manager. 
C.  Any Applicant wishing to Appeal Shall file a request for Appeal with the City Clerk. The request for Appeal will be sufficient in form if it contains the names and addresses of the Applicants, and states that "This Appeal is from the action of the City Engineer in either granting, denying, suspending or revoking Application No. _____ made by (name of Applicant) for an Oversized Load Permit." The request for Appeal Shall also state the reasons for submitting the Appeal. 
D.  Upon receipt of any such Written Appeal, the City Clerk Shall forward the Application together with the Written Appeal to the City Manager as soon as reasonably practicable. The City Manager Shall thereupon determine whether or not the Permit Shall be issued as provided herein after a hearing thereupon. The hearing Shall be held at the earliest reasonable time thereafter; provided, however, the Applicant and any interested Persons requesting Notice Shall be mailed Notice thereof at their last known address at least five Days prior to such Appeal hearing. 
E.  The City Manager's Decision concerning the Appeal Shall be final. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.120 - Permit—Carrying. 
Every Oversized Load Permit, or facsimile thereof, in the case of annual or other Permits which contemplate the Use of more than one Vehicle, Shall be carried in the Vehicle or by the Operator of the Vehicle to which it refers and Shall be presented upon demand to any Peace Officer, or duly authorized City Law Enforcement Officer, Traffic Officer, or any duly authorized agent of the Department of the City charged with the care and protection of the City's Public Streets and places. A facsimile of said Permit Shall also be displayed in a location in the Vehicle that is easily visible to the public. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.130 - Time—Route. 
The City Engineer Shall determine and approve the times and dates when an Oversized Load May be moved, and Shall determine and approve the route or routes over which each Oversized Load May be moved, giving due consideration to existing underpasses, overhead wires and other obstacles, condition of the Streets, and other pertinent conditions. Prescribed routes Shall, whenever possible, be confined to Designated truck routes and arterial Highways and not Local Streets. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.140 - Escort—Required when. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any Person, unless accompanied by an escort Vehicle or Vehicles Approved by the City Engineer, to move upon any City Public Street or place any Oversized Load which falls within any of the Following categories: 
A.  An Oversized Load that exceeds one-half the narrowest roadway width over which such Oversized Load is being moved; 
B.  An Oversized Load that exceeds eleven feet in width, or fourteen feet in height; or 
C.  An Oversized Load that exceeds seventy-five feet overall in length. 
The City Engineer May establish Written requirements for escort Vehicles. Such requirements Shall be followed by Applicants moving Oversized Load which exceed any of the categories listed in this section. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.150 - Stopping—Parking. 
Whenever it becomes impossible or impractical to move or remove an Oversized Load from the City Public Streets or places, detour Signs and warning lights Approved by the City Engineer Shall be so placed as to make the Stopping or parking of such Oversized Load safe for regular traffic on said Streets or places. The City Engineer and City's Chief of Police Shall be so notified immediately by the Permittee or the mover of the Oversized Load that such Oversized Load will be parked or Stopped. Any of said City Officers May require such Oversized Load to be moved or removed, if possible, to a place deemed safe for such Oversized Load and other traffic on said Streets or places. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.160 - Moving at Night. 
A.  The City Engineer May require that any Oversized Load over fourteen feet in width be moved at Night, if it is determined necessary to protect the public safety and welfare. 
B.  When any Oversized Load is moved at Night, and the City Engineer has issued a Permit for such a movement, warning lights Shall be placed by the Permittee or the mover of the Oversized Load upon such Oversized Load in such a manner as to indicate the clearance of such Oversized Load in the front, on the rear and each side. Such warning lights Must be visible from a distance of five hundred feet from the front, rear and each side of the Oversized Load and there Must be at least four such warning lights visible from the front, rear and each side of such Oversized Load. In addition, flagmen, or alternative warning devices Approved by the City Engineer Shall be employed by the Permittee to warn approaching traffic of the presence of such Oversized Load if the City Engineer determines that such flagmen and/or devices are necessary to protect Persons using The City Public Streets arid places and so notifies the Permittee or the mover of the Oversized Load. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions contained in this chapter, the City Engineer May require the Permittee to provide such additional warnings and Signs as the City Engineer deems necessary for the protection of Pedestrians, Vehicles and the Drivers thereof who are using said Public Streets and places. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.170 - Public liability insurance. 
The Applicant for a Permit under this chapter Shall indemnify and hold harmless the City, the City Council, the City Engineer, Chief of Police and other City officials and Employees from any suits, claims or actions brought by any Person or Persons for or on account of any injuries or damages sustained because of or arising out of the movement or location of an Oversized Load upon City Public Streets or places. Said Applicant Shall furnish to the City and maintain during the period for which an Oversized Load Permit is issued, a public liability insurance policy in which the City is named as an additional insured. The policy Shall insure the City, its officers and Employees while acting within the scope of their duties, against all claims, suits or actions arising out of or in connection with the movement of, or having on the City's Public Streets or places an Oversized Load. The policy Shall provide for not less than the Following coverage amounts: 
Incidental Coverage 
Combined Single Limit 	$2,000,000 
 
Said policy or certificate of coverage thereunder Shall be furnished to the City Engineer prior to the issuance of any Permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.180 - Damage—Report. 
The Permittee Shall report any damage to any Property, public or private, as a result of moving or having upon City Public Streets or places any Oversized Load. Such report Shall be presented to the City Engineer within twenty-four hours after such damage results. Such report Shall include the location, cause, and description of any such damages, and the names of any witnesses thereto and Shall bear the signature of Permittee or his duly authorized agent. The City Engineer Shall also provide the Chief of Police with a Copy of such report. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.190 - Damage—City not liable. 
The City, the City Council, the City Engineer, Chief of Police, or any City official or Employee Shall not be liable for any loss or damage arising out of any Person's Violation of or failure to comply with this chapter. The City Shall not be responsible for any and all damage caused by the transport of Oversized Load on City Streets. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.200 - Unlawful Acts. 
A.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any Person to move, or Permit or cause to be moved, any Oversized Load upon a Public Street or Public Place in the City contrary to the terms, provisions, and conditions of a Permit issued under this chapter by the City Engineer, in Violation of any provision of this chapter, other applicable provisions of this Code, or of the California Vehicle Code, including but not limited to terms, provisions and conditions concerning a particular route, and a particular time for movement, and/or under conditions, including but not limited to weather conditions, that would make such movement Hazardous to Persons using Public Streets and places in the City. 
B.  This section Shall not apply to an Oversized Load being moved at the request of an authorized public Officer in the event of Flood, fire, earthquake or other public disaster or Emergency, or for the purposes of national defense. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.210 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any Person, firm, association, partnership, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 0-03-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 15.32 - BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION 
 
15.32.010 - General Plan—Circulation element adopted. 
The City has adopted a circulation element of its General Plan, and the Flood control provisions thereof identify streams for which bridge crossings are required on the General Plan or on Local roads. 
(Ord. 1430 § 1, 1973)  
15.32.020 - Construction defined. 
"Construction" as Used herein includes design, acquisition of Right-of-Way, administration of construction contracts and actual construction. 
(Ord. 1430 § 8, 1973)  
15.32.030 - Procedure—Generally. 
With regard to any proceedings under this chapter the procedures as set out in Sections 15.32.040 through 15.32.070 Shall apply. 
(Ord. 1430 § 2 (part), 1973)  
15.32.040 - Hearing—Notice—Area of Benefit—What it May include. 
For each area proposed to be benefited by the construction of bridge facilities, a Public Hearing Shall be held by the City Council. Notice Shall be given pursuant to Section 65905 of the Government Code of the State. In addition to the requirements of Section 65905 of the Government Code, such Notice Shall also contain preliminary information related to the boundaries of the Area of Benefit, the estimated cost of the facilities, and the method of Fee apportionment. The Area of Benefit May include land or Improvements in addition to the land or Improvements which are the subject of the Subdivision map or Building Permit Application considered in such proceedings. 
(Ord. 1430 § 2(a), 1973)  
15.32.050 - Hearing—Information required to be established—Fee apportionment. 
At such Public Hearing the boundaries of the Area of Benefit, the costs, whether actual or estimated, and a fair method of Fee apportionment Shall be established. A description of the boundaries of the Area of Benefit, the costs, whether actual or estimated, and the method of Fee apportionment established at the hearing Shall be filed by the City with the County Recorder of San Bernardino County. Such apportioned Fees so established Shall be applicable to all areas of benefit and Shall be payable as a condition of Approval of a final Subdivision map or as a condition of issuing a Building Permit for such Property or portions thereof. 
(Ord. 1430 § 2(b), 1973)  
15.32.060 - Fee payment not required when. 
The payment of Fees Shall not be required unless the planned bridge Facility is, in addition to any existing bridge facilities, serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the Area of Benefit. 
(Ord. 1430 § 2(c), 1973)  
15.32.070 - Hearing—Protesting Improvement—Procedure. 
If within the time when protests May be filed, a Written protest is filed with the City Clerk by the Owners of more than one-half of the area of the Property to be benefited by the Improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented to less than one-half of that to be benefited, then the proposed proceedings Shall be Abandoned, and there Shall not be for one Year from the filing of such Written protest any further proceedings for the same Improvement or acquisition under the provisions of this chapter. Any protests May be withdrawn by the Owner making the same, in writing, at any time prior to the conclusion of the Public Hearing. 
(Ord. 1430 § 2(d), 1973)  
15.32.080 - Hearing—Protesting portion of Improvement—Procedure. 
If any majority protest is directed against only a portion of the Improvement then all further proceedings under the provisions of this chapter to construct that portion of the Improvements so protested against Shall be barred for the period of one Year, but the City Council Shall not be barred from commencing new proceedings and not including any Part of the Improvement or acquisition so protested against. Nothing herein Shall prohibit the City Council within such one-Year period, from commencing and carrying on new proceedings for the construction of a portion of the Improvement so protested against if it finds, by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of its members, that the Owners of a majority of the Property within the Area of Benefit are in favor of going forward with such portion of the Improvement or acquisition. 
(Ord. 1430 § 3, 1973)  
15.32.090 - Planned bridge Facility funds—Disposition of moneys. 
Fees paid pursuant to this chapter Shall be deposited in a planned bridge Facility fund. A separate fund Shall be established for each planned bridge Facility Project. Moneys in such fund Shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of the bridge Facility serving the area to be benefited and from which the Fees comprising the fund were collected, or to reimburse the City for the cost of constructing such bridge Facility. 
(Ord. 1430 § 4, 1973)  
15.32.100 - Considerations in lieu of Fees. 
The City May accept considerations in lieu of the payment of Fees. 
(Ord. 1430 § 5, 1973)  
15.32.110 - Moneys advancement from general or road fund. 
The City May advance money from its General Fund or road fund to pay the cost of constructing bridge facilities and May reimburse the General Fund or road fund for such advances from planned bridge Facility funds established to finance the construction of such bridge facilities. 
(Ord. 1430 § 6, 1973)  
15.32.120 - City May incur indebtedness. 
The City May incur an indebtedness for the construction of bridge facilities; provided that the sole security for repayment of such indebtedness Shall be moneys in planned bridge Facility funds. 
(Ord. 1430 § 7, 1973)  
15.32.130 - City May contract with Subdivider or Developer. 
The City May contract with the Subdivider or the land Developer for the construction of the bridge and reimburse the Subdivider or land Developer for the cost of constructing the Facility. 
(Ord. 1430 § 9, 1973)  
15.32.140 - Area of Benefit—Charges on—Payment. 
The City May establish an Area of Benefit and May impose a reasonable charge on Property within the area which is found by the City Council to be benefited by the construction of the bridge. The charge collected Shall be paid to the City or the Subdivider constructing the bridge and the City May enter into a reimbursement agreement with the Subdivider. 
(Ord. 1430 § 10, 1973)  
Chapter 15.36 - FIRE HYDRANT CAPACITY 
 
15.36.010 - Findings. 
The Council finds that adequate fire hydrants with sufficient water pressure and volume are necessary prerequisites for the public health, safety, welfare and enjoyment of Property within the City, and conversely, that the lack of these Improvements is injurious to the safety and welfare of the inhabitants of Colton. 
(Ord. 1624 § 1, 1982)  
15.36.020 - Providing necessary fire flow. 
No change May be made in the Occupancy or Use of any Building which would place the Building in a different Division of the same group of occupancies or in a different group of occupancies, as defined by the edition of the Uniform Building Code then in effect, nor May any Building Permit be Used for any addition to a Building which will increase the area of the Building by more than twenty-five percent of its existing area, nor Shall any Permit be issued for the construction of a Building, Structure, or Dwelling unless provisions are made for the construction and installation of such water lines and fire hydrants as are determined by the Department of Public Works to be necessary to provide necessary fire flow in accordance with City Standards. 
(Ord. 1624 § 2, 1982)  
15.36.030 - Lien agreement for later construction. 
Upon Written recommendation of the City Fire Chief, the City Engineer or his Designee May in his discretion authorize the construction and installation of water lines and fire hydrants by the Property Owner at a later date upon notification from the City pursuant to the terms of a lien agreement prepared by the City to secure performance of the work. In such event, the Property Owner Shall pay a Fee for preparation of the lien agreement in an amount determined by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 0-16-05 § 9, 2005: Ord. 1624 § 3, 1982)  
Chapter 15.40 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, adopted Feb. 6, 2018, amended former Ch. 15.40, §§ 15.40.010—15.40.170, in its entirety to read ash herein set out. Former Ch. 15.40 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 0-26-04, § 1, 2004; Ord. No. 0-28-04, § 1, 2004; Ord. No. O-04-15, §§ 17, 18, 4-7-2015. 
 
15.40.010 - Title. 
The Ordinance codified in this chapter Shall be known as the "Historic Preservation Ordinance of the City of Colton." 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018)  
15.40.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The City finds, determines and declares: 
A.  That the State Legislature of California, pursuant to Government Code Sections 37361 and 25373, has recognized the value of identifying, protecting, and preserving places, Buildings, Structures, and other objects of historical, aesthetic, and cultural importance and has empowered cities to adopt regulations and incentives for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and Use of such places, Buildings, Structures, and other objects; 
B.  That the City possesses many distinctive places, Buildings, Structures, and neighborhoods, beautiful trees, gardens and Streetscapes, public Parks, scenic areas, and urban design features (all referred to in this chapter as "resources") that enhance its value as an attractive and delightful community in which to live and work; 
C.  That certain of these resources are of cultural, aesthetic or historical significance and value because of age, architectural style, aesthetic Appeal, or association with Local history; 
D.  That encouraging the preservation of these resources contributes to the livability and beauty of the community, stimulates economic revitalization, improves Property values in the City, fosters architectural creativity, increases neighborhood stability and conservation, fosters public appreciation of and civic pride in the beauty of the City and the accomplishments of its past, reinforces the distinctive character of the community, adds to the community's understanding of its history and connection with the life and values of the past, and ensures that Colton's cultural, historical, and architectural heritage will be imparted to future generations; 
E.  That shifts in population and in the economy, changes in the way people live, and changes in land Use patterns that threaten to destroy these irreplaceable and desirable resources. Construction and Alterations of inferior quality and appearance are also a threat to these resources; 
F.  That the adoption of reasonable and fair regulations is necessary as a means of recognition, documentation, preservation, and maintenance of resources of cultural, aesthetic, or historical significance. Such regulations serve to integrate the preservation of resources and the extraction of relevant data from such resources into public and private land management and Development processes, and to identify as early as possible and resolve conflicts between the preservation of Cultural Resources and alternative land Uses. Finally, this chapter is intended to carry out the goals and policies of the Colton General Plan. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018)  
15.40.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, words, phrases and terms Shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
"Adaptive Reuse" means converting a Building, Structure or site to a Use other than that for which it was designed. 
"Alteration" means any exterior change or modification, through public or private action, of any Historic District or resource, or Property located within a Historic District including, but not limited to, exterior changes to or modification of structural and/or architectural details or visual characteristics such as paint color and surface texture, grading, surface paving, construction of new Structures, cutting or removal of trees and other natural features, disturbance of Archaeological sites or areas, and the placement or removal of any exterior objects such as Signs, plaques, light fixtures, Street furniture, Walls, Fences, steps, plantings, and landscape accessories affecting the exterior visual qualities of the Property. 
"Archaeology" means the study of ancient peoples and customs as shown by monuments, sites, implements, inscriptions, and relics. 
"Certificate of Appropriateness" is the Permit granted after review by the Commission, approving plans to alter, demolish, move, or subdivide a Designated Historic Resource or District, or for New Construction on the site of a Designated Historic Resource or District. All Alterations and enhancements to Historic Resources or Districts Shall be consistent with the preservation policies and provisions contained in this chapter, as deemed appropriate by the Commission and Shall be verified through the Certificate of Appropriateness by the Commission and the City Liaison Officer to the Commission. 
"Certificate of Economic Hardship" is a Permit granted by the Commission to Permit an Applicant to alter, move, demolish or subdivide a Designated Historic Resource or District due to extreme financial privation or adversity in accordance with the procedure and findings in this chapter. 
"Commission" refers to the Planning Commission of the City of Colton acting as the Historic Preservation Commission or Planning Commission. 
"Cultural Resource" means Improvements, Buildings, Structures, Signs, features, sites, places, areas, or other objects of scientific, aesthetic, educational, cultural, architectural, or historical significance to the citizens of the City, State or Nation which May be eligible for Designation, or Designated and determined to be appropriate for preservation pursuant to this chapter. 
"Day" means calendar Day, including all weekend Days and Holidays. 
"Demolition" means any Act or process that destroys or damages in Part or in whole a Designated Historic Resource or District or a Property identified as a Potential Historic Resource or as Part of a Historic District. 
"Design Guidelines" are principles contained in a document which illustrate appropriate and inappropriate methods of rehabilitation, Alteration and construction. The purpose of the Design Guidelines is to help Decision makers evaluate changes to Historic Resources and Districts with regard to retaining the scale, pattern and historical character of a Historic Resource or District. The Design Guidelines Shall be titled the "City of Colton Historic Preservation Design Manual." 
"Designation" or "Designated" means the Act of selecting, in accordance with the criteria in this chapter, a Historic Resource or District for official City status by the Commission and the City Council. Potential Historic Resources and Districts Shall not be deemed to have been Designated. 
"Historic District" is any area containing a concentration of Improvements, Buildings or Structures that are fifty Years or older which have special character, special scenic and/or urban importance, historical interest, or aesthetic value, which posses integrity of location, design, setting, Materials, workmanship, feeling, and/or association, and/or which represent one or more architectural periods of styles typical to the history of the City, and which have been Designated a Historic District pursuant to this chapter. 
"Historic Resource" is any Improvement, natural feature, Structure, place, site, Fence, Gate, Wall, work of art or other object constituting a physical feature of Real Property that is fifty Years old or older that has significant historic, architectural, or cultural value and which have been Designated a Historic Resource pursuant to this chapter. 
"Intrusion" is a Building or Structure that does not fit into and detracts from a Historic Resource or District because of inappropriate scale, Materials, Landscaping, or other such characteristics. 
"Owner" means an Owner of Property either alone or in combination with others. 
"Potential Historic District" is any area containing a concentration of Improvements, Buildings or Structures that are fifty Years or older which May have special character, special scenic and/or urban importance, historical interest, or aesthetic value, which posses integrity of location, design, setting, Materials, workmanship, feeling, and/or association, and/or which May represent one or more architectural periods of styles typical to the history of the City, and which have not been Designated a Historic District pursuant to this chapter either because it is in the process of being Designated or it otherwise qualifies for Designation except that the Property Owner(s) do not consent to its formal Designation. 
"Potential Historic Resource" is any Improvement, natural feature, Structure, place, site, Fence, Gate, Wall, work of art or other object constituting a physical feature of Real Property that is fifty Years old or older that May have significant historic, architectural, or cultural value, but which has not been Designated a Historic Resource pursuant to this chapter either because it is in the process of being Designated or it otherwise qualifies for Designation except that the Property Owner(s) do not consent to its formal Designation. 
"Preliminary Survey" is an informal determination by the Commission that a Historic Resource or District is of potential historical or cultural significance. Such resources are to be kept on a list by the Commission, but Shall not be deemed to be Designated Historic Resources or Districts. 
"Preservation Officer" is the City Manager who will appoint a staff liaison to the Commission for the administration of this chapter. The staff liaison may, from time to time, delegate duties as authorized by the City Manager. 
"Register of Historic Resources and Districts" is the official City list of all Designated Historic Resources and Districts. 
"Survey" is the accepted method of systematically studying Potential Historic Resources and Districts. It includes a physical description and a photograph of each Potential Historic Resource and/or District, legal information from title or assessment records, statements of significance according to the criteria in this chapter, and a statement of any threat to the integrity or continued existence of the potential resource or District. The information for each potential resource or District Shall be recorded on a Survey sheet. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018)  
15.40.040 - Historic Preservation Duties delegated. 
The Commission is authorized to make recommendations, Decisions, and determinations concerning the Designation, preservation, protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of Historic Resources and Districts which contribute to the historical, cultural and aesthetic values of the City. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018)  
15.40.050 - Commission—Delegated Powers and duties. 
In addition to the powers and duties assigned by Title 18, the following additional powers and duties are delegated to the Planning Commission as follows: 
A.  Cause to be created a document called City of Colton Historic Preservation Design Manual which will serve as Design Guidelines for any Improvement of a Designated historical resource or District; 
B.  Conduct or cause to be conducted Surveys of Structures, Buildings, places, scenic areas, urban design features, and objects (resources) for the purpose of identifying those of cultural, aesthetic or historical significance. This Survey is to be publicized and periodically updated; 
C.  Recommend, in accordance with the criteria set forth in Section 15.40.080, the Designation of Historic Resources and Districts and recommend the Approval of Mills Act contracts to the City Council; 
D.  Compile and maintain a list of potential resources and Districts and a current Local register of all Properties Designated as Historic Resources and Historic Districts; 
E.  Approve, approve conditionally, or deny Applications for certificates of appropriateness and certificates of Hardship for Designated resources or Districts pursuant to Section 15.40.100; 
F.  Review and send comments to the appropriate Commission about proposed General Plan and zoning text and map changes, municipal Improvements, and housing and redevelopment plans that have bearing on the protection, maintenance and enhancement of Designated resources or Districts; 
G.  Endeavor to promote public interest in and understanding of Historic Resources and Districts and their preservation; 
H.  Consult with and advise public officials and agencies; civic, educational, professional and other agencies; and with citizens generally in relation to the preservation of Historic Resources and Districts and to serve as liaison between the City and historical organizations; 
I.  Undertake educational programs and activities in order to teach community members methods to maintain and rehabilitate Colton's Historic Resources and Districts; 
J.  Advise the City Council regarding conservation Easements, other less-than-Fee interest in Property, and the purchase of Fee interests in Property for purposes of historic preservation, and Development agreements for the purposes of preservation of resources and Districts; 
K.  Seek out information and advise the City Council regarding the availability and utilization of gifts or special funds from Federal, State, and private sources; 
L.  Make recommendations to the City Council in order to provide technical expertise necessary to carry on the functions of the Commission; 
M.  From time to time, to issue commendations to Owners of Historic Resources who have rehabilitated their Property in an exemplary manner; 
N.  Ensure that historic preservation is coordinated with other City activities; 
O.  Recommend conservation Easements for acquisition by the City and monitor those acquired; 
P.  Preserve, restore, maintain and operate historic Properties under the ownership or control of the City per City Council Approval; 
Q.  Contract, with prior Approval of the City Council, with County, State, or Federal government, or any agency or Subdivision of the governments, or with any other organization; 
R.  Perform any other functions that May be Designated by Resolution or motion by City Council; 
S.  Notwithstanding duties delegated to the Commission to Designate historical resources, Districts, places, etc., the Preservation Officer is authorized, on an Emergency basis, to Designate same as having a historic value to be preserved. This action by the Preservation Officer Shall be of no further effect unless sustained by a majority vote by the Commission within sixty Days or by the City Council in the Commission's absence. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018)  
15.40.060 - Nomination and Designation of Historic Resources and Historic Districts. 
A.  The Commission Shall undertake to establish and maintain a list of Historic Resources and/or Historic Districts that have been nominated for Designation or identified in a Preliminary Survey. An individual who presents documentation equal to that collected in the Preliminary Survey May request that a resource be placed on the list. This list May include single Structures or sites, portions of Structures, urban design features, man-made or natural landscape elements, or works of art that are fifty Years old or older. 
B.  In determining the category for Designation of a resource, the Commission Shall refer to the definitions contained in Section 15.40.030. 
C.  Criteria for Designation. The criteria, any one of which May be Used to determine Designation, are as follows: 
1.  It has significant character, interest, or value as Part of the Development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the City, State of California, or the United States; 
2.  It is the site of a significant historic event; 
3.  It is strongly identified with a Person or Persons who significantly contributed to the culture, history, or Development of the City; 
4.  It is one of the few remaining examples in the City possessing distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen; 
5.  It is a notable work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has significantly influenced the Development of the City; 
6.  It embodies elements of architectural design, detail, Materials, or craftsmanship that represent a significant architectural innovation; 
7.  It has a unique location or singular physical characteristics representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, community, or the City; 
8.  It has unique design or detailing; 
9.  It is a particularly good example of a period or style; 
10.  It contributes to the historical or scenic heritage or historical or scenic Properties of the City (to include, but not limited to, Landscaping, light standards, trees, Curbing, and Signs); 
11.  It is located within a Historic District, being a geographically definable area possessing a concentration of historic or scenic Properties which contribute to each other and are unified aesthetically by plan or physical Development. 
D.  Designation of Historic Resources and Historic Districts. Designation of resources and Designation of Districts Shall take place in accordance with the Following procedures: 
1.  Any Person or group owning a Historic Resource May request the Designation of a Historic Resource, or ten percent of the Property Owners in a Potential Historic District May request the Designation of a Historic District by submitting an Application for such Designation to the Commission on forms prescribed by the Historic Preservation Officer. The Commission or City Council May also initiate such proceedings on their own motion after Written consent has been obtained from the Owner of a Historic Resource or ten percent of the Property Owners in a Historic District. Historic Resources and Historic Districts that do not have the Property Owner's Permission for submittal of an Application Shall remain known as Potential Historic Resources and Potential Historic Districts. 
2.  The Commission May Use the Survey process to prepare a Written report regarding the proposed Designation, including a description of the proposed Designated resource or District, reasons for its significance, criteria Used to determine eligibility, and other appropriate data. 
3.  The Commission Shall schedule a Public Hearing as soon as feasible but not less than twenty-one Days after the filing of the Application. Notice Shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Colton not less than ten Days before the date set for the Commission hearing. The Notice Shall be filed with the City Clerk and mailed to the Applicant and Owner. 
4.  In the case of a Historic Resource, Notice of the date, place, time, and purpose of the hearing Shall be given by first class mail to the Applicants, Owners, and Occupants of the Historic Resource at least ten Days prior to the date of the Public Hearing, using the name and address of such Owner(s) as shown on the latest equalized assessment rolls, and Shall be advertised once in a newspaper of general circulation in Colton at least ten Days prior to the hearing. 
5.  In the case of a Historic District, Notice of the date, place, time and purpose of the hearing Shall be given by first class mail to the Applicant and Owners of all Properties within the proposed Historic District at least ten Days prior to the date of the Public Hearing, using the name and address of such Owners as shown on the latest equalized assessment rolls, and Shall be advertised once in a newspaper of general circulation in Colton at least ten Days prior to the hearing. 
6.  At the conclusion of the Public Hearing for the Designation of a Historic Resource or District, the Commission Shall recommend, in no event more than thirty Days from the date set for the initial Public Hearing, to the City Council in writing Approval, in whole or in Part, or disapproval in whole or in Part, of the proposed Designation, stating the findings of fact and the reasons for its recommendation based on the report and information brought out at the Public Hearing. 
7.  Following receipt of such report, the City Council Shall, within forty-five Days, consider at a Noticed Public Hearing, the Designation by resolution of each resource or District recommended for Designation by the Commission. 
8.  Following such Designation by the City Council, the City Clerk Shall, within thirty Days, cause to be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder Notice that such Property has been Designated and placed on the City's Register of Historic Resources and Districts. Following the recordation of such Notice, such Property Shall be subject to all the provisions of the Colton Historic Preservation Ordinance. 
9.  If the City Council decides not to Designate a resource or District, it May review the proposed Designation again after one Year, sooner if there are substantial changes in the Application. 
10.  Failure to send any Notice by mail to any Property Owner where the address of such Owner is not a Matter of public record Shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with the proposed Designation. 
E.  Design Guidelines. Following Designation, the provisions of Colton's Design Guidelines Shall also apply to Historic Resources and Historic Districts. Thereafter, any Alteration, Improvement, Subdivision, Lot split, Demolition, or moving of any Designated Historic Resource or Designated Historic District Shall be subject to the review of the City in accordance with Section 15.40.100 of this chapter. The purpose of this review is to retain Buildings and their features as well as features of the site, and Streetscape and landscape features which are important in defining the historic character of the resource, District and/or its Components. The Design Guidelines Shall contain recommendations for making exterior changes to Designated and Potential Historic Resources and Districts. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018)  
15.40.070 - Amendment or rescission of Designation of Historic Resources and Historic Districts. 
A.  The amendment or rescission of any Designated Historic Resource or Historic District Shall be in the Following manner: 
1.  The Applicant Must submit to the Commission a request in writing for the amendment or rescission of the Designation of a Historic Resource. For the amendment or rescission of the Designation of a Historic District, ten percent of the Property Owners in that District Must submit to the Commission a request in writing for such amendment or rescission. The Commission or City Council May also initiate such proceedings on their own motion. 
2.  Requests for amendment or rescission of a Designated Historic Resource or Historic District Must present facts which clearly demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission any of the Following: 
a.  The Designated Historic Resource or District has lost all historical and/or cultural significance due to catastrophe or extensive lawful Alterations performed after the resource or District was initially Surveyed; 
b.  The information relied on by the Commission and the City Council in making the original Designation was erroneous or false, or that circumstances wholly beyond the Owner's control have rendered the resource or District ineligible for historic Designation based on the criteria listed in subsection "C" ("Criteria for Designation") of Section 15.40.080 of this chapter and it would be infeasible to restore the resource or District; 
c.  Failure to approve the requested amendment or rescission would cause immediate and substantial Hardship to the Property Owner(s) which was not reasonably foreseeable at the time the resource or District was Designated. 
3.  The Commission Shall schedule a Public Hearing as soon as feasible, but not less than twenty-one Days after the receipt of the request for amendment or rescission. All Notice requirements for the Public Hearing Shall follow the same manner and procedures that were followed in the original Designation of the resource or District. 
4.  At the conclusion of the Public Hearing for the requested amendment or rescission, the Commission Shall recommend to the City Council in writing, in no event more than thirty Days from the close of the Public Hearing, Approval, in whole or in Part, or disapproval, in whole or in Part, of the requested amendment or rescission, stating the findings of fact and the reasons for its recommendation based on the Written request for amendment or rescission, the environmental review and the information obtained at the Public Hearing. 
5.  Following the receipt of the Commission's recommendation, the City Council Shall, within forty-five Days, consider at a Noticed Public Hearing the requested amendment or rescission, along with the Commission's recommendation. 
6.  If the City Council approves the requested amendment or rescission, the City Clerk Shall, within thirty Days, cause to be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder Notice that the historic Designation for such resource or District has been amended or deleted from the City's Register of Historic Resources and Districts. If the City Council denies the requested amendment or rescission, it May review the request again after one Year, or sooner if there are substantial changes made to the original request. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018)  
15.40.80 - Application to Commission for Certificate of Appropriateness and certificate of Hardship. 
A.  Certificate of Appropriateness for Alterations, New Construction, Moving, Subdivisions, Lot Splits, and Signs. 
1.  A Certificate of Appropriateness issued by the Commission or the Preservation Officer is required for any exterior Alteration to any Designated Historic Resource, for New Construction on the site of a Designated Historic Resource, for the moving of a Historic Resource, and for a Lot split or Subdivision of a Historic Resource. A Certificate of Appropriateness Shall be required to erect or relocate any Sign which is in a Designated Historic District or associated with a Structure in a Historic District. New Construction on any Property located in a Historic District Shall also require a Certificate of Appropriateness. The Development Services Department Shall direct Applicants for Building Permits and Sign Permits for Designated Historic Resources and Districts to apply for a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Commission through the Preservation Officer. No Building, Alteration, Subdivision, Demolition, or removal Permits for any exterior Improvement, Sign, Building, or Structure within a Historic Resource or District Shall be issued while the Public Hearing for Designation or any Appeal related thereto is pending except where a Certificate of Appropriateness has been Secured. 
2.  Applicants are encouraged first to consult with Development Services Department staff about using the Design Guidelines before submitting a formal Application. Any Application for a Certificate of Appropriateness Shall be made on a form prescribed by the Preservation Officer and Shall be accompanied by a Fee set by Resolution of the City Council. The Application Shall include the information required by the Preservation Officer, including, but not limited to, Elevation drawings of the proposed Alterations, samples of proposed colors and Materials, plan view for New Construction, and color photographs of all sides of any existing Structures on the site. 
3.  The Preservation Officer Shall Use a "preservation check list" to determine if the proposal is "Minor" or "major," and Shall Use the Design Guidelines to determine if the proposal is compatible with the existing resource and surrounding Designated resources, if any. All requests for New Construction, Subdivision, Lot splits, Demolitions, or moving of a Historic Resource Shall be considered a major Alteration. Applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness for major Alterations Shall be reviewed and Approved by the Commission. 
4.  A Certificate of Appropriateness for Minor Improvements where proposed work does not adversely affect the exterior Architectural Features of the Designated Historic Resource nor adversely affect the character or historical, architectural, or aesthetic interest or value of the Designated Historic Resource and its site, May be Approved by the Preservation Officer. Alterations in Designated Historic Districts May be Approved by the Preservation Officer except that major Alterations to Designated Historic Districts, as defined in subsection (A)(3) of this section, Shall be reviewed by the Commission. 
5.  The Preservation Officer Shall inform the Commission in writing of all Decisions made regarding Minor Alterations within ten calendar Days after such determination. All such Decisions go into effect eleven Days after a Decision unless Appealed in accordance with Section 15.40.120 of this chapter. 
6.  Using the Colton Design Guidelines, the Survey, the Designation report, and the Preservation Officer's report, the Commission Shall review any major Alterations, Appeals of staff determinations, and Subdivisions, Lot splits, and New Construction within Designated Historic Resources and Historic Districts and make a determination to approve, approve conditionally, or deny the Certificate of Appropriateness. An Approval Shall require the Commission to find that the action proposed is consistent with this chapter and will not be detrimental to a Historic Resource or District, or that the action is necessary to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition pursuant to Section 15.40.160(A). In case of Hardship, the Applicant May apply for a certificate of Hardship pursuant to subsection D of this section. 
7.  The Commission's Decision Shall be in writing and Shall state the findings of fact and reasons relied upon in reaching its Decision. 
8.  After Commission Approval, the Building Official Shall issue the Permit applied for provided that all requirements of City and State Codes, including the Historic Building Code, are met and provided the Commission's Decision has not been Appealed within ten Days of its Decision in accordance with Title 18, Section 18.58.100. 
9.  After a Permit has been issued, the Preservation Officer Shall, from time to time, inspect the work Approved by the Commission in order to assure compliance. If the work is not being performed in accordance with the Certificate of Appropriateness, a Stop Work Order Shall be issued and all work Shall cease. 
10.  A Certificate of Appropriateness Shall become void unless construction is commenced within eighteen Months of the date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness May be renewed for a thirty-six-month period by applying to the Preservation Officer. If the Project is not completed within thirty-six Months after the expiration of the last Building Permit, a new Certificate of Appropriateness Shall be required to complete work. 
11.  Any change in the scope of the work which is determined to be a major Alteration which occurs subsequent to the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness Shall require issuance of a new Certificate of Appropriateness. Certificates of appropriateness for Minor Alterations Shall be issued at the discretion of the Preservation Officer upon the Written request of the Applicant. 
B.  Moving. A Certificate of Appropriateness for moving of a Designated Historic Resource or Structure in a Designated Historic District Shall be granted if the Applicant produces evidence to the satisfaction of the Commission that the Following findings May be made: 
1.  The moving will not have significant effect on the applicable goals and objectives of Colton's General Plan and on the implementation of this chapter. 
2.  The Structure in its original setting is not of such interest or quality that it would reasonably meet Federal or State criteria for Designation as a Historic Resource and thus should be retained in that setting. 
3.  Permit procedures and Appeals are the same as those in subsection A of this section and Section 18.58.100 of Title 18. Structures identified as Intrusions into Historic Districts Shall not require a certificate for moving. 
C.  Demolition. A Certificate of Appropriateness for Demolition of a Designated Historic Resource or Structure in a Designated Historic District Shall be granted if the Applicant produces evidence to the satisfaction of the Commission that the Following findings May be made: 
1.  The Demolition will not have a significant effect on the applicable goals and objectives of Colton's General Plan and on the implementation of this chapter. 
2.  The Structure is not of such unusual design, texture or Materials that it could not be reproduced or could be reproduced only with great difficulty and expense. 
3.  The Structure is not of such interest or quality that it would reasonably meet Federal or State criteria for Designation as a Historic Resource. 
4.  Conversion to a new Use (Adaptive Reuse) Permitted by right under current zoning or with a Conditional Use Permit, rehabilitation, or some other alternatives for preserving the Structure is not feasible. A delay of up to one hundred eighty Days May be Permitted to determine the feasibility of alternatives. During this time the Commission May consult with civic groups, public agencies, and interested citizens. 
5.  A Certificate of Appropriateness Shall take effect upon Approval of a new Structure either by the Planning Commission or the Building Department. 
6.  Permit procedures and Appeals are the same as those in subsection A of this section and Section 18.58.100 of Title 18. Structures identified as Intrusions into Historic Districts Shall not require a certificate for Demolition. 
D.  Certificate of Hardship. A certificate of Hardship Permitting Demolition, moving, Subdivision, or a Lot split, New Construction, or Alteration which has been denied a Certificate of Appropriateness May be granted under the conditions described in this chapter. Application Shall be made in a form prepared by the Preservation Officer, and the same procedure for Public Notice, Public Hearing, and Appeal as for a Certificate of Appropriateness Shall apply. 
A certificate of a Hardship Shall be granted only if the Owner(s) of the Designated Property in question can produce evidence to show that: 
1.  Reasonable Use or return on the Property is not possible under the conditions of the Certificate of Appropriateness; and 
2.  Alternative plans which would be in keeping with the interest of this chapter are not feasible. 
The Commission May delay the Decision on the Application for a period not to exceed ninety Days to investigate plans to allow for a reasonable Use of or return from the Property or other measures to preserve the Property, including selling the Property to an individual or group that would preserve it. 
The Commission Shall review the evidence and make a Written finding, stating the facts and reasons behind the Decision. It Shall notify the Applicant by mail of the acceptance or denial of the certificate of Hardship. Permit procedures and Appeals of certificates of Hardship are the same as those in subsection A of this section and Section 18.58.100 of Title 18. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018)  
15.40.90 - Special review of Potential Historic Resources, Districts and nominated resources. 
A.  Review by Historic Preservation Officer. Any Alteration or Demolition to be conducted at a Potential Historic Resource, Potential Historic District or nominated resource that had not been officially Designated Shall be reviewed by the historic Preservation Officer prior to commencing any such work to assist the Owner in maintaining the significance of the resource and address issues of appropriateness and Designation. 
B.  Upon receipt of a request for Alteration or Demolition, the Historic Preservation Officer Shall convene an informal meeting of the Preservation Officer, Building Official and City Engineer, or their Designated Representatives (the "Recommendation Committee"), to review the Application determine whether it would qualify as a Designated Historic Resource or Part of Designated Historic District and make recommendations concerning appropriate measures to retain the resource or District's historic, architectural, cultural and aesthetic qualities if so qualified. In determining whether a resource or District qualifies for Designation, the recommendation Committee Shall be guided by the requirements of this chapter and Title 14, Chapter 3, Section 15064.5 of the California Code of Regulations. The informal meeting Shall be convened and the Committee Shall provide its recommendations within fourteen Days of the receipt of a request or the request Shall be deemed Approved. If the recommendation Committee determines that the resource or District does not qualify for Designation as a Historic Resource and District, no further action May be taken and the Applicant May proceed with their Project. 
C.  If the recommendation Committee determines that the resource or District qualifies for Designation and imposes conditions on the Permit, the Property Owner will be requested to concur and agree in the recommendations. If the Property Owner agrees to the recommendations of the recommendation Committee, they Shall be made a condition of the request for Alteration or Demolition. The Owner of the Potential Historic Resource or Potential Historic District Shall sign an affidavit agreeing to the conditions or refusing them. The affidavit and conditions of Approval Shall be posted outside City Hall and the Appeal period Shall run from the date of posting. 
D.  If the Owner does not agree with the recommendations of the recommendation Committee, the request Shall be submitted to the Commission. The Matter Shall be submitted to the Commission within thirty Days from the date the Owner signs the affidavit refusing the conditions of the recommendation Committee. 
E.  The Commission Shall consider the Matter and the reasons why the Owner refused the conditions at a hearing. The Commission Shall have the authority to extend the review to explore alternative solutions for making appropriate Improvements for no longer than sixty Days and to explore Demolition alternatives for no longer than one hundred eighty Days, unless the Owner agrees to a longer period of time. 
F.  After at least one hearing before the Commission and in the event the proceedings before the Commission have not progressed in a manner that is satisfactory to the Owner, the Owner May request a hearing before the City Council for final Resolution. The City Council Shall consider the Matter within forty-five Days of the request by the Owner. The final determination by the City Council Shall be advisory and the Owner May proceed with the Alteration or Demolition. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018)  
15.40.100 - Compliance with California Environmental Quality Act. 
In conjunction with any Public Hearing or discretionary action required pursuant to this chapter, the Preservation Officer, Commission and/or City Council Shall cause to be conducted an environmental review of the requested action in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act ("CEQA"). Depending on the nature and scope of the requested action, a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or Environmental Impact Report May need to be prepared. Such environmental documents Shall be prepared based on CEQA, the State CEQA guidelines, and the City of Colton Local CEQA guidelines. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018)  
15.40.110 - Historic Building Code. 
Alternative building regulations May be used for the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration, or relocation of structures designated as Historic Resource Buildings. The State Historic Building Code (Part 8 of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code) May be used for any Historic Resource through the City's Building Permit procedure. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018)  
15.40.120 - Conservation Easements. 
Conservation Easements on the facades of Buildings Designated as Historic Resource May be acquired by the City or nonprofit group through purchase, donation, or condemnation pursuant to California Civil Code 815. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018)  
15.40.130 - Maintenance and repair. 
A.  This chapter Shall not be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of exterior Architectural Features, Walls, landscapes, etc., in or on any Designated Property that does not involve a change in design, Materials, or external appearance thereof, nor does this chapter prevent the construction, reconstruction, Alteration, restoration, Demolition, or removal of any such feature when the Development Services Department certifies to the Council that such action is required for the public safety due to unsafe or dangerous conditions which cannot be rectified through the Use of the State Historic Building Code. 
B.  It Shall be the responsibility of the Owner of a Designated resource to maintain in good repair the Building, Walls and Landscaping in order to prevent deterioration of exterior architectural and scenic features. In order to prevent Demolition by neglect, the City May repair a Historic Resource and treat the cost of repairs as a lien against the Property. 
C.  All such unsafe Buildings, Structures, or appendages are declared to be Public Nuisances and Shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, Demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Dangerous Buildings Code or such alternate procedures, as May have been or as May be adopted by this jurisdiction. As an alternative, the Building Official or other Employee, or official of this jurisdiction as Designated by the Governing Body, May institute any other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the Violation. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018)  
15.40.140 - Violation—Penalties. 
Every Person violating any provision of this chapter Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition, the Following penalties May be enforced: 
A.  The City Attorney May maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain a Violation or cause, where possible, the complete or partial restoration, reconstruction or replacement of any Structure demolished, partially demolished, altered or partially altered in Violation of this chapter. 
B.  The intentional and complete Demolition of a potential or Designated Historic Resource or District or any feature within a Potential Historic Resource or District in Violation of this chapter May result in the denial of Building and construction-related Permits for a future Use of the site or Property for a period of not to exceed twenty-four Months from the date the City becomes aware of the Alteration or Demolition in Violation of this chapter. The purpose of this delay is to provide the City with an opportunity to study and determine appropriate mitigation measures for Alteration, removal and to ensure that mitigation measure for the Alteration or removal are incorporated into any future Development plans or Approvals for the subject site or Property. Mitigation measure imposed by the Historic Preservation Officer, Commission or City Council Shall be imposed as conditions of Approval of any subsequent Permit for Development of the subject Property or site." 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018)  
Chapter 15.44 - CITY ARCHITECT REVIEW 
Section: 
 
15.44.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The City Council recognizes the importance of using the development review process (established by Section 18.32.030) to encourage high quality Development, to protect the value of property, and to promote a positive, beautiful City image. 
B.  This chapter Shall apply to certain Applications to the Development Services Department of the City for permit to construct buildings in the City. 
C.  This chapter Shall only apply to the exterior design of new buildings, and then only to projects as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-16-87 § 1, 1987) 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 19, 4-7-2015)  
15.44.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "City Architect" means one or more Persons licensed as architects in the State and selected by the City to render services as provided in this chapter based upon qualifications and experience in the exterior design of structures. 
B.  "Projects" means applications to construct new buildings or remodel existing buildings that because of their size or location will be important with respect to the beauty of the City. Projects Shall not include any of the following: 
1.  A development of two or less Dwelling Units; 
2.  A commercial development of less than two thousand square feet of interior floor space; 
3.  The remodeling or adding to an existing residential structure; 
4.  Applications by governmental agencies, including schools. 
(Ord. 0-16-87 § 2, 1987) 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 19, 4-7-2015)  
15.44.030 - Implementation. 
A.  Suitable Projects May be referred by the Director of Development Services Department hereafter called "the Director," to the City Architect for design review. Such review Shall be at the expense of the applicant as to payment of the fee of the City Architect. 
B.  When so referred, the Director Shall furnish the City Architect with the applicant's plans and with a request for review thereof as to exterior design. 
C.  Thereupon the City Architect Shall promptly make such a review and respond in writing to the Director with recommendations, if any. 
D.  Prior to transmitting the request to the City Architect, the Director Shall notify the applicant of the pending review by the City Architect and of the required fee. 
E.  The Applicant Shall deposit with the City the appropriate fee. Thereupon the request Shall be made to the City Architect. The deposit Shall be made within thirty days of a written demand therefore. Failure to pay Shall be grounds for denial of the application. Unless paid, there Shall be no request for review by the City Architect. The City Council May establish and amend the applicable fee by resolution. 
(Ord. 0-16-87 § 3, 1987) 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 19, 4-7-2015)  
Chapter 15.48 - MOBILEHOME PARK Rent STABILIZATION  
I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
15.48.010 - Title. 
This chapter May be cited as the "Mobilehome Park Rent Stabilization Ordinance of the City." 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.00, 1989)  
15.48.020 - Statement of purpose. 
A.  Mobilehome Owners have a substantial investment in a residence for which space is Rented or leased. Alternate sites for relocation of Mobilehomes are difficult to find due to the shortage of Vacant spaces, the restrictions of age, size, or style of Mobilehomes Permitted in many Parks, and related to the installation of Mobilehomes, including Permits, Landscaping and site preparation. Additionally, the cost of moving a Mobilehome is substantial and the risk of damage in moving is significant. 
The result of these conditions is the creation of a captive market of Mobilehome Owners and Tenants. This immobility, in turn, contributes to the creation of a great imbalance in the bargaining relationship between Park Owners and Mobilehome Park Tenants in favor of the Park Owners. 
B.  Because Mobilehomes are often occupied by senior citizens, Persons on fixed income and Persons of low or moderate income, exorbitant Rent Increases fall upon these individuals with particular harshness. 
C.  While this chapter is designed to protect Mobilehome Owners from unreasonable Rent Increases, it recognizes the need of Mobilehome Park Owners to receive a just and reasonable return on their investment and Permits Rental increases sufficient to cover the increased cost of repairs, taxes, maintenance, insurance, upkeep and additional amenities. 
D.  Administration of this chapter Shall be under the general direction of the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.01, 1989)  
15.48.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the Following words, terms and phrases Shall have the Following meaning: 
"Base Date" means January 1, 1987, unless otherwise specified. 
"Base Year" means calendar Year 1986. 
"Capital Improvements" means those Improvements which Materially add to the value of Property, appreciably prolong its Useful life, or adapt it to new Uses, which are claimed by the Owner as capital expenses for Internal Revenue Code purposes and are required to be amortized over the Useful life of the Improvement pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code, and the regulations issued pursuant thereto. 
"Commission" means the Rent Review Commission established under this chapter. 
"Consumer Price Index" or "C.P.I." means the index known as the "Consumer Price Index for all Urban Wage Consumers: for the Los Angeles - Long Beach - Anaheim Area," (Base Year, 1967), and if published for the San Bernardino - Riverside - Ontario Area for the Year 1984, and thereafter. These documents are published by the United States Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
"Current Year" means the last calendar Year or fiscal Year. Upon a showing of good cause, the Commission May Permit the Use of a different twelve-month period for the Current Year. 
"Housing Services" means those services provided to Tenants by Mobilehome Park Owners associated with the Use or Occupancy of a Mobilehome Park space, including but not limited to repairs, insurance, maintenance, replacement, painting, light, heat, water, laundry facilities and privileges, Refuse removal, parking, recreation facilities, security services, and any other benefits, privileges or facilities included in any Rental Agreement or lease. 
"Mobilehome" means a Structure designed for human habitation and for being moved on a Street or Highway under Permit pursuant to Section 35790 of the Vehicle Code. Mobilehome does not include a "Recreational Vehicle" as defined in Section 799.24 of the Civil Code or a "commercial Coach" as defined in Section 18218 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Mobilehome Owner" or "Resident" means any Person entitled to occupy a Mobilehome Dwelling Unit pursuant to ownership thereof or a Rental or lease agreement with the Owner thereof. 
"Mobilehome Park" or "Park" means a Parcel or Parcels of land upon which two or more Mobilehomes sites are Rented, or held out for Rent, or held out for Use to accommodate Mobilehomes Used for human habitation. 
"Mobilehome Park Owner" or "Park Owner" means the Owner, lessor, Operator, manager or Designated agent thereof of a Mobilehome Park, sometimes referred to as "Owner." 
"Mobilehome Space" or "Space" means the site within a Mobilehome Park intended, designed or Used for the location or accommodation of a Mobilehome and any Accessory Structures or appurtenances Attached thereto or Used in conjunction therewith. 
"Party" means a Park Owner or his or her Representative(s), a Mobilehome Park Tenant, a group or Mobilehome Park Tenants and/or their Representatives either singly or by means of a Committee or association. 
"Rental Agreement" means an agreement between a Mobilehome Park Owner and Tenant or a prospective Tenant establishing the terms and conditions of a Tenancy in a Mobilehome Park. A lease is a Rental Agreement. 
"Rent Increases" means any additional Rent demanded of or paid by a Tenant, including any reduction in Housing Services without a corresponding reduction in the moneys demanded or paid for Rent. 
"Space Rent" means the consideration, including any bonuses, benefits, or gratuities demanded or received for and in connection with Use or Occupancy of a Mobilehome Space within a Mobilehome Park, or for Housing Services provided, and security deposits, but exclusive of any amounts paid for the Use of the Mobilehome as a Dwelling Unit. The Use or Occupancy of a Mobilehome Space Shall include the exercise of all rights and privileges and the Use of facilities, services and amenities accruing to the Residents thereof. 
"Tenancy" means the right of a Tenant to the Use of a Mobilehome site within a Mobilehome Park on which to locate, maintain and occupy a Mobilehome, site Improvements and Accessory Structures for human habitation, including the Use of the services and facilities of the Mobilehome Park. 
"Tenant" means a Mobilehome Owner, Resident, prospective Tenant who later obtains Tenancy or any other Person who has a Tenancy in a Mobilehome Park under a Rental Agreement. 
"Vacancy" means the condition deemed to have occurred upon the removal of any Mobilehome from a Mobilehome Park or upon Sale of a Mobilehome in place to a third Party. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 1, 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.02, 1989)  
15.48.040 - Exemptions from coverage. 
The provisions of this chapter Shall not apply to the Following: 
A.  New Space or First Time Space Exemption. Space Rent or Space Rent Increases for new Mobilehome Spaces whether in newly constructed Parks or such spaces first Rented after the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this chapter Shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter to the extent that those Rents would have been controlled had the spaces been previously occupied. There Shall be no prospective exemption in such circumstances, however, as to Rents that May be increased annually under this chapter after a space is first Rented. In such cases, the Base Date for purposes of determining permissible future Rent Increases Shall be the date of first Rental or conveyance. 
B.  Vacancy. Whenever a Vacancy occurs, the initial Rent charged to the subsequent Tenant who moves a Mobilehome onto the space left Vacant by the previous Tenant, or charged to the subsequent Owner of a Mobilehome left in place, or charged to a sublessee Tenant subleasing the Mobilehome from a Mobilehome Owner as sublessor, Shall be exempt from the Space Rent ceiling provisions under this chapter. Such Rent Shall be prospectively controlled, however, using the Rental amount charged to the new Tenant at the date of the transfer as the base Rental amount subject to increase after expiration of at least twelve Months as provided in Section 15.48.220 under this chapter, subject to the provisions of subsection C of this section. For purposes of this subsection, "Vacancy" means the condition deemed to have occurred when (1) a subsequent Tenant has the right to move his or her Mobilehome onto the Vacant space, (2) a subsequent Owner of a Mobilehome left in place has the right to move into the Mobilehome, or (3) a sublessee Tenant has the right to move into the Mobilehome. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, the exemption provided herein Shall not apply in the case of a sublease if the exemption would abrogate either a contractual relationship between the Mobilehome Owner and the Mobilehome Park Owner or an interest between the Mobilehome Owner and the Mobilehome Park Owner protected by the Contract Clauses of the United States and California Constitutions. 
C.  Space Rent Agreement Exemption. Any Rental Agreement in excess of twelve Months' duration which also meets all criteria specified by Section 798.17 of the California Civil Code, including, but not limited to, the Tenant notification requirement within the first paragraph of such Rental Agreement, Shall be exempt from the Space Rent ceiling provisions of this chapter, but only during the term of such Rental Agreement or one or more uninterrupted, continuous extensions thereof. If such Rental Agreement is not extended and no new Rental Agreement in excess of twelve Months' duration is entered into, then the last Rental rate charged for the space under such previous exempt Rental Agreement Shall be the base Rent for purposes of this chapter. 
D.  Any lease or other Rental Agreement obligations between any existing Tenant and a Park Owner at the time a Vacancy occurs Shall remain the obligation of the existing Tenant unless such obligations are specifically and voluntarily assumed by any prospective Tenant. 
(Ord. 0-23-01 § 1, 2002; Ord. 0-12-98 § 1, 1998; Ord. 0-18-92 §§ 1, 2, 1992; Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.03, 1989)  
15.48.050 - Periodic review. 
The City Council Shall review the provisions of this chapter one Year Following the date of adoption thereof, and at any other time deemed appropriate, in order to consider the Following: 
A.  Whether Rent control continues to be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; 
B.  Whether the implementation of the provisions of this chapter have been adequate; and 
C.  Whether the provisions of this chapter should be amended to provide more effective regulations or to avoid unnecessary Hardship. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.11, 1989)  
II. - RENT REVIEW COMMISSION 
 
15.48.060 - Establishment. 
The Rent Review Commission of the City is established. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.04(A), 1989)  
15.48.070 - Special qualifications. 
The Rent Review Commission Shall be appointed in accord with the provisions of Chapter 2.30 of this Code. In addition to the qualifications set forth in Section 2.30.060, members of the Rent Review Commission Shall be appointed in such a manner that no more than one member of the Rent Review Commission Shall be a Mobilehome Park Owner, Operator, manager or Designated agent of a Mobilehome Park located in the City and at least one member Shall be a Mobilehome Tenant who resides in the City. The Tenant member of the Rent Review Commission Shall not reside in the same Mobilehome Park as any Owner member of the Rent Review Commission. Candidates for membership of the Rent Review Commission Shall submit a verified statement listing all interests in any Real Property or Mobilehome as defined in Section 798.3 of the California Civil Code including ownership, individually, jointly, legal or equitable and all Sales of such Property, or instruments Secured by such Property within thirty Days of seeking appointment to the Commission. 
(Ord. 0-21-93 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 0-4-93 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.04(B), 1989)  
15.48.100 - Meetings. 
To fulfill its function, the Commission Shall meet as often as it deems necessary, but ordinarily at least one regularly scheduled public meeting Shall be held every ninety Days if needed; or within thirty Days of any hearing or arbitration held hereunder, whichever is earlier. All members of the Commission Shall be required to attend all Commission meetings and hearings unless such member has been disqualified from participation or otherwise excused. Except as expressly provided herein, the Commission Shall establish the time and place of its meetings. All meetings of the Commission Shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act. 
(Ord. 0-21-93 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 0-4-93 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.04(E), 1989)  
15.48.110 - Voting. 
The affirmative vote of a majority of those Commissioners present and voting is required for a Decision, including all motions, regulations and orders of the Commission. 
(Ord. 0-21-93 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 0-4-93 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.04(F), 1989)  
15.48.120 - Quorum. 
A majority of the Commission Shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. 0-21-93 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 0-4-93 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.04(G), 1989)  
15.48.130 - Powers and duties. 
The Commission Shall undertake and have the Following duties, responsibilities, and functions together with all powers reasonably Incidental thereto: 
A.  Adoption of Rules and Regulations. The Commission May make and adopt its own administrative rules and regulations as May be necessary to effectuate the purposes and policies of this chapter and to enable the Commission to carry out its powers and duties thereunder, so long as such rules and regulations are consistent with the Laws of the State, this chapter, and any guidelines adopted by the City Council. Any such rules and regulations Shall be reduced to writing and be on file with the secretary of the Commission at all times. 
B.  Appointment of Officers. The Commission May appoint such officers as it May deem necessary to carry out its duties hereunder. 
C.  Maintenance of Records. The Commission Shall keep a record of its proceedings, which Shall be open for inspection by any member of the public. 
D.  Expenditure of Public Funds. The Commission Shall not have any authority to expend or authorize the expenditures of any public funds, except with the prior express Approval of the City Council. 
E.  Conduct Studies and Investigations. The Commission Shall have the power to make such studies, Surveys, and investigations, conduct such hearings, and obtain such information as is necessary to carry out its powers and duties. 
F.  Require Registration and Registration Fees. The Commission Shall require such registration of Mobilehome Parks and establish such registration Fees as the Commission May deem necessary to enable it to carry out its duties. 
G.  Approve Rent Increases. The Commission May approve such adjustments in Rent ceilings as provided for in this chapter. 
H.  Evaluation. The Commission Shall render at least semiannually a comprehensive Written report to the City Council concerning the Commission's activities, holdings, actions, results of hearings, and all other Matters pertinent to this chapter. 
I.  Related Duties. The Commission Shall undertake such other related duties as May be assigned by the City Council. 
(Ord. 0-21-93 § 2, 1993; Ord. 0-4-93 § 2, 1993; Ord. 0-11-91 §§ 2, 3, 1991; Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.04(H), 1989)  
15.48.140 - Compensation. 
Members of the Commission Shall be entitled to such compensation as May be set by the City Council including reimbursement for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. The Commission Shall not have any authority to expend or authorize the expenditures of any public funds, except with the prior express Approval of the City Council. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 4, 1991; Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.04(I), 1989)  
15.48.150 - Staff. 
The City Manager Shall provide all administrative staff necessary to serve the Commission. The City Manager Shall provide a secretary to serve as Secretary of the Commission and Shall be responsible for the maintenance of all records of the Commission. The City Attorney or his/her Designee Shall act as legal counsel to the Commission. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.04(J), 1989)  
III. - REGISTRATION AND FINANCING 
 
15.48.160 - Registration requirements. 
Within sixty calendar Days after the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this chapter, Mobilehome Park Owners are required to register all Mobilehome Parks, and Mobilehome Rental spaces within such Parks, with the Commission. 
The initial registration Shall include: the name(s), Business address(es), Business telephone number(s) of each Person or legal entity possessing an ownership interest in the Park and the nature of such interest; the number of Mobilehome Rental spaces within Park; a Rent schedule reflecting Rents within the Mobilehome Park on the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this chapter; a listing of all other charges, including utilities not included in the Rent, paid by Tenants and the approximate amount of each such charge; and the name and address to which all required Notices and correspondence May be sent. 
The Commission is empowered to establish further registration requirements as it deems necessary to carry out the intent of this article. The registration requirements provided for in this article or which May be established by the Commission Shall apply to all Mobilehome Parks, including those exempt from the Rent ceiling limitations by reason of the existence of a valid Space Rent agreement under Section 15.48.040(C). The Commission Shall develop rules which require all Mobilehome Park Owners to report all vacancies as they occur. 
No Park Owner Shall be eligible to receive any Rent ceiling adjustment as provided for under the provisions of this chapter unless such current registration as May then be required for the Mobilehome Park is on file with the Commission at the time the petition for the Rent ceiling adjustment is filed. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.05(A), 1989)  
15.48.170 - Financing. 
The provisions of this chapter Shall be self-supporting and financed solely by Fees assessed for that purpose. The Commission Shall finance its reasonable and necessary expenses by charging Park Owners annual registration Fees in amounts deemed reasonable by the Commission. No Part of such Fees May be passed through from Owners to Tenants. The Commission is also empowered to charge reasonable Fees for filing of petitions or complaints pursuant to this chapter. 
The Community Development Director is directed to maintain accurate accounting of all direct and indirect costs of administering the regulations contained in this chapter. The Community Development Director Shall submit a report to the Commission and City Council of such costs and any recommendations for a change in the methods of financing at least annually, from and after the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.05(B), 1989)  
IV. - RESTRICTIONS ON Rent 
 
15.48.180 - Current maximum allowable Space Rent. 
The current maximum allowable Space Rent for any controlled space in a Mobilehome Park Shall be the Rent in effect on January 1, 1987, plus any Rent Increases implemented since that date and prior to the adoption of the Ordinance codified in this chapter to the extent such increases would have been lawful under Articles V and VI of this chapter. If there was no Rent in effect prior to the adoption of the Ordinance codified in this chapter, the Space Rent Shall be charged pursuant to Section 15.48.040(A). 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.06(A), 1989)  
15.48.190 - Maximum allowable Space Rent. 
The maximum allowable Rent at any given time Shall be the current maximum allowable Rent plus any future Rent adjustments allowed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.06(B), 1989)  
15.48.200 - Refusal of Tenant to pay illegal Rent. 
A Tenant May refuse to pay any Rent in excess of the maximum lawful Rent Permitted by this chapter. The fact that such unpaid Rent is in excess of the maximum lawful Rent Shall be a defense in any action brought to recover possession of a Mobilehome Space for nonpayment of Rent or to collect the legal Rent. Collection of any amount in excess of the maximum lawful Rent as prescribed by this article Shall constitute a Violation of this chapter and Shall be punishable as set forth in Article IX of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.06(C), 1989)  
V. - RENT ADJUSTMENTS 
 
15.48.220 - General Rent Increases. 
A.  Annual Adjustments. Rents May be adjusted once each calendar Year in the manner provided for in this chapter, by the Owner with Notice, in writing, to the Commission by sending a Copy of the sixty Day Notice of increase of Rents as issued to Tenants. 
B.  General Rent Increases. A general Rent Increase May be made only Following the passage of twelve Months since the last previous Rent Increase, whether such Rent Increase was a general increase and/or special Rent adjustment granted pursuant to petition as provided in Section 15.48.230. 
C.  Maximum Annual General Rent Increase. The maximum annual general Rent Increase allowed a Park Owner Shall be an amount equal to sixty percent of the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index per Year. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 5 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.07(A), 1989)  
15.48.230 - Special Rent adjustment. 
A.  Filing of Petition. An Owner who is dissatisfied with the general Rent Increase May file a petition for special Rent adjustment. 
B.  Matters to be Considered by the Commission. In authorizing special Rent adjustments, the Commission Shall consider the purposes of this chapter and the requirements of Law. The Commission May consider all relevant factors including: increases or decreases in operating and maintenance expenses, the extent and cost of utilities paid by the Owner, necessary and reasonable Capital Improvement of the Park as distinguished from normal repair, replacement and maintenance, increases or decreases in amenities, equipment or services, substantial deterioration of the Park other than a result of ordinary wear and tear, failure on the Part of the Owner to provide adequate repair, Housing Services or to comply with applicable housing, health and safety codes, Federal and State income tax benefits, the speculative nature of the investment, the Owner's rate of return on investment, the Owner's current and Base Year Net Operating Income, profit and loss statements and any other factor deemed relevant by the Commission or its Officer in providing the Owner a fair return. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 5 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.07(B), 1989)  
VI. - STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL Rent ADJUSTMENT DECISION 
 
15.48.240 - Determination by the Commission. 
In order to effectuate the purpose of Section 15.48.230, the formula set forth in Section 15.48.320 Shall be employed by the Commission in determining whether to grant a petition for special Rent adjustment. Only upon determination of necessity Shall the Commission employ the standards set forth in this Article VI. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 5 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.07(C) (1), 1989)  
15.48.250 - Fair return. 
It is the intent of this chapter to allow special Rent adjustments that will provide Park Owners with a fair return on their investments consistent with the expressed goal and purpose of this chapter to protect Tenants from unreasonable increases in Rent. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 5 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.07(C), 1989)  
15.48.260 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of Rent adjustment proceedings, the Following definitions Shall be Used: 
A.  "Net Operating Income" means Gross Income less Operating Expenses. 
B.  "Gross Income" equals the Following: 
1.  Gross Rents, computed as gross Rental income; plus 
2.  Interest from Rental deposits, unless directly paid by the Owner to the Tenants (interest Shall be computed at the rate of five and one-half percent per annum of all deposits unless such deposits earn greater interests); plus 
3.  Income from utilities, miscellaneous Fees, and all other Fees charged Tenant; plus 
4.  All other income or consideration received or receivable for or in connection with the Use or Occupancy of Mobilehome Spaces within the Park; 
5.  Minus uncollected Rents due to Vacancy and bad debts to the extent that the same are beyond the Owner's control. Uncollected Rents in excess of three percent of gross Rents Shall be presumed to be unreasonable unless established otherwise. Where uncollected Rents Must be estimated, the average of the Preceding three Years experience Shall be Used, or some other equitable formula developed. 
C.  "Operating Expenses" include the Following: 
1.  Real Property taxes; 
2.  Utility costs; 
3.  Management expenses (contracted or Owner performed) including necessary and reasonable advertising, accounting, insurance, managerial expenses, and Allowable Legal Expenses. Management expenses are presumed to be five percent of Gross Income, unless established otherwise; 
4.  Repair and maintenance expenses include painting, cleaning, fumigation, Landscaping, and repair of all standard services, including power, electrical, plumbing and carpentry; 
5.  Owner-performed labor which Shall be compensated at the Following hourly rates upon documentation being provided, showing the date, time and nature of the work performed: 
General maintenance 	$ 7.00/hr. 
Skilled labor 	$ 13.00/hr. 
 
Notwithstanding the above, an Owner May receive greater or lesser compensation for self-labor if it can be shown that the amounts set forth above are substantially unfair in a given case. There Shall be a maximum allowance under this Subdivision of five percent of Gross Income, unless the Owner shows greater services for the benefit of the Tenants; 
6.  License or registration Fees required by Law to the extent same are not otherwise paid by Tenants, except registration Fees required under Section 15.48.170; 
7.  Capital expenses with a total cost of less than one hundred dollars per Year per benefited Rental space and the amortized portion of other capital expense; 
8.  Reserve fund for replacement of long term items, not to exceed five percent of Gross Income and only provided that same actually exists; 
9.  Necessary Capital Improvement costs exceeding reserves for replacement. An Owner May include such costs if the Owner has consulted with Tenants prior to initiating construction of such Improvements, regarding the nature and purpose of such Improvements and the estimated costs, and has obtained the prior Written consent of Tenants of at least fifty-one percent of the occupied Mobilehome Spaces that the cost of such Improvements May be included as an operating expense. 
D.  Operating Expenses Shall not include: 
1.  Avoidable and unnecessary expense increases since the Base Year; 
2.  Mortgage principal and interest payments or lease payments under any ground lease except insofar as such payments are contemplated by Section 15.48.330; 
3.  Any penalties, Fees or interest assessed or awarded for Violation of this or any other Law; 
4.  Legal Fees, except as provided in subsection (E) of this section; 
5.  Depreciation of the Property; 
6.  Any expense for which the Owner has been reimbursed by any security, deposit, insurance settlement, judgment for damages, settlement, or any other means of reimbursement; 
7.  Registration Fees required by the Commission to finance the operation of this chapter. 
E.  "Allowable Legal Expenses" Shall include Attorney's Fees and costs incurred in connection with successful good faith attempts to recover Rents owing and successful good faith unlawful detainer actions not in derogation of applicable Law, to the extent same are not recovered from Tenants. 
F.  "Allowable Legal Expenses" Shall not include Attorneys' Fees and costs incurred in proceedings before the Commission. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 6, 1991; Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.07(C)(3), 1989)  
15.48.270 - Presumption of fair Base Year Net Operating Income. 
Except as provided in Section 15.48.280, it Shall be presumed that the Net Operating Income produced by a Property during the Base Year provided a fair return on Property. Owners Shall be entitled to maintain and increase their Net Operating Income from Year to Year in accordance with Article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.07(C) (4), 1989)  
15.48.280 - Rebutting the presumption. 
It May be determined that the Base Year Net Operating Income yielded other than a fair return on Property in which case, the Base Year Net Operating Income May be adjusted accordingly. In order to make such a determination, the Hearing Officer Must make at least one of the Following findings: 
A.  The Owner's operating and maintenance expenses in the Base Year were unusually high or low in comparison to other Years. In such instances, adjustments May be made in calculating such expenses so the Base Year Operating Expenses reflect average expenses for the Property over a reasonable period of time. The Hearing Officer Shall consider the Following factors: 
1.  The Owners made substantial Capital Improvements during 1986 which were not reflected in the Rent levels on the Base Date; 
2.  Substantial repairs were made due to damage caused by natural disaster or vandalism which management has taken appropriate action to reduce; 
3.  Maintenance and repair was below accepted standards so as to cause significant deterioration in the quality of Housing Services; 
4.  Other expenses were unreasonably high or low not withstanding the Following of prudent Business measures. 
B.  The Rental rates on the Base Date were disproportionate due to enumerated factors below. In such instances, adjustments May be made in calculating gross Rents consistent with the purpose of this chapter. 
1.  The Rental rates on the Base Date were substantially higher or lower than in Preceding Months by reason of premiums being charged or rebates being given for reasons unique to particular units or limited to the period determining the base Rent. 
2.  The Rent on the Base Date was substantially higher or lower than at other times of the Year by reason of seasonal demand or seasonal variations in Rent. 
3.  The Rental rates on the Base Date were exceptionally high or low due to other factors which would cause the Application of the Base Year Net Operating Income to result in gross inequity to either the Owner or Tenant. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 7, 1991; Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.07(C)(5), 1989)  
15.48.290 - Determination of Base Year Net Operating Income. 
A.  To determine the Net Operating Income during the Base Year, there Shall be deducted from the annualized Gross Income being realized in 1986, a sum equal to the actual Operating Expenses for calendar Year 1986, unless the Owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Hearing Officer that some other consecutive twelve-month period is justified by reason consistent with the purpose of Articles V and VI of this chapter. 
B.  In the event the Owner did not own the subject Property during the Base Year, the Operating Expenses for 1986 Shall be determined by one of the Following methods, whichever the Hearing Officer determines to be more reliable in the particular case: 
1.  The previous Owner's actual Operating Expenses as defined in Section 15.48.260(C) if such figures were available; or 
2.  Actual Operating Expenses for the first calendar Year of ownership, discounted to 1986 by the schedule in Article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.07(C)(6), 1989)  
15.48.300 - Determination of Current Year Net Operating Income. 
To determine the Current Year Net Operating Income, there Shall be deducted from the annualized Gross Income, determined by annualizing the monthly Rents in effect at the time of filing of a petition, a sum equal to the actual Operating Expenses for the last calendar Year, unless the Owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Hearing Officer that some other consecutive twelve-month period is justified by reasons consistent with the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.07(C)(7), 1989)  
15.48.310 - Schedule of increases in Operating Expenses. 
Where scheduling of Rental increases, or other calculations, require Projections of income and expenses, it Shall be assumed that Operating Expenses, exclusive of Property taxes, and management expenses, increases at five percent per Year, that Property taxes increase at two percent per Year and that management expenses constitute five percent of Gross Income. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.07(C)(8), 1989)  
15.48.320 - Allowable special Rent adjustment. 
The Commission May Permit special Rent adjustments, unless otherwise prescribed by Law, such that the Owner's Net Operating Income will be increased at the rate of sixty percent of the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) over the Base Year. The CPI for the Base Year Shall be determined by Use of the monthly figure for January, 1987 (January, 1987 CPI = 113.4). For purposes of initiating a special Rent adjustment, the percentage increase in the CPI Shall be calculated by dividing the most recently reported monthly CPI figure at the time of receipt of the Owner's petition for increase by 113.4. The percentage increase in the CPI is the amount by which the resulting figure exceeds a base of 1.00. 
For example, if the most recently reported monthly CPI figure at the time of receipt of the Owner's petition for increase were 128.4, the percentage increase in the CPI would be thirteen percent (128.4 ÷ 113.4 = 1.13; 1.13 - 1.00 base = 13%) so that the Hearing Officer could Permit, in such instance, an increase in the Owner's Net Operating Income of up to 7.8 percent maximum allowable net income increase. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 8 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.07(C)(9), 1989)  
15.48.330 - Discretionary considerations. 
While the Net Operating Income formula should operate to guarantee a Park Owner a fair return on investment, the Commission considering a request for special Rent adjustments Shall consider all relevant factors in making a determination, as set forth in Section 15.48.230. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 8 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.07(C)(10), 1989)  
15.48.335 - Consideration of refinancing debt. 
A.  The Commission May consider increased costs associated with refinancing of mortgage or debt when such costs are limited to increases in interest payments from those interest payments made during the Base Year which result from either: 
1.  Refinancing of the outstanding principal owed for the acquisition of a Park, where such refinancing is mandated by the terms of a financing transaction entered into prior to January 1, 1987 (e.g., termination of a loan with a balloon payment); or 
2.  Increased interest costs incurred as a result of a variable interest rate loan Used to finance the acquisition of the Park and entered into prior to January 1, 1987. 
B.  Special Rent adjustments based upon increased costs associated with refinancing Shall be allowed only where the Owner can show that the terms of the refinancing were reasonable and consistent with prudent Business practices under the circumstances. To the extent that refinancing does not benefit the subject Park, e.g., amounts of money are being Used for the purpose of leveraging other investments rather than benefiting the Park, such amount Shall not be considered. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 9, 1991)  
15.48.340 - Limit on special Rent adjustments pending hearing or litigation. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no special Rent adjustment in a Mobilehome Park Shall be valid during the time that any hearing proceeding is being conducted pursuant to this chapter, nor Shall such a special Rent adjustment be valid during the period in which a Commission Decision for that Park is being reviewed by a Court of competent jurisdiction, except the Tenants Shall be required to pay any general Rent Increase that has been properly Noticed and imposed pursuant to Section 15.48.220. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 10, 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.07(C)(11), 1989)  
15.48.345 - Compliance with the code condition precedent to general Rent Increase or special Rent adjustment. 
No Owner Shall be entitled to a general Rent Increase or a special Rent adjustment if the Owner has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter or any implementing regulation issued by the Commission, including any provisions or regulations requiring the payment of registration Fees and registration penalties. Nor Shall any Owner be entitled to a general Rent Increase or a special Rent adjustment if the Owner has failed to comply substantially with any applicable State or Local housing, health or safety Law. No Owner Shall be entitled to a general Rent Increase or a special Rent adjustment unless the Notice increasing Rent contains a statement in substantially the Following form: 
The undersigned (Owner) certifies that the Rental space(s) subject to this Rent Increase and the common areas of the Park are not subject to any uncorrected citation or Notices of Violation of any State or Local housing, health or safety Laws issued by any government official or agency. 
If an Owner fails to comply with this section, the Tenant May refuse to pay the improperly Noticed increase, May seek administrative or civil remedies under this chapter and May raise the Owner's noncompliance as an affirmative defense in any resulting unlawful detainer action. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 11, 1991)  
15.48.350 - Rent decreases for reduction in services. 
A.  No Owner Shall reduce the level or kind of services provided to Tenants as of the date of adoption of the Ordinance codified in this chapter or take any other punitive action in retaliation for the exercise by Tenants of any of the rights granted by this chapter. 
B.  If a Mobilehome Park provides in the Rent, without separate charge, utilities or similar services (including, but not limited to natural Gas, electricity, water, sewer, trash, cable television) and converts to separate metering, separate charge or other lawful means of transferring to the Tenant the obligation for payment for such services, the cost savings Shall be passed through to Tenants by a Rent reduction equal to the actual cost to the Park of such transferred Utility or similar service (less common area usage) based on costs for the twelve-month period prior to Notice to the Tenants of the change. 
C.  For purposes of subsection (B) of this section, in determining cost savings to be passed on to Tenants in the form of decreased Rent, the cost of installation of separate Utility meters, or similar costs incurred by the Owner to shift the obligation for payment of Utility costs to the Tenants Shall not be considered. However, this Shall not be construed to prohibit or prevent the consideration of inclusion of such costs as an increased operating expense at mediation or arbitration. 
D.  If a service other than a Utility or similar service as defined in this section is reduced or eliminated, or if a Utility or similar service is reduced or eliminated without a concomitant decrease in Rent as provided for in subsection (B) of this section, any aggrieved Party May petition the Commission for hearing to resolve the Matter provided that: 
1.  Any petition initiating the hearing process Must be filed within twelve Months of the date on which the service was reduced or eliminated; and 
2.  The reduction or elimination in services Must continue to exist at the time of the hearing. Rent decreases Shall only be granted prospectively. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 §§ 12, 13, 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.07(C)(12), 1989)  
15.48.355 - Enforcement. 
The Commission may, at its discretion, request Written records or other documentation from any Park Owner regarding the operations of any Park in order to assure compliance with allowable Rents, to respond to any complaint filed by a Tenant, and to properly administer this chapter. Failure to respond in a reasonable period of time to the Written request of the Commission for records or other related documentation regarding the operation of a Park Shall constitute a Violation of this chapter subject to the penalty provisions of Sections 15.48.630 and 15.48.640. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 14, 1991)  
VII. - PROCEDURES FOR FILING, PROCESSING AND HEARING OF PETITIONS 
 
15.48.360 - Generally. 
Park Owners and Tenants Shall address all concerns and disputes regarding implementation of this chapter to the Commission through petitions filed in accord with the procedures set forth in this section. The Commission Shall hear Matters raised by petition at Public Hearings scheduled for that purpose and Noticed in accord with the provisions of this article. This process Shall be referred to as the "hearing process." The Commission Shall enact rules and regulations governing the hearing process which Shall include the provisions set out in this article. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 15 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08 (part), 1989)  
15.48.370 - Petitions for special Rent adjustment. 
Any Owner May file a petition for a special Park Rent adjustment under the provisions of Section 15.48.220 and under Articles V and VI of this chapter. A petition for a special Park Rent adjustment Shall be on the form Approved by the Commission and a list of the names and addresses of all Residents affected by that special Rent adjustment Shall be Attached to the petition. A petition for a special Rent adjustment Shall be considered filed only after the petitioner has provided all of the information requested in the form. No special Rent adjustment Rent Increase May be imposed prior to final Approval of a petition. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 15 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(A), 1989)  
15.48.380 - Petitions for Rent decrease. 
Where a reduction in services is claimed, and the Park Owner has failed to substantially comply with Section 15.48.350, a Tenant May file a petition for an individual Space Rent adjustment under the applicable provisions of Article VII of this chapter and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. Where a parkwide reduction in services is claimed, and the Park Owner has failed to substantially comply with Section 15.48.350, a petition for a Park-wide Space Rent adjustment May be filed. Such a petition will be accepted for filing only if it is signed by at least one adult Tenant from ten percent of the Rented spaces within a Park. A petition for Rent decrease Shall be on the form Approved by the Commission and a list of the names and addresses of all Residents affected Shall be Attached to the petition. A petition for Rent decrease Shall be considered filed only after the petitioning Tenants have provided all the information requested on the form. No Rent adjustment for a reduction in services May be claimed by any Tenant prior to final Approval of a petition. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 15 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(B), 1989)  
15.48.400 - Filing of petition. 
Any petition for a special Rent adjustment or for Rent decrease or for any other dispute or claim of Violation of this chapter Shall be filed with the Community Development Department and Must be accompanied by a filing Fee as established by Resolution of the Commission. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 17 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(D), 1989)  
15.48.410 - Adjustment meeting. 
Prior to filing a petition, any Party May request an informal meeting with staff to review the contents of the petition, procedures to be followed with regard to Notice and hearing requirements, and any appropriate alternative methods of resolving the Matters raised in the petition. No monetary charges Shall be imposed for any voluntary or informal meeting(s) with staff. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 17 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(E), 1989)  
15.48.420 - Schedule of hearing. 
A hearing will be scheduled with the Commission no later than thirty Days after filing of any petition. All hearings Shall be conducted by the Commission. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 17 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(F), 1989)  
15.48.430 - Continuances. 
A reasonable continuance of the hearing May be granted at the discretion of the Hearing Commission. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 17 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(G), 1989)  
15.48.440 - Notice to parties. 
After scheduling a hearing, the Commission Shall notify all interested parties of the subject Park of the time, date and place of hearing in writing. Notice Shall be accomplished by sending a Copy of the Notice by first class mail. All expenses of mailing Shall be paid by the petitioner for the hearing. Notice procedure Shall be accomplished at least ten Days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 17 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(H), 1989)  
15.48.450 - Failure of parties to appear. 
In the event that either the Tenant(s) or the Park Owner(s) or their Designated Representatives should fail to appear at any hearing at the specified time and place, the Commission May hear and review such evidence as May be presented and render a Decision as if both parties had been present. However, the Commission May reasonably delay the hearing date and require additional Notice if, in the discretion of the Commission, such a delay is necessary to assure adequate Notice to any Party. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 17 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(I), 1989)  
15.48.460 - Records. 
The Commission May require any Party to a hearing to provide it with any books, records and papers pertinent to resolving the Matters raised in any petition. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 17 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(J), 1989)  
15.48.470 - Evidence rule. 
The hearing Shall not be conducted according to technical rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence Shall be considered if it is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable Persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of Business affairs, regardless of the existence of any common Law or statutory rule that might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions. Unduly repetitious or irrelevant evidence Shall be excluded upon order of the Commission. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 17 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(K), 1989)  
15.48.480 - Quantum of proof and burden of proof. 
The Decision of the Commission Must be supported by substantial evidence submitted at the hearing. The petitioning Party Shall have the burden of proof in such proceedings. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 17 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(L), 1989)  
15.48.490 - Open hearings. 
All hearings Shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(M), 1989)  
15.48.500 - Right of assistance. 
All parties to a hearing May have assistance in presenting evidence and developing their position from Attorneys, Tenant or Owner organization Representatives or any other Persons Designated by said parties. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(N), 1989)  
15.48.510 - Hearing record. 
The Commission Shall make available for inspection and Copying by any Person at his own expense an official record which Shall constitute the exclusive record for Decision on the issues at the hearing. The record of the hearing Shall be obtainable for the cost of Copying. Any Party May have the proceedings tape recorded or otherwise transcribed at his or her expense. The hearing record Shall include: 
A.  All Exhibits, papers and documents offered either before or during the proceedings; 
B.  A list of participants present; 
C.  A summary of all testimony accepted in the proceedings; 
D.  All findings; and 
E.  All final Decisions, orders and rulings. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 17 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(O), 1989)  
15.48.520 - Time for making Decisions. 
The Commission Shall announce its determination of any Matter raised by petition at the conclusion of the Public Hearing after full presentation of evidence and discussion by the Commission. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 19 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(P), 1989)  
15.48.530 - Written statement of Decision and Notice to parties. 
The Commission Attorney Shall prepare a Written summary of the Commission's Decision in Resolution form within twenty Days Following the hearing and forward it to the Commission for adoption. Staff Shall agendize the Resolution at the next scheduled meeting after the Written summary is received. The Resolution Shall be mailed to all parties within five Days after adoption. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 19 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(Q), 1989)  
15.48.540 - Limitation on right to petition for future special Rent adjustments as Part of Decision. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter that allow Park Owners to petition for special Rent adjustments, the Commission has the authority as Part of its special Rent adjustment Decision to amortize any increase allowed over more than one fiscal Year and to limit a Park Owner's right to petition for special Rent Increases during the amortization period except in circumstances where a Park Owner can demonstrate extreme Hardship. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 17 (part), 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(R), 1989)  
15.48.590 - Finality of Decision. 
The Decision of the Commission on Appeal Shall be final and binding. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(W), 1989)  
15.48.600 - Judicial review. 
An Owner or Tenant aggrieved by any action or Decision of the Commission May seek judicial review by Appealing to the appropriate Court within the jurisdiction. In order to allow an aggrieved Party the opportunity to seek appropriate judicial review, enforcement of the orders and Decisions of the Commission on Appeal Shall be stayed for a period of not less than thirty Days from the date of adoption of the Resolution required in Section 15.48.530. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 21, 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.08(X), 1989)  
15.48.605 - Legal representation. 
All parties involved in disputes Shall be individually responsible for any legal services Used in connection with their complaint(s) or petition(s) except as May be determined in Section 15.48.630. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 22, 1991)  
VIII. - TERMINATION OF TENANCY 
 
15.48.610 - Reasons for termination. 
A Tenancy which is not subject to the provisions of the Mobilehome Residency Law (Civil Code Sections 798—799.6) Shall not be terminated nor Shall its renewal be refused, except for one or more of the Following reasons: 
A.  Failure of the Tenant to comply with a Local Ordinance or State Law or regulation relating to Mobilehomes within a reasonable time after the Tenant receives a Notice of noncompliance from the appropriate governmental agency; 
B.  Conduct by Tenant, upon the Mobilehome Park Premises, which constitutes a substantial annoyance to other Tenants; 
C.  Failure of the Tenant to comply with a reasonable rule or regulation of the Mobilehome Park. No Act or omission of the Tenant Shall constitute such a failure to comply unless and until the Owner has given the Tenant Written Notice of alleged rule or regulation Violation and the Tenant has failed to adhere to the rule or regulation within seven Days; 
D.  Nonpayment of Rent, Utility charges or reasonable Incidental service charges; 
E.  Condemnation of Mobilehome Park; 
F.  Change of Use of the Mobilehome Park, provided that the provisions of subsection (f) of Section 789.56 of the California Civil Code are followed. 
1.  The Owner gives the Tenant Written Notice of the proposed change twelve Months or more before the date of the proposed change; 
2.  The Owner gives each proposed Tenant whose Tenancy will commence within twelve Months of the proposed change, Written Notice thereof prior to the inception of his Tenancy. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.09(A), 1989)  
15.48.620 - Notice of termination—Contents. 
Notice of termination or refusal to renew Must be given in the manner prescribed by Section 1162 of the Code of Civil Procedures at least sixty Days prior to the termination date of the Tenancy; said Notice Shall state the date the Tenancy terminates, the reason for the termination or refusal to renew, and the specific facts upon which the Owner is relying. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.09(B), 1989)  
IX. - REMEDIES FOR VIOLATION 
 
15.48.630 - Civil remedies. 
Any Person who demands, accepts or retains any payment in Violation of the provisions of this chapter Shall be liable in a civil action to the Person from whom such payment is demanded, accepted or retained for damages in the sum of three times the amount by which the payment or payments demanded, accepted or retained exceed the maximum Rent which could lawfully be demanded, accepted or retained together with reasonable Attorney's Fees and costs as determined by the Court. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.10(A), 1989)  
15.48.640 - Criminal remedies. 
Any Owner who wilfully and knowingly violates any of the provisions of this chapter or the orders of the Commission Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction Shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars for each substantive Violation per space, or by imprisonment for not more than six Months per substantive Violation per space, or by both such fines and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 0-11-91 § 23, 1991: Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.10(B), 1989)  
15.48.650 - Injunctive and other civil relief. 
The Commission, the City, and the Tenants and Owners May seek relief from the appropriate Court within the jurisdiction within which the Rental unit is located to enforce any provisions of this chapter or its implementing regulations or to restrain or enjoin any Violation of this chapter and of the rules, regulations, orders and Decisions of the Commission. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.10(C), 1989)  
15.48.660 - Nonwaiver of rights. 
Any waiver or purported waiver by a Tenant of rights granted under this chapter prior to the time when such rights May be exercised, whether oral or Written, Shall be void as contrary to public policy. 
(Ord. 0-19A-89 § 1.10(D), 1989)  
X. - APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER TO PROSPECTIVE TENANTS AND TERMS PERMITTED IN RENTAL AGREEMENTS 
 
15.48.670 - Applicability to prospective Tenants. 
All rights and obligations imposed by the California Civil Code Section 798.17 and this chapter Shall also apply to prospective Tenants of Mobilehome Parks, and no Park Owner Shall be entitled to require, as a condition of Tenancy, that a prospective Tenant enter into a long-term lease or long-term Rental Agreement. 
(Ord. 0-18-92 § 3 (part), 1992: Ord. 0-11-91 § 24, 1991)  
15.48.680 - Terms of Rental Agreements that May be offered. 
A.  No prospective Tenant Shall be required to accept a long-term Rental Agreement as a condition of Tenancy. 
B.  Every Rental Agreement with a term in excess of twelve Months Shall provide the Park Owner and the Tenant a minimum termination Notice period of sixty Days prior to termination of the Rental Agreement. 
C.  All prospective Tenants Shall be entitled to the same protections with regard to Rental Agreements afforded existing Tenants under the California Mobilehome Residency Law, as it currently exists or is hereafter amended. 
D.  All Park Owners meeting the standard set forth in California Civil Code Section 798.22 Shall be prohibited from entering into any Rental Agreement for any period of time for the Rental of a Mobilehome Rental space for Use by a Recreational Vehicle, as defined in California Health and Safely Code Section 18010, unless a special area within the Mobilehome Park has been specifically Designated for such Use and all such Recreational Vehicles are located only in such Designated area. 
(Ord. 0-23-01 § 2, 2002: Ord. 0-18-92 § 3 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 15.49 - RENTAL HOUSING REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION PROGRAM 
 
15.49.010 - Purpose. 
The City Council recognizes a need for an organized inspection program of residential rental units within the City in order to upgrade rental units to meet City and state life, safety, health, fire and zoning codes within the City and to provide a more efficient system for compelling both absentee and local landlords to correct violations and to maintain, in proper condition, rental property within the City. The City Council recognizes that the most efficient system to provide for rental inspections is the creation of a program requiring the registration of all residential rental units within the City so that orderly inspection schedules can be made by City officials. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Chief" means the Chief of Police. 
B.  "Division" means the Code Enforcement Division of the City's Police Department. 
B.  "Dwelling Unit" means a building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for residential occupancy with permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. Dwelling Unit shall not include hotels, motels, boarding homes or convalescent care facilities. The existence of a permitted home occupation within a Dwelling Unit will not limit the application of this chapter if such Dwelling Unit is otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  "Occupant" means any Person occupying a Dwelling Unit, whether as a tenant or permittee of the Owner. 
D.  "Owner" means the record Owner of a Dwelling Unit subject to the requirements of this chapter including the agent of the Owner. 
E.  "Person" means any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation, or receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.030 - Application of chapter; exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to a Dwelling Unit that is rented, leased or otherwise let to a Person other than the Owner of the Dwelling Unit. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Dwelling Units occupied by the record Owner of such Dwelling Unit. 
2.  Mobilehomes within mobilehome parks. 
3.  Second units or "granny units," occupied by a family member of the Owner of the primary Dwelling Unit, that are legally constructed on the same lot as the primary unit and conform with the provisions, standards and criteria of Government Code Section 65852.2 and 65852.1, respectively. 
4.  Condominiums, townhouses or single-family homes that are covered by a homeowners association ("HOA") which actively and effectively enforces covenants, codes and restrictions ("CC&Rs"). 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.040 - Registration requirement. 
No Person shall rent, lease, or otherwise permit another Person to occupy a Dwelling Unit within the City unless such Dwelling Unit is registered with the City's Code Enforcement Division as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.050 - Registration prerequisite to utility connection. 
No connection of City utilities, including water and electricity, shall be made for any Dwelling Unit which is proposed to be rented, leased or otherwise occupied by a Person other than the Owner of the Dwelling Unit until such Dwelling Unit is registered as required in this chapter and the Owner presents proof of registration to the City Utility Department. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.060 - Registration process. 
A.  The Owner or designated local property manager of every Dwelling Unit subject to the requirements of this chapter shall obtain an annual registration certificate from the Code Enforcement Division and shall pay an annual registration fee and inspection fee, which shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  Registration shall be made upon forms furnished by the Code Enforcement Division for such purpose and shall specifically require the following minimum information: 
1.  Name, address and phone number of the Owner. 
2.  Name, address and phone number of the designated local property manager if the Owner lives outside the City. 
3.  The street address of the property on which the Dwelling Unit is located. 
4.  The number and types of Dwelling Units on the property (e.g. single-family, multifamily). 
5.  The maximum number of occupants permitted for each Dwelling Unit. 
6.  The name, phone number and address of the Person authorized to make or order made repairs or services for the Dwelling Unit, if in violation of City or state codes, if the Person is different than the Owner or local manager. 
C.  Upon receipt of the registration form required by subsection (B) and payment of the required registration and inspection fees, the Division shall issue the Owner a registration certificate which shall state the following: 
1.  The date of issue. 
2.  The legal use of the property on which the Dwelling Unit is located. 
3.  The address of the property on which the Dwelling Unit is located. 
4.  The Owner's name and address. 
5.  A registration number. 
6.  The date of expiration. 
7.  Any other pertinent information as determined by City. 
D.  The registration certificate shall expire one year from issuance or upon a change of ownership of the Dwelling Unit. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.070 - Annual inspection. 
A.  The Division shall cause each registered Dwelling Unit to be inspected at least once annually for compliance with applicable state and City laws relating to zoning, building, health, safety and property maintenance. The Division shall prepare an inspection schedule which provides at least thirty days' notice to the Owner prior to initial inspection. 
B.  Inspection shall include, but not limited to, all common area hallways, stairways, lobbies, utility rooms, laundry rooms, storage rooms, recreation rooms, grounds, refuse areas, parking areas, building extensions, signs and other areas designated as common areas for the purpose of identifying any threats to safety or health, including property maintenance standards. The Division shall prepare inspection guidelines to be used in determining whether a certificate of inspection will be issued for a registered Dwelling Unit. The inspection guidelines shall be provided to the Owner and shall be made available free of charge to the general public. 
C.  If, upon completion of the annual inspection, the Dwelling Unit is found to be in compliance with all applicable state and City laws, the City shall issue a certificate of inspection for the Dwelling Unit. 
D.  If, upon completion of the inspection, the Dwelling Unit is found to be in violation of one or more provisions of applicable state or City laws, the City shall provide written notice of such violations and shall set a reinspection date before which such violations shall be corrected. If such violations have been corrected within that period, the City shall issue a certificate of inspection for the Dwelling Unit. If such violations have not been corrected within that period, the City shall not issue the certificate of inspection and may take any action necessary to enforce compliance with applicable state and City codes. 
E.  Nothing in this section shall preclude the inspection of a Dwelling Unit more frequently than once a year or upon receipt of a complaint regarding that Dwelling Unit. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.080 - Reinspections. 
If reinspections of a Dwelling Unit are necessitated by the existence of violations of this chapter or any other state or City law relating to zoning, building, health, safety and property maintenance, the Owner shall pay all costs incurred by the City in obtaining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.090 - Interior inspections. 
Where the exterior inspection provided for in this chapter reveals evidence of possible interior defects or an extreme state of exterior dilapidation exists, the City may make an interior inspection of the Dwelling Unit. The City shall be authorized to inspect the interior of any Dwelling Unit for the purpose of enforcing state or City laws only if: 
1.  Such inspection is at the request of or with the consent of the Occupant or Owner; or 
2.  Unit is vacant or between occupancies, if authorized by law; or 
3.  Pursuant to a warrant or other court order. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.100 - Certificate availability. 
Upon the request of the City or an existing or prospective Occupant, the Owner of a Dwelling Unit shall produce the registration certificate and the certificate of inspection. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.110 - Certificate transferability. 
A registration certificate and a certificate of inspection issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable to succeeding Owners. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.120 - Other actions, prosecutions, court cases. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City from taking action under any of its fire, housing, zoning or other health safety codes for violations thereof to seek injunctive relief or criminal prosecution of such violations. The enforcement of this chapter by a criminal, civil or administrative action shall not relieve the Owner of the obligations under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.130 - Appeals. 
Any dispute arising between the City and the Owner of a Dwelling Unit registered and inspected pursuant to this chapter may be reviewed by or appealed to the Code Enforcement and Housing Advisory Appeals Board established pursuant to City Council Resolution R-27-94. The appeal must be filed in writing within seven days after notification of the City's actions and must state with particularity the reason for the appeal. The Owner shall have the right to appear and to be represented by counsel. The Code Enforcement and Housing Advisory Appeals Board, after due and proper hearing, shall issue its order of decision in writing within thirty days of receipt of the written appeal. The decision of the Code Enforcement and Housing Advisory Appeals Board may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction in the manner provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.140 - Violations; penalty. 
Any violations of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in Section 15.04.010 of this code. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012; Ord. No. O-04-15, § 16, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. O-26-16, § 13, 12-20-2016)  
15.49.150 - Public nuisance. 
Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The Chief shall have the authority to require correction of any violations identified through inspection by using the procedures set forth in chapter 8.04 of this code, Health and Safety Code Section 17980, Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 17274 and 24436.5 and any other applicable state or federal law. In addition to any other relief provided by this chapter, the City Attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this chapter. Such application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction and permanent injunction. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.160 - Time for compliance. 
All Dwelling Units subject to the requirements of this chapter shall register with the City's Code Enforcement Division within sixty days of the effective date of this chapter. In the event of a change of ownership of a Dwelling Unit subject to the requirements of this chapter, the new Owner must register such Dwelling Unit with the City's Code Enforcement Division within thirty days of such change of ownership. No inspection fee shall be required of the new Owner after a change of ownership provided that the previous Owner has paid all inspection fees and has complied with all requirements of this chapter and any notices from the City concerning violations of health, fire, safety, building or zoning codes of the City. Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon a change of ownership, the new Owner shall be required to pay a registration fee. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.170 - Late filing penalties. 
Any Owner who fails to register a Dwelling Unit as required by this chapter shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the registration and inspection fee established by resolution of the City Council for each month or part thereof after the date such registration is required. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
15.49.180 - Maintenance of records. 
All records, files and documents pertaining to the requirements of this chapter, except business licenses, shall be maintained by the Code Enforcement Division and made available to the public as allowed or required by state law or City ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 7-17-2012)  
Chapter 15.52 - EMERGENCY ACCESS DEVICES FOR CONTROLLED ACCESS GATES AT MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES 
 
15.52.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for the installation and maintenance of Emergency Access Devices to Controlled Access Gates within the City. This chapter Shall not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other Laws or Ordinances, or with restrictions placed upon Property by covenant, deed, or other private agreement or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the City is a Party. 
(Ord. 0-24-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.52.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions contained in this section Shall govern the meanings of the Following terms, words, phrases and their derivations: 
"Chief of Police" means the Chief Law Enforcement Officer of the City of Colton or the Chief Law Enforcement Officer's authorized Representative. 
"City" means the City of Colton, California. 
"Controlled Access Gate" means any Gate which limits public Access to restricted or private areas by means of a self-locking or lockable device, whether mechanical or electronic. 
"E-Key System" means a remote radio controlled receiver Gate operation system, which is of a type and specification Approved by the Chief of Police, which is installed upon and activates Electrically Operated Gates to facilitate rapid ingress or egress by Emergency Personnel. 
"Electrically Operated Gate" means any Gate which is operated by an electrical mechanism to facilitate Pedestrian or vehicular ingress to or egress from a Gated public or Private Property, Driveway, Yard or Parking Lot. 
"Emergency Access Device" means any locking mechanism, padlock, keyed Lockset, keyed electric switch, radio operated remote Gate opener receiver, or other security apparatus that is Approved by the Chief of Police or Fire Chief or their Designees, which is intended to facilitate Emergency ingress to or egress from any Gated multi-unit residential Property, including any locked Building or otherwise Secured area on such Property, by Emergency response personnel or for purposes of lawful inspection, routine patrol, or other official purposes by Police Department or Fire Department personnel. 
"Emergency Personnel" means any Person of an official capacity employed by the City of Colton, or any public officer, Police Officer, or an Emergency Medical Technician as defined in Division 2.5 (commencing with Section 1797) of the Health and Safety Code, including but not limited to any Paramedic, firefighter, Fire Department Employee, Police Department Employee, Code Enforcement Officer, Animal Control Officer, Ambulance Driver, or any Person acting under the lawful direction of any of the aforementioned authorized officials. 
"Fire Chief" means the Chief Officer of the Fire Department serving the jurisdiction or the Chief Officer's authorized Representative. 
"Fire Department" means the Colton Fire Department. 
"Gate" means any Pedestrian Gate, Electrically Operated Gate, Utility or maintenance Access Gate, or other Gate which is Used to allow entry to Secured or controlled Access areas of any multi-unit residential Property, whether installed on the perimeter Fence line or interior area. 
"Key Padlock" means a security padlock. 
"Key Switch" means a security keyed electrical switch. 
"Key Vault" means a security metal vault that is Used to store Pass Keys for Use by Emergency Personnel. 
"Pass Key" means any key, magnetic key card, password, or combination code Used to facilitate the unlocking and opening of any Gate, Lock, keyed switch, padlock, or electronically controlled Lock mechanism. 
"Pedestrian Gate" means any Access Gate which is intended primarily for Pedestrian ingress to or egress from a Fenced Property. 
"Police Department" means the Colton Police Department. 
(Ord. 0-24-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.52.030 - Responsibilities of Property Owners. 
A.  The Property Owner of a multi-unit residential Property, to which Access is controlled by a perimeter Fence or Gate, Shall equip and maintain every Gate on the Property with an Approved Emergency Access Device. 
B.  No Person Shall erect, operate, or maintain any Controlled Access Gate for a multi-unit residential Property within the City unless that Gate is equipped with an Approved Emergency Access Device. 
C.  All electrically operated vehicular Access Gates at multi-unit residential Properties Shall be equipped with both an E-Key System, and a Key Switch device or Key Vault device. 
D.  All controlled Access Pedestrian Gates at multi-unit residential Properties Must be equipped with a Key Vault device containing a Pass Key or alternatively a Key Switch device if electrically operated. Where a Pedestrian Gate is situated immediately adjacent to an electrically operated vehicular Access Gate, which is equipped with an Emergency Access Device as outlined above, that Pedestrian Gate is not generally required to be equipped with an Emergency Access Device. 
E.  All perimeter Utility or maintenance Controlled Access Gates at multi-unit residential Properties Shall be equipped with a Key Padlock or Key Vault device. 
(Ord. 0-24-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.52.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any Person who willfully violates the provisions of this chapter Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any Property Owner who receives Written Notice to comply with this chapter from the Chief of Police or Fire Chief or their Designees and fails to comply within ninety Days Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A Violation of this section Shall constitute a Public Nuisance and May be abated by the City. The Property Owner Shall be required to reimburse the City for the actual expenses incurred incident to the abatement of such Nuisance. In addition, an administrative fine or penalty May be imposed as authorized in Chapter 8.12. B. Nothing in this section Shall prevent the City from initiating civil, criminal or other legal or equitable proceedings as an alternative or in addition to the proceedings set forth in the administrative fine and penalty provisions of Chapter 8.12. 
(Ord. 0-24-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.52.050 - Tampering prohibited—Penalty. 
A.  Any Person who willfully tampers, vandalizes, injures, destroys, breaks down, pulls down, deactivates, interferes with the radio transmitter signal, or otherwise willfully compromises the intended operation of any Emergency Access Device, including but not limited to any Pass Key, Key Padlock, Key Vault, Key Switch, or E-Key System, including but not limited to the transmitter, receiver, Antenna, gate and Gate operating mechanism, equipment Enclosure, or electrical wiring, is guilty of a misdemeanor. For the purposes of this section, it is not necessary that a tampering action results in actual physical damage to the Emergency Access Device. Any Person who willfully attempts to tamper or commits any Act in furtherance of tampering to an aforementioned Emergency Access Device is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Nothing in this section Shall prevent the City from initiating civil, criminal or other legal or equitable proceedings as an alternative or in addition to the proceedings set forth in the administrative fine and penalty provisions of Chapter 8.12. 
(Ord. 0-24-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.52.060 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, Subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or any Part thereof is for any reason held to unconstitutional, such Decision Shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter or any Part thereof. 
(Ord. 0-24-05 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 15.54 - REPAIR OF DAMAGED STRUCTURES 
 
15.54.010 - Adoption and intent. 
This chapter establishes regulations as amendments to the Building code for the expeditious repair of damaged Structures. In the event an amendment to the California Building Standards Code results in differences between these Building standards and the California Building Standards Code, the text of these Building standards Shall govern. In accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7, express findings that modifications to the California Building Standards Code are reasonably necessary because of Local climatic, geological or topographical conditions are either already on file with the California Building Standards Commission, or will be filed prior to the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this article. In accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.6, at least one true Copy of the California Building Code has been on file with the City Clerk since fifteen Days prior to enactment of the Ordinance codified in this article. While this article is in force, a true Copy of this chapter Shall be kept for public inspection in the Office of the City Clerk. A reasonable supply of this chapter Shall be available in the Office of the City Clerk for public purchase. 
(Ord. No. O-01-09, 3-3-2009)  
15.54.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the Following definition applies and is hereby added to Section 3402.1 Definitions of the 2007 California Building Code (CBC): 
Substantial Structural Damage. A condition where: 
1.  In any Story, the vertical elements of the lateral-force-resisting system, have suffered damage such that the lateral load-carrying capacity of the Structure in any direction has been reduced by more than twenty percent from its pre-damaged condition, or 
2.  The capacity of any vertical gravity load-carrying Component, or any group of such Components, that supports more than thirty percent of the total area of the Structure's floor(s) and roof(s) has been reduced more than twenty percent from its pre-damaged condition, and the remaining capacity of such affected elements with respect to all dead and live loads is less than seventy-five percent of that required by the Building code for new Buildings of similar Structure, purpose, and location. 
(Ord. No. O-01-09, 3-3-2009)  
15.54.030 - Repairs. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the Following repair requirements are hereby added as a new Subsection 3403.5 to Section 3403 Additions, Alterations or Repair in the 2007 California Building Code (CBC): 
3403.5.1 Repairs. 
Repairs of structural elements Shall comply with this section. 
3403.5.1.1 Seismic evaluation and design. 
Seismic evaluation and design of an existing Building and its Components Shall be based on the Following criteria. 
3403.5.1.1.1 Evaluation and design procedures. The seismic evaluation and design Shall be based on the procedures specified in the Building code, ASCE 31 Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings (for evaluation only) or ASCE 41 Seismic Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings. The procedures contained in Appendix A of the International Existing Building Code Shall be Permitted to be Used as specified in Section 3403.5.1.1.3. 
3403.5.1.1.2 CBC level seismic forces. When seismic forces are required to meet the Building code level, they Shall be one of the Following: 
1. One hundred percent of the values in the Building code. The R factor Used for analysis in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Building code Shall be the R factor specified for structural systems classified as "Ordinary" unless it can be demonstrated that the structural system satisfies the proportioning and detailing requirements for systems classified as "Intermediate" or "Special". 
2. Forces corresponding to BSE-1 and BSE-2 Earthquake Hazard Levels defined in ASCE 41. Where ASCE 41 is Used, the corresponding performance levels Shall be those shown in Table 3403.5.1.1.2. 
TABLE 3403.5.1.1.2 

ASCE 41 and ASCE 31 PERFORMANCE LEVELS 
OCCUPANCY CATEGORY (BASED ON IBC TABLE 1604.5) 	PERFORMANCE LEVEL FOR Use WITH ASCE 31 AND WITH ASCE 41 BSE-1 EARTHQUAKE HAZARD LEVEL 	PERFORMANCE LEVEL FOR Use WITH ASCE 41 BSE-2 EARTHQUAKE HAZARD LEVEL 
I 	Life Safety (LS) 	Collapse Prevention (CP) 
II 	Life Safety (LS) 	Collapse Prevention (CP) 
III 	Note (a) 	Note (a) 
IV 	Immediate Occupancy (IO) 	Life Safety (LS) 
 
a. Performance Levels for Occupancy Category III Shall be taken as halfway between the performance levels specified for Occupancy Category II and Occupancy Category IV. 
3403.5.1.1.3 Reduced CBC level seismic forces. When seismic forces are Permitted to meet reduced Building code levels, they Shall be one of the Following: 
1. Seventy-five percent of the forces prescribed in the Building code. The R factor Used for analysis in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Building code Shall be the R factor as specified in Section 3403.5.1.1.2. 
2. In accordance with the applicable chapters in Appendix A of the International Existing Building Code as specified in Items 2.1 through 2.5 below. Structures or portions of Structures that comply with the requirements of the applicable chapter in Appendix A Shall be deemed to comply with the requirements for reduced Building code force levels. 
2.1. The seismic evaluation and design of Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings in Occupancy Category I or II are Permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A1. 
2.2. Seismic evaluation and design of the Wall anchorage system in reinforced concrete and reinforced masonry Wall Buildings with flexible diaphragms in Occupancy Category I or II are Permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A2. 
2.3. Seismic evaluation and design of cripple Walls and Sill plate anchorage in residential Buildings of light-frame wood construction in Occupancy Category I or II are Permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A3. 
2.4. Seismic evaluation and design of soft, weak, or open-Front Wall conditions in multiunit residential Buildings of wood construction in Occupancy Category I or II are Permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A4. 
2.5. Seismic evaluation and design of concrete Buildings and concrete with masonry infill Buildings in all Occupancy Categories are Permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A5. 
3. In accordance with ASCE 31 based on the applicable performance level as shown in Table 3403.5.1.1.2. 
4. Those associated with the BSE-1 Earthquake Hazard Level defined in ASCE 41 and the performance level as shown in Table 3403.5.1.1.2. Where ASCE 41 is Used, the design spectral response acceleration parameters S XS and S X1 Shall not be taken less than seventy-five percent of the respective design spectral response acceleration parameters S DS and S D1 defined by the International Building Code and its reference standards. 
3403.5.1.2 Wind Design. Wind design of existing Buildings Shall be based on the procedures specified in the Building code. 
3403.5.2 Repairs to damaged Buildings. Repairs to damaged Buildings Shall comply with this section. 
3403.5.2.1 Unsafe conditions. Regardless of the extent of structural damage, unsafe conditions Shall be eliminated. 
3403.5.2.2 Substantial Structural Damage to vertical elements of the lateral-force-resisting system. A Building that has sustained Substantial Structural Damage to the vertical elements of its lateral-force-resisting system Shall be evaluated and repaired in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 3403.5.2.2.1 through 3403.5.2.2.3. 
3403.5.2.2.1 Evaluation. The Building Shall be evaluated by a registered design professional, and the evaluation findings Shall be submitted to the code official. The evaluation Shall establish whether the damaged Building, if repaired to its pre-damage state, would comply with the provisions of the Building code. Wind forces for this evaluation Shall be those prescribed in the Building code. Seismic forces for this evaluation are Permitted to be the reduced level seismic forces specified in Code Section 3403.5.1.1.3. 
3403.5.2.2.2 Extent of repair for compliant Buildings. If the evaluation establishes compliance of the pre-damage Building in accordance with Section 3403.5.2.2.1, then repairs Shall be Permitted that restore the Building to its pre-damage state, using Materials and strengths that existed prior to the damage. 
3403.5.2.2.3 Extent of repair for noncompliant Buildings. If the evaluation does not establish compliance of the pre-damage Building in accordance with Section 3403.5.2.2.1, then the Building Shall be rehabilitated to comply with applicable provisions of the Building code for load combinations including wind or seismic forces. The wind design level for the repair Shall be as required by the Building code in effect at the time of original construction unless the damage was caused by wind, in which case the design level Shall be as required by the code in effect at the time of original construction or as required by the Building code, whichever is greater. Seismic forces for this rehabilitation design Shall be those required for the design of the predamaged Building, but not less than the reduced level seismic forces specified in Section 3403.5.1.1.3. New structural members and connections required by this rehabilitation design Shall comply with the detailing provisions of the Building code for new Buildings of similar Structure, purpose, and location. 
3403.5.2.3 Substantial Structural Damage to vertical load-carrying Components. Vertical load-carrying Components that have sustained Substantial Structural Damage Shall be rehabilitated to comply with the applicable provisions for dead and live loads in the Building code. Undamaged vertical load-carrying Components that receive dead or live loads from rehabilitated Components Shall also be rehabilitated to carry the design loads of the rehabilitation design. New structural members and connections required by this rehabilitation design Shall comply with the detailing provisions of the Building code for new Buildings of similar Structure, purpose, and location. 
3403.5.2.3.1 Lateral force-resisting elements. Regardless of the level of damage to vertical elements of the lateral force-resisting system, if Substantial Structural Damage to vertical load-carrying Components was caused primarily by wind or seismic effects, then the Building Shall be evaluated in accordance with Section 3403.5.2.2.1 and, if noncompliant, rehabilitated in accordance with Section 3403.5.2.2.3. 
3403.5.2.4 Less than Substantial Structural Damage. For damage less than Substantial Structural Damage, repairs Shall be allowed that restore the Building to its pre-damage state, using Materials and strengths that existed prior to the damage. New structural members and connections Used for this repair Shall comply with the detailing provisions of the Building code for new Buildings of similar Structure, purpose, and location. 
3403.5.3 Referenced Standards 
Standard Referenced 
Reference In Code 
Number 	Title 	Section 
Number 
ASCE 31-03 	Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings 	3403.5.1.1.1, TABLE 3403.5.1.1.2, 3403.5.1.1.3 
ASCE 41-06 	Seismic Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings 	3403.5.1.1.1, 3403.5.1.1.2, TABLE 3403.5.1.1.2, 3403.5.1.1.3. 
 
(Ord. No. O-01-09, 3-3-2009)  
Chapter 15.56 - SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS[13] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-04-15, § 17, April 7, 2015, amended Ch. 15.56 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former 15.56, §§ 15.56.010—15.56.040, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. O-02-09, § 1, 3-3-2009. 
 
15.56.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a building or structure for continued occupancy after any natural or manmade disasters. The chapter further authorizes the building official and his or her Authorized Representatives to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 17, 4-7-2015)  
15.56.020 - "Safety Assessment" Defined. 
"Safety assessment" means a visual, nondestructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition of the building or structure for continued occupancy. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 17, 4-7-2015)  
15.56.030 - Application of Provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter are applicable, following each natural or manmade disaster, to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the City of Colton. The Council May extend the provisions as necessary. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 17, 4-7-2015)  
15.56.040 - Placards. 
A.  The following are verbal descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures. Copies of actual placards are attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and adopted by reference. 
1.  "INSPECTED—Lawful Occupancy Permitted" (Green Placard). The placard describing this condition is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure. Occupants should always be cautious of potential hazards following any natural or manmade disasters. 
2.  "RESTRICTED USE—Off-Limits to Unauthorized personnel" (Yellow Placard) The placard describing this condition is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy. 
3.  "UNSAFE—Do Not Enter or Occupy" (Red Placard) The placard describing this condition is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard Shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the building official, or his or her Authorized Representative. Safety assessment teams Shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered. 
B.  In addition to the above descriptive conditions, each placard Shall also contain the City Building and Safety Division's address and telephone number along with the Ordinance number of this City chapter. 
C.  Once the placard has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an Authorized Representative of the building official or upon written notification from the City building and safety division. It is unlawful for any Person, firm or corporation to alter, remove, cover or deface a placard unless authorized pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. O-04-15, § 17, 4-7-2015)  
Chapter 15.58 - RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS 
 
15.58.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for recycling by specified development activities to facilitate the city's compliance with state recycling mandates, including removal of architectural barriers to recycling and ensuring recycling of construction and demolition debris. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, § 1, 4-15-2014)  
15.58.020 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to applicants for the following types of development activities: 
A.  The demolition of any structure. 
B.  The construction of, and additions or tenant improvements with the exception of residential single family homes up to four units and projects with a valuation less than one hundred thousand dollars. 
C.  All reroofing activities that do not include removal of existing roof. 
D.  Work for which only a plumbing, only an electrical, or only a mechanical permit is required. 
A Building Recycling Plan is not required for smaller demolition and renovation projects within the City whose total costs is less than one hundred thousand dollars and shall be encouraged to divert at least fifty percent of all project-related construction and demolition debris from landfill to recycling or reuse operations. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, § 2, 4-15-2014)  
15.58.030 - Site and Building Recycling Plan Requirements. 
The applicant for any development activity subject to this chapter shall, as a condition of approval of that application, submit for review and approval a completed site and building recycling plan to the City's Building and Safety Division. The site and building recycling plan shall be based upon the application form of the building and safety department and consists of two components (site plan and building recycling plan). The plan shall include the location and design of all existing and proposed recycling and trash enclosures, design of site access points for solid waste and recycling collection vehicles and a design of the grading of the site, operational criteria for the proposed use of the property and capacity requirements for the waste generation of the building. 
The Development Services Director may waive the requirement for a site plan upon its finding that: a) the development activity is a reroofing project or a demolition; or b) the development activity is a tenant improvement not requiring significant site improvements; or c) the existing trash and recycling enclosure is adequate to provide the required level of service, including capacity and access, for trash collection for recycling, for the facility. 
A.  Site Plan Requirements: 
1.  Development Activity Other Than Duplexes, Triplexes, Fourplexes: For development activity other than duplexes, triplexes and fourplexes, the site plan shall provide for one or more double enclosures. If a trash compactor is proposed for use, the design and manufacturer's detail drawings shall be submitted with the site plan submittal. The plans shall comply with the solid waste recycling access act of 1991, the solid waste development requirements for the activity and the requirements of this code. 
2.  Trash and Recycling Containers: Trash and recycling containers shall be shown on the site plan at grade. 
3.  Trash and Recycling Enclosures Accessibility: Trash and recycling enclosures shall be accessible to solid waste collection vehicles. Location and access shall be designed to minimize potential injury to employees or the public and damage to property from collection vehicles. The plan shall include design for solid waste truck turnaround movements, showing access and turnaround areas, and "keep clear" areas, for solid waste collection vehicles. 
4.  Adequate Capacity: Adequate capacity shall be provided for the trash and recycling enclosure design as shown on the site. Such requirements shall be based on the volume and tonnage generated by the development activity, as estimated by the City. 
5.  Recycling and Trash Enclosures Required: Recycling and trash enclosures shall be required where trash receptacles are not stored wholly within a building and in any industrial project where trash receptacles are being used and the trash receptacles are not stored wholly within the building or screened by landscaping, fencing or a structure. 
a.  Size: Recycling and trash bin enclosures shall be sized to provide for both recycling and trash receptacles without one blocking the other for proper access. 
b.  Design Specifications: The design of the recycling and trash bin enclosures shall conform to the City's standard specifications and plans. Alternative enclosure designs are subject to the approval of the Public Works Director. The storage of grease or oils in the trash and recycling enclosure is prohibited. 
6.  Issuance of Building Permit: No building permit shall be issued for any development activity subject to this chapter unless the site plan has been approved by the Building Official. 
B.  Building Recycling Plan Requirements: 
1.  The storage of trash and recyclables shall be contained in dumpsters or other receptacles approved by the City. 
2.  The storage of non-trash or non-recyclables in the trash and recycling enclosure is prohibited. 
3.  The flow of materials through the facility shall be indicated. Interior space shall be identified in centralized areas for the consolidation of trash and recyclables (e.g., lounges, copy machine areas, etc.). 
4.  An education/public outreach program shall be implemented to instruct occupants of the development about the benefits of recycling and how to recycle. 
a.  Promotional Literature: The owners/property managers of the development shall provide tenants with information on the proper separation of recyclables from trash. Such information will be provided upon move in and at least once each year thereafter. Employees of commercial businesses shall receive periodic training to reinforce the proper separation of materials, including the distribution of a flier that lists the materials for recycling. 
b.  Signage: Signage shall be permanently posted on recycling containers to distinguish them from refuse or trash containers. General instructions about how to recycle shall be posted within the recycling and trash enclosure at or near the receptacle area and shall be visible to the enclosure/receptacle users. The name and phone number of the person responsible for maintenance of the enclosure or receptacle shall be posted. Any sign visible from outside of the enclosure shall be no larger than two square feet. 
5.  Recycling receptacles shall be co-located next to trash containers in the centralized areas of office work spaces. Signage shall be employed to instruct users as to the proper separation of recyclables from trash. Signage may be posted on the wall above or adjacent to the containers or affixed to the containers. Signage shall be large enough to read from [a] five-foot distance by a person with average eyesight. 
6.  No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any development activity subject to this chapter structure until the adequacy of the building recycling plan has been approved by the development services director. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, § 3, 4-15-2014)  
15.58.040 - Construction and Demolition Recycling Requirements. 
The construction and demolition requirements specify recycling or deconstruction for reuse in the removal, remodeling or new construction of any structure on the site. The construction and demolition recycling plan shall include the following: 
A.  Loading and Collection Area Drawing: The construction and demolition recycling plan shall include a drawing that identifies an area for the loading and collection of recyclable materials with appropriate access for collection vehicles. 
B.  Targeted Materials for Recycling: Targeted materials for recycling shall include concrete, asphalt, clean wood (unpainted or untreated), brick, metal, cardboard and sheetrock. The municipal utilities director may modify the targeted materials based on available markets. 
C.  Separation of Materials: The demolition and construction plan shall specify how the materials will be separated at the source and/or recycled by utilizing the services of a processor. 
D.  Plan Compliance: The Construction and Demolition (C&D) program shall demonstrate compliance with the following construction site requirements: 
1.  Construction waste and demolition debris shall be removed from the construction site on a regular basis and shall not be stored on site and in the open for a period in excess of four weeks, provided that such waste is not hazardous or noxious and does not constitute a nuisance, in which case it must be appropriately secured and regularly removed from the construction site. 
2.  Reasonable efforts shall be demonstrated to provide for segregation of recyclable construction materials and demolition debris for diversion from landfills. 
3.  Construction waste and demolition debris that may become windblown shall be containerized to prevent litter. 
E.  Recycled Materials: Recycled materials to be used in construction or remodeling of the facility shall be identified. 
F.  Approved Demolition Permit and Building Permit: No demolition permit or building permit shall be issued for any development activity subject to this chapter unless the construction and demolition diversion program plan has been approved by the Building Official. 
G.  Certificate of Occupancy and Reporting Requirements/Documentation of Compliance with Construction and Demolition Diversion Program: 
1.  Recycling Report a Condition of Certificate of Occupancy: The applicant shall submit a waste diversion report to the building and safety department that documents the construction and demolition debris recycled as a condition of issuing a certificate of occupancy. 
2.  Requirement to Report Quantities of Waste Recycled as a Condition of the Certificate of Occupancy: The construction and demolition report shall report the estimated quantities of all construction waste and demolition debris listed in the recycling plan. 
3.  Documentation of Reported Quantities: The applicant shall attach recycling receipts or provide other pertinent documentation that demonstrates waste diversion and recycling in conformance with the approved construction and demolition waste diversion plan. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, § 4, 4-15-2014)  
15.58.050 - Exceptions for Existing Development. 
A.  Existing Recycling and Trash Bin Enclosure: If the development activity is a tenant improvement for a site, not requiring significant site improvements, that has an existing trash enclosure, then the required recycling containers for the facility shall be located inside the trash enclosure. If it is not possible to locate the required recycling receptacles in the trash enclosure, based on the Development Services Director estimate of required volume, then recycling receptacles shall be located adjacent to the existing trash enclosure. Any proposed modifications to the existing trash enclosure shall comply with the requirements listed in Section 15.58.030 of this chapter. 
B.  No Existing Recycling and Trash Bin Enclosure: If the development activity does not have an existing trash enclosure, the development may be required to install a trash enclosure that will meet the requirements of Section 15.58.030 of this chapter. If it is determined by the Development Services Director that there is insufficient space to construct a trash and recycling enclosure, the required recycling receptacle shall be located adjacent to the existing trash receptacles. Any proposed recycling and trash enclosure shall comply with the requirements listed in Section 15.58.030 of this chapter. The Development Services Director shall have the authority to grant exceptions to the requirements under Section 15.58.030 of this chapter based on space and access considerations. 
C.  Waiver of Parking Requirement: In order to meet the required recycling volume requirement for the size of the facility, the planning commission and/or city council may grant a waiver to reduce required parking through approval of a variance. The Development Services Director shall have the authority to grant the use of parking spaces for the location of recycling receptacles, provided the enclosure or receptacles meet the design specifications in Section 15.58.030 of this Chapter and the reduction in parking spaces does not violate the minimum requirement for the development. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, § 5, 4-15-2014)  
Chapter 15.60 - PERMITTING SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM 
Section: 
 
15.60.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This Chapter is designed to encourage the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the City to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. O-09-15, § 1, 8-4-2015)  
15.60.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Association" means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
B.  "Building department" means the Building and Safety Division of the Development Services Department for the City of Colton. 
C.  "Building official" means the Building Official for the City of Colton. 
D.  "City" means the City of Colton. 
E.  "Common interest development" means any of the following: 
1.  A community apartment project. 
2.  A condominium project. 
3.  A planned development. 
4.  A stock cooperative. 
F.  "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  Email 
2.  The Internet 
3.  Facsimile 
G.  "Expedited permitting," and "expedited review," means the process outlined in Sec. 15.60.060 entitled "Expedited permit review and inspection requirements." 
H.  "Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is not larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal. 
2.  A solar energy system that (1) conforms to all applicable State fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City; (2) all State and City health and safety standards; and (3) all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the City of Colton. 
I.  "Solar energy system" means either of the following: 
1.  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
2.  Any structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water heating. 
(Ord. No. O-09-15, § 1, 8-4-2015)  
15.60.030 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements with no structural alterations Shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. O-09-15, § 1, 8-4-2015)  
15.60.040 - Small Residential Rooftop Solar System Requirements. 
A.  A small residential rooftop solar energy systems Shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the City and the State of California. 
B.  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems for heating water Shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
C.  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems for producing electricity Shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. O-09-15, § 1, 8-4-2015)  
15.60.050 - Electronic Processing. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited small residential rooftop solar energy system application Shall be made available on the City's publicly accessible website. 
B.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents via email, the City's website, or facsimile Shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. 
C.  An applicant May submit the application and related documentation for a small residential rooftop solar energy system by electronic submittal, as specified on the City website. Electronic signatures Shall be accepted by the City on all electronic submittals in lieu of a wet signature, in conformance with California Government Code § 16.5 and 2 California Code of Regulations § 22000 et seq. 
(Ord. No. O-09-15, § 1, 8-4-2015)  
15.60.060 - Duties of Building Department and Building Official; Application Review. 
A.  The Building Department Shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems Shall comply in order to be eligible for expedited permitting. The permitting process, including the standard plans and checklist, Shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting set forth in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
B.  An application that City staff determines satisfies the information requirements contained in the City's checklist(s) for expedited small residential rooftop solar system processing, including complete supporting documents, Shall be deemed complete. 
C.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance Shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
D.  After City staff deems an application complete, City staff Shall review the application to determine whether the application meets applicable local and State codes and regulations. 
E.  City staff Shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit within a reasonable period of time after receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist, standard plan and this article. 
F.  The City Shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-09-15, § 1, 8-4-2015)  
15.60.070 - Inspections. 
A.  Only one inspection Shall be required and performed by the Building Department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. 
B.  The inspection Shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two business days of a request. 
C.  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-09-15, § 1, 8-4-2015)  
Title 16 - DIVISION OF LAND 
Chapters:  
DIVISION I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Chapter 16.04 - AUTHORITY AND CITATION 
Sections: 
 
16.04.010 - Authority. 
The City Council assumes control of the design and Improvement of land and Subdivisions of Property, as such power is vested in the City by the provisions of Division 2, Title 7 of the Government Code, and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 1 § 1, 1977)  
16.04.020 - Citation. 
The Ordinance codified in this title is adopted to supplement and implement Division 2, Title 7 of the Government Code, and May be cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance of Colton." 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 1 § 2, 1977)  
Chapter 16.08 - CONFORMITY TO GENERAL PLAN—WAIVER 
Sections: 
 
16.08.010 - Report—Required when. 
A report as to the conformity to the General Plan, which is required pursuant to Section 65402 of the Government Code, as a result of a proposed division of land, May be included as a Part of and at the same time as the action taken by the Advisory Agency on such division of land. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 2 § 1, 1977)  
16.08.020 - Report—Not required when. 
Such report is not required for a proposed Subdivision which involves: 
A.  The disposition of the remainder of a larger Parcel which was acquired and Used in Part for Street purposes; 
B.  Acquisitions, dispositions or abandonments for Street widening; 
C.  Alignment Projects; provided, that the Advisory Agency expressly finds that any such disposition for Street purposes, acquisitions, dispositions or abandonments for Street widening or alignment Projects is of a Minor nature. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 2 § 2, 1977)  
Chapter 16.12 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.12.010 - Definitions. 
The Following words and phrases Shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them. All words and phrases herein defined or Used which are contained in Division 2, Title 7 of the Government Code, Shall have the same meaning as ascribed therein, where any conflict or ambiguity arises: 
A.  "Advisory Agency" means a Designated official or an official body charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and Improvement of proposed divisions of Real Property, the imposing of requirements or conditions thereon, or having the authority by Local Ordinance to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove maps. See Chapter 16.16 of this Code. 
B.  "City Council" refers to the City Council of the City of Colton. 
C.  "City Engineer" refers to the City Engineer of the City of Colton. 
D.  "City Standards" means any Improvement standards or design standards which have been currently accepted by the City Engineering division, and which standards are delineated and on file for Use and examination by the public in the Office of the Community Services Director. 
E.  "Design" means: 
1.  Street alignment, Grades and widths; 
2.  Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments, Grades and sizing thereof; 
3.  Location and size of all required Easements and rights-of-way; 
4.  Lot size and configuration; 
5.  Traffic Access; 
6.  Grading; 
7.  Land to be dedicated for Parks or recreational purposes; and 
8.  Such other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire Subdivision as May be necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or implementation of the General Plan or any specific plan. 
F.  "General Plan" refers to the City General Plan. 
G.  "Improvement" refers to such Street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the Subdivider on the land to be Used for public or private Streets, Highways, ways and Easements, as are necessary for the general Use of the Lot Owners in the Subdivision and Local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs, as a condition precedent to the Approval and acceptance of the final map thereof. 
H.  "Improvement" also refers to such other specific Improvements or types of Improvements, public agencies, private utilities, any other entity Approved by the Local agency, or by a combination thereof, if necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or implementation of the General Plan or any specific plan. 
I.  "Local Agency" refers to the City of Colton. 
J.  "Minor Subdivision" refers to any Subdivision creating four or less Parcels, or as Designated under Section 66426(a), (b), (c) or (d) of the Subdivision Map Act. 
K.  "Planning Commission" refers to the Planning Commission of the City of Colton. 
L.  "Remainder Parcel" means that portion of an original Lot or Lots, or Parcel or Parcels which is not a Part of the Subdivision. 
M.  Singular and plural. Words Used in the singular number include the plural and words Used in the plural number include the singular. 
N.  "Specific plan" refers to any adopted specific plan of the City of Colton. 
O.  "Subdivision" means the division of any improved or unimproved land, shown on the latest equalized County assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of Sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property Shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, Streets, Utility Easements or Railroad rights-of-way. Subdivision includes a Condominium Project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, or a community Apartment Project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code. Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity or public Utility Shall not be considered a division of land for the purposes of computing the number of Parcels. 
P.  "Subdivider" means a Person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided Real Property into a Subdivision for himself or for others, except that Employees and consultants of such Persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not Subdividers. 
Q.  "Subdivision Map Act" means Division 2, Title 7 of the Government Code. 
R.  "Standard Subdivision" means any Subdivision of land other than Minor Subdivisions. 
S.  "Zoning Ordinance" refers to the provisions of Title 18 of this Code, establishing land classifications and Districts within the corporate limits of the City of Colton and regulating the Use of Property therein, defining terms Used in this Code, providing for the adjustment, enforcement and amendment thereto, and prescribing penalties for its Violation. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 3 §§ 1, 2, 1977)  
Chapter 16.16 - ADVISORY AGENCY 
Sections: 
 
16.16.010 - Standard Subdivisions. 
The Planning Commission is Designated as the Advisory Agency, as that term is Used in the Subdivision Map Act, and is charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and Improvement of those proposed divisions of Real Property defined in this title as Standard Subdivisions, the imposing of requirements and conditions thereon, and having the authority to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove Tentative Maps. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 4 § 1, 1977)  
16.16.020 - Minor Subdivisions. 
The City Engineer is Designated as the Advisory Agency, as that term is Used in the Subdivision Map Act, and is charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and Improvement of those proposed divisions of Real Property, defined in this title as Minor Subdivisions, the imposing of requirements and conditions thereon, and having the authority to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove maps. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 4 § 2, 1977)  
Chapter 16.20 - ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
16.20.010 - City Engineer—Powers and duties. 
The City Engineer is specifically charged with the administration of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and is responsible for preliminary reports and designs of proposed Subdivisions, reports on Tentative Maps and the City Council certification of final maps. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 5 § 1, 1977)  
16.20.020 - City Council—Delegation of authority. 
The City Council authorizes the City Engineer to act in its behalf and make such initial determinations as are required by Section 66436(c)(1) relating to the Interference of a proposed Subdivision with existing rights-of-way, Easements or other interests which cannot ripen into Fee, held by a public entity or public Utility. If the City Engineer finds that the Subdivision will not unreasonably interfere with rights-of-way, Easements or other interests, he Shall so notify the Subdivider to proceed with notification of said public entity or public Utility pursuant to Section 66436(c)(1). 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 5 § 2, 1977)  
Chapter 16.22 - PLAN CHECK SERVICES AND PLAN REVIEW SERVICES FEES 
Sections: 
 
16.22.010 - Findings—Purpose. 
The City Council finds and declares: 
A.  It is recognized that as Part of the Development review process, planning division staff time and City resources are utilized to provide both plan check services and architectural and Site Plan review services. 
B.  The Planning Commission, after public review, has recommended the Establishment of Fees for said services. 
C.  Staff is authorized to present to City Council a Resolution setting the appropriate Fee for plan check services and architectural and Site Plan review services. 
(Ord. 0-21-88 § 1, 1988)  
16.22.020 - Established. 
The Fees stated in Section 16.22.010 are established. 
(Ord. 0-21-88 § 2, 1988)  
Chapter 16.24 - MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.24.010 - Standard Subdivision—Maps required. 
A tentative and final map Shall be required for all Standard Subdivisions. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 1(A), 1977)  
16.24.020 - Minor Subdivisions—Maps required. 
A.  A preliminary and Parcel map Shall be required for Minor Subdivisions, as described by Section 66426 (a), (b), (c) and (d) of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  A preliminary and Parcel map Shall be required for those Minor Subdivisions creating four or less Condominiums, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, or a community Apartment Project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, containing four or less Parcels. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 1(B), (C), 1977)  
16.24.030 - Parcel map—Required when. 
A Parcel map Shall be required for all Subdivisions as to which a final or Parcel map is not otherwise required by this section. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 1(D), 1977)  
16.24.040 - Tentative Map—Processing Fee. 
Every Person submitting a Tentative Map Shall pay a processing Fee at the time of filing the map, in the amount prescribed by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 2(A), 1977)  
16.24.050 - Tentative Map—Copies—Distribution. 
Not less than twenty-two copies of the Tentative Map Shall be filed with the Planning Department. When such required copies of a Tentative Map are filed, in addition to the filing Fee, the Planning Director Shall immediately forward copies, as specified, to each of the Following, with a request that each report recommendations, if any, to the Planning Department: 
A.  City Engineer, three copies; 
B.  Each City entitled by Law to review and recommend thereon, two copies; 
C.  Elementary and high School Districts, two copies; 
D.  San Bernardino County Planning Commission, one Copy; 
E.  San Bernardino County Flood control District, two copies; 
F.  California State Department of Transportation, two copies; 
G.  Telephone company, two copies; 
H.  Gas company, two copies; 
I.  Fire Department, two copies; 
J.  Police Department, one Copy; 
K.  Electric Utility, two copies. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 2(B), 1977)  
16.24.060 - Tentative Map—Size and scale. 
A.  The size of the Tentative Map Shall be either eighteen inches by twenty-six inches or twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches at the option of the Subdivider. 
B.  The scale of the map Shall be large enough to show required information clearly, and sufficient sheets Shall be Used to accomplish this end. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 2(C), 1977)  
16.24.070 - Tentative Map—Information required. 
A.  The Following information is required on or accompanying a Tentative Map: 
1.  Tract number; 
2.  Name, address and telephone number of Owner(s) whose Property is to be subdivided; 
3.  Name, address and telephone number of Developer, if different than Owner; 
4.  Name, address, telephone number and registration number of Engineer or land surveyor under whose direction the map was prepared; 
5.  North point; 
6.  Scale; 
7.  Date of preparation; 
8.  Boundary lines; 
9.  Legal description; 
10.  The location, width, approximate Grade and Curb separation of all existing and proposed Streets and Highways within and adjacent to the proposed Subdivision; 
11.  The location and width of all Alleys within or adjacent to the proposed Subdivision; 
12.  The width, purpose and approximate location of all existing and proposed Easements or rights-of-way, whether public or private, within or adjacent to the Subdivision; 
13.  Lot Lines and approximate dimensions of Lots; 
14.  Lot numbers; 
15.  Approximate location and width of all Watercourses or areas subject to inundation from Floods; 
16.  Approximate location of all existing Buildings, Structures and irrigation ditches to remain, to be removed, or to be relocated. Buildings and Structures on adjacent Property Shall also be shown, if such Buildings or Structures affect the design of the proposed Subdivision; 
17.  The type, approximate size and location of all trees within the boundaries of the proposed Subdivision, and the proposed disposition of each; 
18.  Approximate radius and central angle of all curves; 
19.  Existing topography of the land proposed for division, using a contour interval of no more than two feet where the general Grade of the land is less than ten percent, and a contour interval of no more than five feet where the general Grade is ten percent or greater. Contours on adjacent Property Shall be shown if the surface of such land affects the design and/or Improvement of the proposed division. The map Shall contain a statement by the Person preparing the map indicating the source of the contours shown on the map; 
20.  Proposed general design of all grading: Building pads, cut-and-fill Slopes, drainageways and finished Lot grading; 
21.  A geological soils report prepared by a Civil Engineer who is registered by the State of California, based upon adequate test borings or excavations, unless the Department of Community Services determines that, due to the knowledge such Department has as to the qualities of the soil of Subdivisions or Lot, no preliminary analysis is necessary. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems, which if not corrected would lead to structural defects, the Person filing the Tentative Map Shall submit a soils investigation of each Lot in the Subdivision, prepared by a Civil Engineer who is registered by the State of California, which Shall recommend corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each Structure proposed to be constructed on the expansive soil. The City Engineer Shall approve the soils investigation if it is determined that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each Structure to be constructed, and Shall require that the Approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each Structure as a condition to the Building Permit. 
If the City Engineer finds that a Written geological report is necessary to determine whether the Property to be divided is subject to an existing or potential geological hazard, the Person filing the Tentative Map Shall submit such report to the City Engineer. 
The report Shall be prepared by a registered engineering geologist. Such information May be furnished separately from the map itself; 
22.  Railroads; 
23.  Proposed source of water supply; 
24.  Proposed method of Sewage disposal; 
25.  Proposed Stormwater drainage and disposal (approximate Grades and sizes where applicable); 
26.  Type of Street Improvements and utilities which the Subdivider proposes to install; 
27.  Proposed Landscaping; 
28.  Key map indicating the location of proposed division of land in relation to the surrounding area; 
29.  Location of all existing and proposed utilities, including, but not limited to, sewer, water, Gas, electric, fire protection and Street lights; 
30.  Classification of all Lots as to intended Use (commercial, industrial, residential); 
31.  Building Setback Lines; 
32.  Agreements and covenants to be recorded. 
B.  In the event that certain of the above-listed requirements by their very nature cannot be incorporated on the map, or by their incorporation will create confusion, it is acceptable for the submission of such information to be made in the form of reports, Written statements and additional maps. Such information Shall be submitted at the same time as the Tentative Map and in quantities as specified in Section 16.24.070, or in such other quantities as the City Engineer deems necessary. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 2(D), 1977)  
16.24.080 - Final map—Processing Fee. 
Every Person submitting a final map Shall pay, at the time of filing the map, a processing Fee in the amount prescribed by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 3(A), 1977)  
16.24.090 - Final map—Copies required. 
Not less than four copies of the final map Shall be submitted to the Engineering Division. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 3(B), 1977)  
16.24.100 - Final map—Compliance required. 
The final map Shall be in substantial compliance with the Approved or conditionally Approved Tentative Map with the provisions of Article 2 of the Subdivision Map Act and with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 3(C), 1977)  
16.24.110 - Final map—Information required. 
The Following information Shall be submitted as Attachments to the final map: 
A.  Preliminary title report; 
B.  Three copies of all required Improvement plans; 
C.  Any additional information required by the City Engineer or as conditions of Approval of the Tentative Map. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 3(D), 1977)  
16.24.120 - Preliminary Parcel map—Processing Fee. 
Every Person submitting a preliminary Parcel map Shall pay, at the time of filing the map, a processing Fee in the amount prescribed by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 4(A), 1977)  
16.24.130 - Preliminary Parcel map—Copies to be filed. 
Not less than four copies of the preliminary Parcel map Shall be filed with the Engineering Department. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 4(B), 1977)  
16.24.140 - Preliminary Parcel map—Size and scale. 
The size and scale requirements Shall be the same as Designated for a Tentative Map by Section 16.24.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 4(C), 1977)  
16.24.150 - Preliminary Parcel map—Information required. 
The information required on or accompanying a preliminary Parcel map May be the same as Designated for a Tentative Map by Section 16.24.070 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 4(D), 1977)  
16.24.160 - Parcel map—Processing Fee. 
Every Person submitting a Parcel map Shall pay, at the time of filing the map, a processing Fee in the amount prescribed by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 5(A), 1977)  
16.24.170 - Parcel map—Compliance required. 
A.  If a preliminary Parcel map has been required, the Parcel map Shall be in substantial compliance with the Approved or conditionally Approved preliminary Parcel map, with the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 2 of the Subdivision Map Act and with the provisions of this title. 
B.  If a preliminary Parcel map has not been required, the Parcel map Shall be in compliance with Article 3, Chapter 2 of the Subdivision Map Act, with the provisions of this title and with all other applicable titles, sections and paragraphs of this Code. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 5(B), 1977)  
16.24.180 - Parcel map—Information required. 
The Following information Shall be submitted as Attachments to the Parcel map: 
A.  Preliminary title report; 
B.  If a preliminary Parcel map was required and Improvements made a condition thereof, three copies of all required Improvement plans; 
C.  Any additional information required by the City Engineer or as conditions of Approval of the preliminary Parcel map, if such has been required. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 5(C), 1977)  
16.24.190 - Parcel maps—Field Survey. 
All Parcel maps Shall be based on a Field Survey made in conformance with the provisions of the Land Surveyors Act and this title. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 6 § 5(D), 1977)  
Chapter 16.26 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.26.010 - Citation and authority. 
The Ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California (hereinafter referred to as the Vesting Tentative Map statute), and May be cited as the Vesting Tentative Map Ordinance. 
(Ord. 1690 (part), 1985)  
16.26.020 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the Colton Subdivision Ordinance. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance Shall apply to the Vesting Tentative Map Ordinance. 
To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and Development. 
(Ord. 1690 (part), 1985)  
16.26.030 - Consistency. 
No land Shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a Vesting Tentative Map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan or not Permitted by the Zoning Ordinance or other applicable provisions of the municipal code. 
(Ord. 1690 (part), 1985)  
16.26.040 - Definitions. 
A.  A "Vesting Tentative Map" means a "Tentative Map" for a residential Subdivision, as defined in the Colton Subdivision Ordinance, that Shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map" at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 16.26.060, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
B.  All other definitions set forth in the Colton Subdivision Ordinance are applicable. 
(Ord. 1690 (part), 1985)  
16.26.050 - Application. 
A.  This chapter Shall apply only to Residential Developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by the Colton Subdivision Ordinance, requires the filing of a Tentative Map or tentative Parcel map for a Residential Development, a Vesting Tentative Map May instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
B.  If a Subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map statute, the filing of a Vesting Tentative Map Shall not be a prerequisite to any Approval for any proposed Subdivision, Permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
(Ord. 1690 (part), 1985)  
16.26.060 - Filing and processing. 
A Vesting Tentative Map Shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and Shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in the Colton Subdivision Ordinance for a Tentative Map except as hereinafter provided: 
A.  At the time a Vesting Tentative Map is filed it Shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map." 
B.  At the time a Vesting Tentative Map is filed a Subdivider Shall also supply the Following information: 
1.  Height, size and location of Buildings; 
2.  Sewer, water, storm drain and road details; 
3.  Information on the Uses to which the Buildings will be put; 
4.  Detailed grading plans; 
5.  Geological studies; 
6.  Flood control information; 
7.  Architectural plans; 
8.  Any other studies normally deferred to the Building Permit stage. 
(Ord. 1690 (part), 1985)  
16.26.070 - Fees. 
Upon filing a Vesting Tentative Map, the Subdivider Shall pay the Fees required by the then current Fee schedule for the filing and processing of a Tentative Map. 
(Ord. 1690 (part), 1985)  
16.26.080 - Expiration. 
The Approval or conditional Approval of a Vesting Tentative Map Shall expire at the end of the same time period, and Shall be subject to the same extensions, established by the Subdivision Ordinance for the expiration of the Approval or conditional Approval of a Tentative Map. 
(Ord. 1690 (part), 1985)  
16.26.090 - Vesting on Approval of Vesting Tentative Map. 
A.  The Approval or conditional Approval of a Vesting Tentative Map Shall confer a vested right to proceed with Development in substantial compliance with the Ordinances, policies, and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. 
However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the Approval or conditional Approval of a Vesting Tentative Map Shall confer a vested right to proceed with Development in substantial compliance with the Ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the Vesting Tentative Map is Approved or conditionally Approved. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a Permit, Approval, extension or entitlement May be made conditional or denied if any of the Following are determined: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the Residents of the Subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; 
2.  The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with State or Federal Law. 
C.  The rights referred to herein Shall expire if a final map is not Approved prior to the expiration of the Vesting Tentative Map as provided in Section 16.26.080. If the final map is Approved, these rights Shall last for the Following periods of time: 
1.  An initial time period of two Years. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a Project covered by a single Vesting Tentative Map, this initial time period Shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. 
2.  The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section Shall be automatically extended by any time Used for processing a complete Application for a grading Permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty Days, from the date a complete Application is filed. 
3.  A Subdivider May apply for a one-Year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section expires. If the extension is denied, the Subdivider May Appeal that denial to the City Council within fifteen Days. 
4.  If the Subdivider submits a complete Application for a Building Permit during the periods of time specified in subsection (C)(1) through (3) of this section, the rights referred to herein Shall continue until the expiration of that Permit, or any extension of that Permit. 
(Ord. 1690 (part), 1985)  
16.26.100 - Development inconsistent with zoning—Conditional Approval. 
A.  Whenever a Subdivider files a Vesting Tentative Map for a Subdivision whose intended Development is inconsistent with the Zoning Ordinance in existence at that time, that inconsistency Shall be noted on the map. The City May deny such a Vesting Tentative Map or approve it conditioned on the Subdivider, or his or her Designee, obtaining the necessary change in the Zoning Ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the Zoning Ordinance is obtained, the Approved or conditionally Approved Vesting Tentative Map Shall, notwithstanding Section 16.26.090(A), confer the vested right to proceed with the Development in substantial compliance with the change in the Zoning Ordinance and the map, as Approved. 
B.  The rights conferred by this section Shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 16.26.090(C). 
(Ord. 1690 (part), 1985)  
16.26.110 - Applications inconsistent with current policies. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a Property Owner or his or her Designee May seek Approvals or Permits for Development which depart from the Ordinances, policies, and standards described in Section 16.26.090(A) and Section 16.26.100 and Local agencies May grant these Approvals or issue these Permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable Law. 
(Ord. 1690 (part), 1985)  
Chapter 16.27 - WAIVER OF CERTAIN Subdivision REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILEHOME PARK CONVERSIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.27.010 - Waiver of Parcel map, tentative and final map for Mobilehome Park conversions. 
Other provisions of this title notwithstanding, the City Council may, by Resolution, waive the requirement for a Parcel map, tentative and final map for a single Parcel division for the conversion of an existing Mobilehome Park to Condominiums. 
(Ord. 0-14-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
16.27.020 - Findings required. 
Prior to granting a waiver pursuant to Section 16.27.010, the City Council Shall make the Following findings: 
A.  The proposed Subdivision is initiated and sponsored by the City or by the redevelopment agency for the City. 
B.  The proposed Subdivision Shall not result in the displacement from the subject Mobilehome Park of Tenants and/or Owners of Mobilehomes then located within the subject Mobilehome Park who do not purchase the Condominium unit where the Mobilehome which they own or within which they reside is located. 
C.  The Subdivision complies with such requirements then in effect as May have been established by the Subdivision Map Act (California Government Code Sections 66400 et seq.) or this chapter pertaining to significant health and safety concerns and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-14-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
16.27.030 - Conditions of Approval. 
The City Council may, in the Resolution granting a waiver hereunder, impose such conditions as the City Council deems necessary to enable the City Council to make the aforementioned findings. 
(Ord. 0-14-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
16.27.040 - Procedures and timing. 
The Applicant requesting a waiver as provided for in this chapter Shall make Application therefor on such forms as May be provided for by the Director of Planning. The Application Shall include the Following data for City evaluation: 
A.  Plot plan of the current Mobilehome Park configuration showing Streets, permanent Structures, existing Mobilehomes and total number of proposed spaces, to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning. 
B.  Preliminary Title Report. The City Council Shall approve or deny the request within fifty Days of the determination of a complete Application. 
(Ord. 0-14-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
16.27.050 - Criteria for grant of waiver. 
The Following criteria Shall be Used to determine whether a waiver should be granted: 
A.  If the subject Parcel(s) was created by a recorded Parcel or final map, the Parcel map, tentative and final map Shall be waived. 
B.  If the subject Parcel was not created by a recorded Parcel or final map, the Tentative Map Shall be waived and a Parcel map is required. 
(Ord. 0-14-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
16.27.060 - Review by City Engineer. 
Upon review of the Application as provided for under this section, the City Engineer Shall recommend to the City Council the extent of waivers Permitted. 
A.  Upon the grant of a full waiver as provided in Section 16.27.050(A), the City Engineer Shall prepare a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance, as appropriate, for recordation in the Office of the County Recorder for the purpose of documenting the Approval of the Subdivision. The City Engineer Shall not record or release for recordation a conditional certificate of compliance prepared pursuant to this section unless and until the Owner or Owners of the Property to be subdivided or the appropriate City agency, as the case May be, have entered into an agreement with the City to provide for the satisfactory completion of all conditions of certificate of compliance. 
B.  Upon the grant of a partial waiver provided in Section 16.27.050, the City Engineer Shall not record or release for recordation the Parcel map prepared pursuant to this section unless and until the Owner or Owners of the Property to be subdivided, or the appropriate City agency, as the case May be, have entered into an agreement with the City to provide for the satisfactory completion of all conditions of the Parcel map. 
(Ord. 0-14-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
16.27.070 - Off-Site Improvements. 
The City Shall not impose any Off-Site design or Improvement requirements unless these are necessary to mitigate an existing health or safety condition. No other dedications, Improvements or in-lieu Fees Shall be required. In no case, Shall the mitigation of a health or safety condition have the effect of reducing the number or changing the location of existing Mobilehome Spaces. 
(Ord. 0-14-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
16.27.080 - Bonding requirements. 
No bond or other security devices are required for the performance of the agreement. The Applicant Shall have a period of one Year from the date the agreement is executed to complete the required Improvements. 
(Ord. 0-14-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 16.28 - PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
16.28.010 - Generally. 
After noting the requirements of Chapter 16.24, it is desirable that the Subdivider should confer with the Planning Director and the City Engineer, or the Designated Representatives thereof, before preparing any map of any proposed Subdivision. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 1, 1977)  
16.28.020 - Tentative Map—Preparation. 
The Tentative Map Shall be prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 2(A), 1977)  
16.28.030 - Tentative Map—Filing—When. 
The Tentative Map, accompanied by all reports, Written statements and information required under Chapter 16.24 and required processing Fees, Shall be filed with the Planning Director. To assure the Advisory Agency all necessary information to consider a Tentative Map, the Advisory Agency Shall act only upon such Tentative Maps as Shall have been filed with the Planning Department not less than thirty-five Days prior to the date of the Advisory Agency meeting at which such Matter is to be considered. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 2(B), 1977)  
16.28.040 - Tentative Map—Reports required. 
Prior to the consideration, by the Advisory Agency, of a Tentative Map and within twenty Days Following its filing, City Departmental staff Shall make reports, in writing, to the Planning Department as to any recommendations in connection with the Tentative Map and its bearing on particular functions. Failure to so report Shall be deemed to constitute Department Approval. Copies of all staff reports and recommendations to be presented to the Advisory Agency Shall be served on the Subdivider at least three Days prior to any hearing or action on the map by the Advisory Agency. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 2(C), 1977)  
16.28.050 - Tentative Map—Hearing. 
The Advisory Agency Shall consider a Tentative Map at its first regular meeting held not less than thirty-five Days Following the filing of the Tentative Map. Such meeting Shall be a Public Hearing, as such is defined by Chapter 16.40. Action on the Tentative Map in approving, conditionally approving or disapproving Shall be taken not later than fifty Days Following the filing of the Tentative Map. The Advisory Agency Shall report its action directly to the Subdivider. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 2(D), 1977)  
16.28.060 - Tentative Map—Approval—Copy to be sent. 
Upon Approval of the Tentative Map, a Copy Shall be sent by the Advisory Agency to the Real Estate Commission of the State of California. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 2(E), 1977)  
16.28.070 - Tentative Map—Appeal of City action. 
The action of the Advisory Agency taken on a Tentative Map in approving, conditionally approving or disapproving said map May be Appealed to the City Council by the Subdivider, Department of the City, any interested Person adversely affected by such action, or any interested Person Appealing relative to Sections 66473.5, 66474, 66474.1 and 66474.6 of the Subdivision Map Act. Such Appeals Shall be filed and processed as described in Chapter 16.36. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 2(F), 1977)  
16.28.080 - Tentative Map—Approval—Expiration. 
The Approval or conditional Approval of a Tentative Map Shall expire two Years from the date the map was Approved or conditionally Approved. 
(Ord. 1692 (part), 1985: Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 2(G)(1), 1977)  
16.28.090 - Tentative Map—Approval—Extension. 
The Person filing a Tentative Map May request an extension of the Approval or conditional Approval by Written Application to the Advisory Agency. Such Application Shall be filed no less than fifteen Days prior to the expiration date of the Approval or conditional Approval. Said Application Shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 16.44. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 2(G)(2), 1977)  
16.28.100 - Tentative Map—Modification. 
A.  Modification of a Tentative Map after Approval or conditional Approval Shall not extend or be cause for extension of time limits, as established by Section 16.28.080. 
B.  Extensive modifications to an Approved or conditionally Approved Tentative Map, determined by the City Engineer and the Planning Director to be of a nature other than required as a condition of Approval of said Tentative Map, or of a nature which significantly changes the design of the Subdivision, Off-Site Improvements, on-site construction or Utility construction, May be cause for resubmittal to the Advisory Agency. Such resubmittal Shall be subject to the same Fees, requirements and procedures established for Tentative Maps by Chapters 16.20 and 16.24. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 2(H), 1977)  
16.28.110 - Final map—Preparation. 
The final map Shall be prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 3(A), 1977)  
16.28.120 - Final map—Items for review and Approval. 
Prior to the filing of the final map with the City Council, the Subdivider Shall submit to the City Engineer the Following items for review and Approval: 
A.  Proposed final map; 
B.  All required Improvement plans, such as, but not limited to, Street, sewer, water, electric, Street light and storm drain plans; 
C.  Subdivision grading plan; 
D.  All bonds and/or securities required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title; 
E.  All cash deposits required by the City; 
F.  All executed agreements between the City and Subdivider required by the City; 
G.  Any additional plans, agreements, Fees or Permits which were required as conditions of Approval of the Tentative Map. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 3(B), 1977)  
16.28.130 - Final map—Submission to City Council. 
Upon receipt and Approval of the above items, the City Engineer Shall affix his signature to the final map and submit same to the City Council for Approval pursuant to Section 66457 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 3(C), 1977)  
16.28.140 - Final map—Copy to be filed. 
The Subdivider Shall cause a mylar duplicate Copy of the final map to be filed with the Engineering Division after the recordation of the final map. The procedure for the acquisition of the duplicate Shall be established by Engineering Division Policy. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 3(D), 1977)  
16.28.150 - Preliminary Parcel map—Preparation. 
The preliminary Parcel map Shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 4(A), 1977)  
16.28.160 - Preliminary Parcel map—Filing. 
The preliminary Parcel map, accompanied by all required reports, Written statements and information required under Chapter 16.24. and required processing Fees, Shall be filed with the Engineering Division. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 4(B), 1977)  
6.28.170 - Preliminary Parcel map—Reports required. 
Prior to the consideration, by the Advisory Agency, of a preliminary Parcel map and within twenty Days Following its filing, the Advisory Agency May request reports from City Departmental staff as to any recommendations in connection with the preliminary Parcel map and its bearing on particular functions. Failure to so report, upon request, Shall be deemed to constitute Departmental Approval. Copies of all such staff reports and recommendations Shall be transmitted to the Subdivider within twenty-five Days after the filing of the preliminary Parcel map. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 4(C), 1977)  
16.28.180 - Preliminary Parcel map—Advisory Agency action. 
Within fifty Days after the filing of the preliminary Parcel map, the Advisory Agency Shall act upon the preliminary Parcel map in approving, conditionally approving or disapproving said map. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 4(D), 1977)  
16.28.190 - Preliminary Parcel map—Appeal of City action. 
The action of the Advisory Agency taken on a preliminary Parcel map in approving, conditionally approving or disapproving said map May be Appealed to the City Council by the Subdivider, Department of the City, any interested Person adversely affected by such action, or any interested Person Appealing relative to Sections 66473.5, 66474, 66474.1, and 66474.6 of the Subdivision Map Act. Such Appeals Shall be filed and processed as described in Chapter 16.40. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 4(E), 1977)  
16.28.200 - Preliminary Parcel map—Approval—Expiration when. 
Upon the Approval or conditional Approval of a preliminary Parcel map, such Approval or conditional Approval Shall remain in effect for twelve Months and thereafter until such time as the Advisory Agency determines that such additional conditions, factors or circumstances appear and/or become dominant which require significant modification to the map or to the conditions of Approval thereon. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 4(F), 1977)  
16.28.210 - Preliminary Parcel map—Modification. 
Extensive modifications to an Approved or conditionally Approved preliminary Parcel map, determined by the Advisory Agency to be of a nature other than required as a condition of Approval of said preliminary Parcel map and of a nature which significantly changes the design of the Subdivision, Off-Site Improvements, on-site construction or Utility construction, May be cause for resubmittal of a revised preliminary map. Such resubmittal Shall be subject to the same Fees, requirements and procedures as established for preliminary Parcel maps by Chapter 16.24. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 4(G), 1977)  
16.28.220 - Parcel map—Preparation. 
The Parcel map Shall be prepared in accordance with Chapter 16.24. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 5(A), 1977)  
16.28.230 - Parcel map—Filing. 
The Parcel map, accompanied by all required Fees and information, Shall be filed with the Engineering Department. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 5(B), 1977)  
16.28.240 - Parcel map—Approval, disapproval—When. 
The Advisory Agency Shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the map within thirty Days of the filing of said Parcel map or within such extension of time as is mutually agreed upon by the Subdivider and the Advisory Agency. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 5(C), 1977)  
16.28.250 - Parcel map—Transmission to County Recorder. 
Upon Approval or conditional Approval of a Parcel map, the Advisory Agency Shall cause said Parcel map to ultimately be transmitted to the County Recorder. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 5(D), 1977)  
16.28.260 - Parcel map—Appeal of City action. 
The action of the Advisory Agency taken on a Parcel map for which a preliminary Parcel map has not been required in approving, conditionally approving or disapproving said map May be Appealed to the City Council by the Subdivider, Department of the City, any interested Person adversely affected by such action, or any interested Person Appealing relative to Sections 66473.5, 66474, 66474.1, and 66474.6 of the Subdivision Map Act. Such Appeals Shall be filed and processed as described in Chapter 16.36. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 5(E), 1977)  
16.28.270 - Parcel map—Copy to be filed. 
The Subdivider Shall cause a mylar duplicate Copy of the Parcel map to be filed with the Engineering Division after the recordation of the Parcel map. The procedure for the acquisition of the duplicate Shall be established by Engineering Division Policy. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 7 § 5(F), 1977)  
Chapter 16.32 - PARCEL MAP WAIVER 
Sections: 
 
16.32.010 - Requirements. 
The Advisory Agency May waive the filing of a Parcel map for a division of land, provided all of the Following conditions and requirements are met: 
A.  A preliminary Parcel map Shall be required. 
B.  All Off-Site Improvements are existing and are at ultimate design locations. 
C.  No dedications of rights-of-way or public Utility Easements are required. 
D.  The boundary of the Parcel being divided has been Surveyed and monumented within five Years prior to the request for division and said Survey is a Matter of public record, and sufficient monuments shown on the recorded Survey remain intact so as to allow location of the Property without requiring a devious Survey. A record of Survey which in the opinion of the Advisory Agency, has been recorded primarily for the purpose of compliance with this section Shall be considered an attempt to circumvent the requirement of this chapter and a Violation thereof. The provisions of this subsection Shall have no Application when the proposal is for a merger or combination of Parcels. 
E.  All other conditions and requirements of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act have been met. 
(Ord. 1662, 1984; Ord. 1520 Art. 8 § 1, 1977)  
16.32.020 - Procedure. 
The Subdivider Shall make Application for a waiver of the Parcel map requirement of this chapter as follows: 
A.  Forms for said Application Shall be obtained from the Engineering Division of the City. Forms Shall relate to the information required by Section 66428 of the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this title. 
B.  The Subdivider May complete the required forms, provided he is knowledgeable in the areas of information required. The forms or portions of the forms May be completed by an agent of the Subdivider knowledgeable in the areas of information required. 
C.  The Subdivider Shall file the completed forms, and such additional maps and information as May be required by the forms, along with a processing Fee in the amount established by Resolution of the City Council, with the Engineering Division. 
D.  The City Engineer Shall review the Application and within thirty Days approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the Parcel map waiver. The Subdivider Shall be notified in writing as to the Decision. 
E.  The action of the Advisory Agency taken on a Parcel map waiver in approving, conditionally approving or disapproving said waiver May be Appealed to the City Council by the Subdivider, Department of the City, any interested Person adversely affected by such action, or any interested Person Appealing relative to Sections 66473.5, 66474, 66474.1, and 66474.6 of the Subdivision Map Act. Such Appeals Shall be filed and processed as described in Chapter 16.36. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 8 § 2, 1977)  
Chapter 16.34 - PARCEL MERGERS 
Sections: 
 
16.34.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide a method for merging of contiguous Parcels of land held under common ownership in accord with the provisions of Section 66499.20 3/4 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 0-22-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
16.34.020 - Residential Parcel mergers. 
The Planning Commission May authorize the merger of contiguous residential Parcels held under common ownership upon review and Approval of a properly submitted and complete Application submitted pursuant to this chapter including the Following: 
A.  Satisfactory evidence of common ownership of all affected Parcels; 
B.  Plot plan showing all Structures in relation to existing Parcel Lot Lines. 
(Ord. 0-22-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
16.34.030 - Nonresidential Parcel mergers. 
The Planning Commission May authorize the merger of contiguous nonresidential Parcels of land held under common ownership upon review and Approval of a properly submitted and complete Application submitted pursuant to this chapter including the Following: 
A.  A final Parcel map delineating all Parcels to be merged as one unit; 
B.  Satisfactory evidence of common ownership of all affected Parcels; 
C.  Plot plan showing all Structures in relation to existing Parcel Lot Lines. 
(Ord. 0-22-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
16.34.040 - Parcel merger procedures. 
The Owners of Parcels proposed for merger under this chapter Shall make Application for a Parcel merger as follows: 
A.  Submission to the Planning Department of an Application form obtained from the Engineering Department of the City, prepared by the Owner or his qualified agent, containing all information required by this chapter and Section 66499.20 3/4 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Submission to the Planning Department of such additional maps and information as May be required by the Engineering Department form, together with a filing Fee in an amount established by Resolution of the City Council. 
C.  The Planning Department Shall review the Application as submitted in coordination with the Engineering Department and determine its completeness. 
D.  Upon a determination of completeness of the Application for Parcel merger, the Engineer Department Shall makes its recommendation to the Planning Department for Approval or denial to the Planning Department and the planning Department Shall review the Application and make its recommendation regarding the proposed Parcel merger in accord with the provisions of the City's Zoning Ordinance and general plan to the Planning Commission. 
E.  The Planning Commission Shall review the completed Application, together with the recommendations of the Engineering Department and the Planning Department and Shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the proposed Parcel merger within thirty Days of the determination of completeness of the Application by the Planning Department. 
F.  The Applicant Shall be notified in writing of the Planning Commission's action within fifteen Days of that action. 
G.  The Parcel Owner, a Department of the City, or any interested Person May Appeal the action of the Planning Commission to the City Council in accord with the procedures set forth in Chapter 16.36 of this Code. 
H.  Upon expiration of the Appeal period or upon direction of the City Council on an Appeal, the Planning Department Shall transmit to the Owner/Applicant a "Notice of merger" evidencing the merger of the Parcel(s) for recordation by the Owner with the San Bernardino County Recorder. 
(Ord. 0-22-93 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 16.36 - APPEALS 
Sections: 
 
16.36.010 - Filing—When—Contents. 
Appeals Shall be filed with the City Clerk within fifteen Days after the action of the Advisory Agency from which the Appeal is being taken. Such Appeals Shall be in writing and Shall state the reason for said Appeal. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 9 § 1, 1977)  
16.36.020 - By Subdivider. 
Upon the filing of an Appeal by the Subdivider, such Appeal and Public Hearing Shall be conducted in the manner provided by Section 66452.5(a) of the Subdivision Map Act and by this title. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 9 § 2, 1977)  
16.36.030 - By other than Subdivider. 
Appeals by other than the Subdivider, as provided by Chapter 16.28, Shall be processed as provided by this title. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 9 § 3 (part), 1977)  
16.36.040 - Rejection or hearing. 
The City Council may, at its own discretion, reject the complaint within fifteen Days, or set the Matter for Public Hearing. If the City Council rejects the complaint, the complainant Shall be notified of such action. If the Matter is set for hearing, the hearing Shall be conducted and Notice thereof given, as provided by Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act and by this title. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 9 § 3(A), 1977)  
Chapter 16.40 - PUBLIC HEARING 
Sections: 
 
16.40.010 - Notice. 
Notice of Public Hearings Shall be given as provided in Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 10 § 1, 1977)  
16.40.020 - Interested Persons Permitted to attend. 
Any interested Person May appear at such a hearing and Shall be heard. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 10 § 2, 1977)  
Chapter 16.44 - EXTENSIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.44.010 - Application—Contents. 
Applications for extensions of Approval or conditional Approval Shall be made in writing and Shall be submitted to the Planning Department. The Application Shall state the reasons for requesting the extension. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 11 § 1, 1977)  
16.44.020 - Granting—Conditions. 
In granting an extension, the Advisory Agency May revise existing conditions and/or impose new conditions. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 11 § 2, 1977)  
16.44.030 - Limit. 
An extension or extensions of Tentative Map Approval or conditional Approval Shall not exceed an aggregate of three Years. 
(Ord. 1692 (part), 1985: Ord. 1520 Art. 11 § 3, 1977)  
16.44.040 - Denial—Appeal. 
If the Advisory Agency denies a Subdivider's request for extension, the Subdivider May Appeal to the City Council within fifteen Days after such action of the Advisory Agency. Such Appeals Shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.40. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 11 § 4, 1977)  
Chapter 16.48 - WAIVER OF DIRECT ACCESS TO STREETS 
Sections: 
 
16.48.010 - Permitted. 
The Advisory Agency May impose a requirement that any dedication or offer of dedication of a Street Shall include a waiver of direct Access rights to such Street from any Property shown on a final or Parcel map as abutting thereon, and that if the dedication is accepted, such waiver Shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of the waiver of direct Access. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 12, 1977)  
Chapter 16.52 - DEDICATIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.52.010 - Required. 
As a condition of Approval of a map, the Subdivider Shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all Parcels of land within the Subdivision that are required for Streets, Alleys, including Access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public Utility Easements, and other public Easements. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 13 § 1, 1977)  
16.52.020 - Final map—Improvements required. 
The Subdivider Shall improve or agree to improve all Streets, Alleys, including Access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public Utility Easements, and other public Easements, and dedicate said Improvements to the City. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 13 § 2, 1977)  
16.52.030 - Parcel map—Improvements required. 
The Subdivider Shall be required to improve or agree to improve all Streets, Alleys, including Access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public Utility Easements, and other public Easements or any portions thereof, as determined by the Advisory Agency to be necessary for the protection of the public health and safety and/or to promote and protect the growth and Development of the City, and to dedicate such Improvements to the City. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 13 § 3, 1977)  
Chapter 16.56 - IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.56.010 - Defined. 
"Improvements" include but are not limited to Curbs and gutters, Sidewalks, Street and Alley surfacing, Street trees, water system, grading, storm drains, culverts, bridges, sanitary sewers, and such other Structures or Improvements as May be required by Ordinance or deemed by the Advisory Agency to be necessary for the general Use of the Lot Owners in the Subdivision and Local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs. Improvements Shall also include plans, profiles and specifications of proposed Improvements. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 14 § 1, 1977)  
16.56.020 - Supplemental Improvements—Required—Reimbursement. 
Pursuant to Section 66485 of the Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivider May be required to install Improvements for the benefit of the Subdivision which May contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of Property not within the Subdivision as a condition precedent to the Approval of a Subdivision or Parcel map, and thereafter to dedicate such Improvements to the public. However, the Subdivider Shall be reimbursed for that portion of the cost of such Improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the Subdivider to install such Improvements to serve the Subdivision only and the actual cost of such Improvements pursuant to the provisions of the Sections 66486 and 66487 of the Subdivision Map Act. Such reimbursement Shall be accomplished by the provisions of an agreement by and between the Subdivider and the City. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 14 § 2, 1977)  
16.56.030 - Completion after final map Approval—Agreement required. 
If such Improvement work is not completed satisfactorily before the final or Parcel map is Approved, the Subdivider Shall be required to enter into an agreement with the City whereby said Improvements Shall be completed within a specified time. To assure that such work will be accomplished, the Subdivider Shall furnish to the City security as described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 14 § 3, 1977)  
16.56.040 - Security—Required. 
Any Improvement agreement, contract or Act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act or this title for which security is required Shall be Secured in the manner provided for in Section 66499 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 14 § 4(A), 1977)  
16.56.050 - Security—Amount. 
The Improvement security Shall be in the amount set forth in this section and authorized by Section 66499.3 of the Subdivision Map Act: 
A.  A security in the amount of one hundred percent of the total estimated cost of the Improvement or the Act to be performed, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Act or agreement; 
B.  An additional security in the amount of fifty percent of the total estimated cost of the Improvement or the performance of the required Act, Securing payment to the contractor, his subcontractors and to Persons furnishing labor, Materials or equipment to them for the Improvement or performance of the required Act; 
C.  If the Improvement security is other than a bond or bonds furnished by duly authorized corporate surety, an additional amount Shall be included, as determined by the City Council, as necessary to cover the cost and reasonable expenses and Fees, including reasonable Attorney's Fees, which May be incurred by the City in successfully enforcing the obligation Secured; 
D.  The Improvement securities Shall also secure the faithful performance of any changes or Alterations in the work, and labor and Materials related thereto, to the extent that such changes or Alterations do not exceed ten percent of the original estimated cost of the Improvement. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 14 § 4(B), 1977)  
16.56.060 - Release—Procedure. 
The Improvement security required in this chapter Shall be released in the Following manner: 
A.  Security given for faithful performance of any Act or agreement Shall be released upon the final completion and acceptance of the Act or work. 
B.  Security given to secure payment to the contractor, his subcontractors and to Persons furnishing labor, Materials or equipment, may, six Months after the completion and acceptance of the Act or work, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all claims therefor filed and of which Notice has been given to the legislative body, plus an amount reasonably determined by the City Engineer to be required to assure the performance of any other obligations Secured thereby. The balance of the security Shall be released upon the settlement of all such claims and obligations for which the security was given. 
C.  No security given for the guarantee or warranty of work Shall be released until the expiration of the period thereof. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 14 § 4(C), 1977)  
Chapter 16.58 - DEDICATION OF LAND OR PAYMENT OF FEES FOR PARK AND RECREATIONAL PURPOSES 
Sections: 
 
16.58.010 - Park and Recreation dedication and Fees. 
A.  Authority and Purpose. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 66477 of the Government Code of the State of California and Shall be interpreted to be consistent with the provisions thereof. The Park and Recreational Facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of a Fee is required by the terms of this section Shall be provided in accordance with the standards, specifications and requirements of the General Plan of the City any specific plan adopted thereto, and any other adopted Resolution, policy or standard of the City. 
B.  Effect on Other Laws. With respect to the requirement of dedication of land or payment of Fees for Park and Recreational purposes by any residential Subdivider pursuant to this title, this chapter Shall supersede all other Ordinances or regulations of the City inconsistent herewith. The enactment of this chapter Shall not supersede any other provisions or authority adopted by Ordinance of the City Council unless expressly stated in this chapter. 
C.  Exemptions. The provisions of this section Shall not apply to commercial or industrial Subdivisions; nor to Condominium or stock cooperative Projects which consist of the Subdivision of airspace in an existing Apartment Building which is more than five Years old when no new Dwelling Units are added. 
(Ord. 0-06-00 § 1 (part), 2000; Ord. 0-10-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.58.020 - Definitions. 
The Following definitions Shall govern the meaning of words in this chapter, unless from the context in which the word is Used, a different meaning is clearly intended: 
A.  "Park" means a Parcel or contiguous Parcels of land which is owned, operated and maintained by a public agency or private association and which provides recreational land and facilities for the benefit and enjoyment of the Residents of the Subdivision and of Persons residing, working or visiting in the City. Parks May be classified as community Parks, including community centers, athletic facilities, large multiuse Swimming Pools, picnic areas, cultural centers or similar facilities; public neighborhood Parks, including playground equipment, sports Fields, and picnic areas; and private neighborhood Parks, generally intended to serve only the immediate Subdivision/Development or specified planned community in which they are located. Parks May also include, or be limited to Open Space areas suitable for active or passive Uses. 
B.  " Park and Recreational Facilities" means any public Improvements deemed necessary by the City to develop, improve or rehabilitate land and facilities for Park and Recreational purposes. Such Improvements May include but not be limited to grading; landscaped areas for active and passive recreational Use, Open Space and sports Fields; irrigation and drainage systems; lawn, shrubs and trees; facilities for recreational community gardening; walkways; Bicycle facilities and Park lighting; playground or other recreational equipment; picnic facilities; community center or other Buildings, Swimming Pools; volleyball, basketball, tennis, racquetball and other Courts; Vehicle Driveways and parking areas and any other facilities which May hereafter be authorized by state Law or Approved by the City. 
C.  "Private Open Space" means that privately owned land and facilities for Park and Recreation purposes provided within a Subdivision and perpetually maintained and operated by the future Residents or Owner of the Subdivision, which land and facilities can be credited against the dedication and payment requirements established in this chapter, when the Following criteria are met: 
1.  That the private Park land meet a minimum size requirement of one-third (0.3) acre; 
2.  That the proposed private Park land be reasonably adaptable for Use for Park and Recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, Access and location of the private Park land; 
3.  That the Following areas or Subdivision design features Shall not be eligible for private Park credit; Yards, Court areas, Setbacks, Subdivision edges, landscaped Subdivision entries, greenbelts, meandering streams and circulation Improvements such as Bicycle, hiking and equestrian trails; 
4.  That the location of the land provide convenient Access to housing and Schools; 
5.  That the perpetual private ownership and maintenance of the land is adequately provided for by a recorded Written agreement; and 
6.  That the Use of the private Park land is perpetually restricted for Park and Recreational purposes which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the City Council and in no event without providing equivalent Park and Recreational space elsewhere in the Subdivision. 
D.  "Fair Market Value" means the value of the land being subdivided based upon the current assessed value, modified to equal Market Value in accordance with the current practice of the County Assessor, or at the option of City based upon an appraisal by a qualified appraiser selected by City. In the event the Subdivider disagrees with this Fair Market Value determination, the Subdivider May select a qualified appraiser who, together with the original appraiser, Shall select a third qualified appraiser. The three appraisers so selected Shall conduct a Fair Market Value analysis of the Property and their determination Shall be binding upon the City and the Subdivider for the purposes of this chapter. All costs of appraisal Shall be paid by the Subdivider prior to the recordation of any final map or the issuance of any Building Permit. The Fair Market Value Shall be determined as of the time the final map or Parcel map is filed. With regards to any Park and Recreation Improvements or equipment provided by the Subdivider, the Fair Market Value Shall be the actual cost to acquire, construct or install the Improvement or equipment. 
(Ord. 0-10-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.58.030 - Park dedication required. 
As a condition of Approval of a tentative or final tract map or Parcel map for a residential Subdivision, the Subdivider Shall be required to dedicate land, pay a Fee in lieu thereof or both, at the option of the City, in the amount provided in this chapter, for Park or recreational purposes, unless the Subdivider is exempted from this requirement by the express provisions of this chapter. The dedication of land and/or payment of a Fee Shall be at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-10-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.58.040 - Standards for determining dedication. 
A.  General. If the Park dedication is required under Section 16.58.030, the Park area required Shall be determined in accordance with the standards provided in this section. 
B.  Standard of Park Area to Population. It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, safety and welfare of the Residents of the City require that three acres of Property for every one thousand Persons residing within the City be devoted to Local Park and Recreational purposes, and that such Park area is necessary to provide for the needs of the current and future Persons residing and working in the City. Said ratio of .003 is hereafter referred to as the Park area standard. 
C.  Dwelling Unit Occupancy Factor. The Dwelling Unit Occupancy Factor for each type of Dwelling Unit Shall be established by Resolution and based on the most recent available U.S. Census Data. These figures May be revised from time to time by Resolution. 
D.  Computation of Area of Park to be Dedicated. The dedication of Park land required for any Subdivision Shall be determined by multiplying the number of Dwelling Units in the Subdivision for each housing type by the Occupancy factor for each housing type by .003 (i.e., the ratio of the Park area standard of three acres to one thousand population). This is represented as follows: 
(# Dwelling Units) (Occupancy factor) 
(3/1,000) = Area of Park to be dedicated 
E.  Qualification of Land Being Dedicated. In addition to meeting the requirements set forth in this section, any land offered for Park dedication Shall meet the criteria specified in Section 16.58.060(D). 
F.  Recent Park Development Surveys indicate a Development cost of one hundred ten thousand eight hundred sixteen dollars per acre for Improvements to Park and Recreation Facilities. This cost applies to seventy-eight acres of new Parkland for a total cost of eighty-six thousand four hundred thirty-six dollars and forty-eight cents. The recommended and Approved cost recovery level for Improvements to Park and Recreation Facilities is fifty percent or forty-three thousand two hundred eighteen dollars and twenty-four cents. 
(Ord. 0-10-08 § 3, 2008; Ord. 0-06-00 § 1 (part), 2000; Ord. 0-10-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.58.050 - Fees in lieu of dedication. 
When Permitted by Section 16.58.060, the Subdivider May pay to the City a Fee in lieu of making such dedication. The Fee Shall be computed by multiplying the area of Park to be dedicated under Section 16.58.040(D) by the Fair Market Value of the land being developed plus the Subdivision's fair share contributions to cover the cost of Park Improvements. 
(Ord. 0-06-00 § 1 (part), 2000: Ord. 0-10-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.58.060 - Determination of dedication, Fees or combination. 
A.  Dedication Generally Required. Where a Park or Recreational Facility has been Designated in the General Plan of the City or other adopted Resolution policy or standard of the City, and is to be located in whole or in Part within the proposed Subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the Residents of the Subdivision and other members of the public, the Subdivider Shall dedicate land for a Park and provide Recreational Facilities thereon as provided in this chapter unless the City determines that dedication is not desirable as provided in this section. The Fair Market Value of the land and Recreational Facilities provided by the Subdivider's obligations hereunder. If the Fair Market Value of the Park and Recreational Facilities provided is less than that required hereunder, the difference Shall be paid by the Subdivider as an in-lieu Fee. 
B.  In-Lieu Fees. Where no Park or Recreational Facility located in whole or in Part within the proposed Subdivision is Designated in the General Plan of the City or other adopted Resolution policy or standard of the City, the Subdivider Shall, in lieu of dedicating land, pay a Fee computed in accordance with Section 16.58.050 to be Used for Park and Recreational purposes to serve the Residents of the area being subdivided and other members of the public. 
C.  Combination of Land and Fees. The City May accept a combination of land and Fees, with the respective amounts to be determined in the sole discretion of the City, so long as the aggregate Fair Market Value plus in-lieu Fees does not exceed the limits established in this chapter. 
D.  Determination of Land or Fee. Whether the City accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a Fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, Shall, in the City's sole discretion, be determined by consideration of the Following: 
1.  The provisions of the City's General Plan, any specific plan adopted thereto, and any other adopted Resolution, policy or regulation of the City; 
2.  Topography, geology, Access and location of land in the Subdivision available for dedication; 
3.  Size and shape of the Subdivision and land available for dedication; 
4.  The feasibility of dedication; 
5.  Access and location of other Park sites to Subdivision; and 
6.  Need of other accessible Park sites for Development, Improvement and rehabilitation. 
The determination of the City as to whether land Shall be dedicated, or whether a Fee Shall be charged, or a combination thereof, Shall be final and conclusive. 
E.  In-Lieu Fees for Subdivisions of Fifty Parcels or Less. If the Subdivision contains fifty Parcels or less, only the payment of in-lieu Fees May be required, except that Condominium, stock cooperative or community Apartment Projects May be required to dedicate land if they have more than fifty Dwelling Units. 
(Ord. 0-10-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.58.070 - Subdivider credits. 
A.  Public Parks. The Subdivider Shall receive a credit against the Park dedication requirement for the Fair Market Value of any land dedicated and for the value of any Park and Recreation Improvements provided by Subdivider in conjunction with any public Park. The value of such Improvements Shall be determined by City based upon Section 16.58.020(D). 
B.  Private Park. In conjunction with any Planned Development, real estate Development, stock cooperative, community Apartment or Condominium, as defined by State Law, if the Subdivider provides Private Open Space as defined in Section 16.58.020, then the Subdivider May receive a credit equal to the Fair Market Value of the Private Open Space against the Park dedication requirement of this chapter, but such credit Shall not exceed one-third of such Park dedication requirement. The actual amount of such credit Shall be determined by the City based upon the comparability of the Private Open Space to public Park area and the adequacy of such Private Open Space to serve the needs of the Subdivision for active recreational Uses. 
C.  Application of Credits. The credits provided in this section Shall be applied to reduce the Subdivider's obligation to dedicate and/or pay an in-lieu Fee as required under this chapter, but only to the extent of such credit. 
(Ord. 0-10-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.58.080 - Disposition of land or Fees. 
The amount and location of land to be dedicated or the Fees to be paid Shall bear a reasonable relationship to the Use of the Park and Recreational Facilities by the future inhabitants of the Subdivision. In accordance with Government Code Section 66477, it is expressly acknowledged that the land to be dedicated or Fees to be paid May be for both neighborhood and community Parks. In addition, such Fees May be Used to improve or rehabilitate existing Parks. Fees paid by a Subdivider pursuant to this chapter May be spent to develop, improve and rehabilitate community and neighborhood Parks even though such Parks May be Used by Nonresidents of the Subdivision, so long as the benefit of the Park and Recreational Facilities to Residents of the Subdivision is reasonable in relation to the location of the Park and amount of the Fees. 
(Ord. 0-10-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.58.090 - Time of dedication or payment of Fees. 
All Park Fees Shall be paid directly to the City cashier upon the date of final inspection, or the date the certificate of Occupancy is issued, whichever occurs last, provided that the City May require payment on a pro rata basis for each Dwelling or upon a percentage of Dwellings when they have received final inspection or certificate of Occupancy, whichever occurs last. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City May require earlier payment of such Fees if necessary to reimburse the City for previous expenditures or if the Fees are collected for Park and Recreation Improvements where the City has established an account, appropriated funds, and adopted a construction schedule or plan for the Park and Recreation Improvements prior to final inspection or certificate of Occupancy. In the event of dedication, dedication Shall be made at the time of recordation of the final map. 
(Ord. 0-10-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.58.100 - Schedule for performance. 
A.  City's Schedule. The Community Development Director Shall prepare and maintain a schedule specifying how, when and where the land or Fees, or both, which were dedicated to the City to develop Park or Recreational Facilities will be Used. Any Fees collected under this chapter Shall be committed within five Years after the payment of such Fees or the issuance of Building Permits on one-half of the Lots created by the Subdivision, whichever occurs later. 
B.  Subdivider's Schedule. In the event that the Subdivider improves or develops Parks for public or private ownership, he Shall prepare a schedule specifying when, how and where he will develop the Park or Recreational Facilities to serve the Residents of the Subdivision. This schedule will be required as a condition of Subdivision map Approval. 
(Ord. 0-10-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
16.58.110 - Procedure. 
A.  Approval of Subdivision Map. Unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, any Decision or action required by City in this chapter, Shall be made after the duly Noticed Public Hearing at the time of Approval of the tentative tract map or Parcel map, by the advisory body. Such Decision or action Shall be made a condition of Approval of the Subdivision map. 
B.  Appeals. Any Person May Appeal a determination of the advisory body made pursuant to this chapter. Appeals Shall be made as provided in Chapter 16.36 of this title. 
(Ord. 0-10-88 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 16.60 - REVERSION TO ACREAGE 
Sections: 
 
16.60.010 - Permitted. 
Subdivided Property May be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6, Article I of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 15 § 1, 1977)  
16.60.020 - Fee. 
Every Person requesting a reversion to acreage Shall pay a processing Fee at the time of submitting the map in the amount as prescribed by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 15 § 2, 1977)  
Chapter 16.64 - MONUMENTATION 
Sections: 
 
16.64.010 - Minimum requirements. 
At the time of making the Survey for the final map or Parcel map, the Engineer or surveyor Shall set sufficient durable monuments so as to conform with the standards described in Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code; provided, however, that the requirements of this chapter Shall be considered as minimum. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 16 (part), 1977)  
16.64.020 - Boundaries. 
Subdivision boundaries Shall be monumented by a minimum of one-inch iron pipes, eighteen inches long, and tagged with the registration number of the Engineer or surveyor preparing the map. Such monuments Shall be placed at all corners, angle points, beginning and end of curves on the exterior boundary of the Subdivision. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 16 § 1, 1977)  
16.64.030 - Street centerlines. 
Street centerlines Shall be monumented in the same manner as provided for Subdivision boundaries. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 16 § 2, 1977)  
16.64.040 - Interior Lot corners. 
All Interior Lot corners Shall be monumented by a minimum of two inches by two inches redwood stakes, eighteen inches long, and tagged with the registration number of the Engineer or surveyor preparing the map. Such monuments Shall be placed at all Interior Lot corners, angle points, beginning and end of curves. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 16 § 3, 1977)  
16.64.050 - Interior monuments. 
Interior monuments need not be set at the time the map is recorded if the Engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set on or before a specified date, and if the Subdivider furnishes to the City a cash deposit guaranteeing the payment of the cost of setting the monument. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 16 § 4, 1977)  
16.64.060 - Permanent monuments in Streets. 
All permanent monuments in Streets Shall have at least three ties to points in concrete Curb, or to such other points as determined by the Engineering Division to be suitable substitutes. A Copy of said ties Shall be furnished to the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 16 § 5, 1977)  
16.64.070 - Approval. 
Monumentation Shall not be Approved as complete until such time as construction, done in conjunction with the Subdivision, is sufficiently complete to eliminate the probability of disturbance or destruction of the monumentation by remaining construction. The City Engineer Shall determine the point in construction when Approval May be given. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 16 § 6, 1977)  
Chapter 16.68 - ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT 
Sections: 
 
16.68.010 - Analysis required. 
No tentative, preliminary or Parcel map, when no preliminary map is required, filed pursuant to the provisions of this title Shall be Approved until an environmental impact analysis is prepared, processed and considered in accordance with Local CEPA guidelines. The Subdivider Shall provide such additional data and information and deposit and pay such Fees as May be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 17, 1977)  
Chapter 16.72 - GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
16.72.010 - Compliance with City provisions required. 
Every map Approved pursuant to this Ordinance Shall be conditioned on compliance with City requirements for grading and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to offsite Property. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 18, 1977)  
Chapter 16.76 - DENIAL 
Sections: 
 
16.76.010 - Findings. 
The Advisory Agency Shall deny Approval of a Tentative Map, preliminary Parcel map or Parcel map if no preliminary Parcel map has been required, if it makes any of the Following findings: 
A.  The proposed map is not constant with applicable general and specific plans; 
B.  The design or Improvement of the proposed Subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
C.  The site is not physically suitable for the type of Development; 
D.  The site is not suitable for the proposed density of Development; 
E.  The design of the Subdivision or the proposed Improvements is likely to cause substantial environmental damage or will substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
F.  The design of the Subdivision or the type of Improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
G.  The design of the Subdivision or the type of Improvements will conflict with Easements, acquired by the public at large, for Access through or Use of Property within the proposed Subdivision. In this connection, the Advisory Agency May approve a map if it finds that alternate Easements for Access or for Use will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection Shall apply only to Easements of record or to Easements established by judgment of a Court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is hereby granted to the Advisory Agency or legislative body to determine that the public at large has acquired Easements for Access through or Use of Property within the proposed Subdivision; 
H.  The Discharge of wastes from the proposed Subdivision into an existing community sewer system would result in Violation of existing requirements prescribed by a California Regional Water Quality Control Board, pursuant to Division 7 (commencing with Section 13000) of the Water Code. In the event that the Advisory Agency finds that the proposed waste Discharge would result in or add to Violation of requirements of such Board, it May disapprove the map of the Subdivision. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 19, 1977)  
Chapter 16.80 - DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
16.80.010 - Minimum requirements. 
The standards of design in this chapter Shall be considered as minimum requirements. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 20 (part), 1977)  
16.80.020 - Streets, Highways and Alleys. 
A.  Major Streets and Highways Shall have a Right-of-Way width of not less than one hundred twenty feet. 
B.  Arterial Streets and Highways Shall have a Right-of-Way width of not less than ninety-six feet. 
C.  Secondary Streets and Highways Shall have a Right-of-Way width of not less than eighty-eight feet. 
D.  Industrial Streets Shall have a Right-of-Way width of not less than seventy-two feet. 
E.  Collector Streets Shall have a Right-of-Way width of not less than sixty-four feet. 
F.  Local Streets Shall have a Right-of-Way width of not less than sixty feet. 
G.  Cul-de-sac Streets Shall be Local Streets and Shall have a Right-of-Way width of not less than sixty feet and Shall have a length of no more than five hundred feet. A Right-of-Way radius at the terminus of a cul-de-sac Shall be not less than fifty feet. 
H.  Special Local Streets where Railroads, Grade separations, Freeways and hills, or other dominant factors or unusual conditions are involved Shall be subject to individual determination by the Advisory Agency and the City Engineer. 
I.  Boundary-line Streets and half-width Streets will be Permitted only when such partial dedications are necessary for the carrying out of the circulation element of the General Plan, or with assurances, in writing, from the Owner of the adjoining Property of intention to dedicate the remaining Parts of the Street when such adjoining Property is subdivided. 
J.  Along limited-access Highways or Freeways, a service roadway or Frontage Street separated from the traffic roadway by an acceptable separation strip will be required for Access to abutting Private Property and Local Streets. All dimensions on such multiple-roadway thoroughfares Shall be as defined on the General Plan, the specific plan or State Department of Transportation plans. 
K.  Curved Streets and Highways. 
1.  Major and arterial Streets and Highways Shall have a centerline radius of not less than one thousand feet. 
2.  Secondary Streets Shall have a centerline radius of not less than five hundred feet. 
3.  All other Streets Shall have a centerline radius of not less than two hundred feet. 
4.  Lesser radii May be Used if evidence indicates that existing conditions are dominant factors. Each such situation Shall be subject to individual determination by the City Engineer and the Advisory Agency. 
L.  Continuations and Intersections. 
1.  Streets which are a continuation of Streets into contiguous territory Shall be so aligned as to assure that their centerlines will coincide. In cases where straight continuations are not physically possible, such centerlines Shall be continued by curves. 
2.  Street intersections Shall be as near right angles as practicable. In no case Shall the angle be less than forty-five degrees. 
3.  Street intersection Right-of-Way Shall have a radius of not less than fifteen feet. 
M.  Improvements within the Right-of-Way Shall be installed to the standards as established by the general and specific plans and in agreement with the current City Standards. 
N.  Alleys Shall be a minimum of twenty feet in width. In no case Shall Alleys terminate as a dead end. 
O.  The Following Shall be considered as standard design for Grade: 
1.  Four-tenths percent Shall be considered as a minimum design Grade. 
2.  Street Grades between six percent and ten percent will be Approved only for such distances as topographical conditions make a lesser Grade impractical. 
3.  Grades less than four-tenths percent or greater than ten percent will be Approved only when conclusive evidence shows that other Grades are impractical. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 20 § 1, 1977)  
16.80.030 - Lot and Block. 
A.  Area and Dimensions of Lots. The area and dimensions of all Lots Shall be as required for the particular land Use District in which the Property is classified by the City Zoning Ordinance; provided, however, that: 
1.  Each Lot Shall have an area of not less than seven thousand two hundred square feet. 
2.  Each Lot Shall have a depth of not less than one hundred feet. 
3.  Each Interior Lot Shall have a width of not less than sixty feet at the Building Setback Line. 
4.  Each Corner Lot Shall have a width of not less than seventy feet at the Building Setback Line. 
5.  Lots larger than minimum May be required by the Advisory Agency if: 
a.  Topographic conditions require larger Lots for the adequate Use and liveability of the Property. 
b.  Larger Lots are required to retain the general pattern of land Parcels established for the area, either by existing Development or by zoning of General Plan requirements. 
B.  Lot Design and Layout. 
1.  Lots having no Frontage on a Public Street Shall be cause for disapproval of a Subdivision. 
2.  No Lot Shall be divided by a County, City, School District, or Tax Code Area boundary. 
3.  The side lines of Lots Shall be approximately at right angles to the Street Centerline. 
4.  Double Frontage Lots Shall be avoided whenever possible. 
5.  Odd-shaped Lots Shall be subject to individual determination by the Advisory Agency. 
C.  Blocks. 
1.  Blocks less than three hundred thirty feet in length or more than nine hundred ninety feet in length May be cause for disapproval, but in no case Shall a Block be longer than thirteen hundred twenty feet in length. 
2.  Long Blocks May be required adjacent to main thoroughfares whenever the City deems it advisable in order to reduce the number of intersections. 
3.  Blocks Shall be generally two Lots in depth. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 20 § 2, 1977)  
16.80.040 - Sanitary sewers. 
A.  Sewer Mains. 
1.  Sewer mains Shall be of a size and capacity sufficient to service the Subdivision and such additional areas as May be required pursuant to Chapter 16.36; provided, however, that the minimum line size Shall be eight inches and the minimum Grade Shall be four-tenths percent. 
2.  Manholes on all gravity sewer mains Shall be located at two-hundred-fifty-foot intervals along the mains, or as close thereto as practical; provided, however, that manholes Shall also be located at all horizontal and vertical angle points and at all points at which sewer mains intersect or originate. A clean-out May be installed at the origin of any sewer main if no future extension of such main is practical and if such origin is located within one hundred fifty feet of a manhole on the same main. 
B.  Laterals. Each Lot Shall be serviced by a lateral of a size sufficient to serve the proposed Use of the Lot. In no case Shall a lateral be less than four-inch line. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 20 § 3, 1977)  
16.80.050 - Water supply and system. 
A.  Supply. Water Shall be provided from the water system of the City or other Approved source. 
B.  System. 
1.  Water mains Shall be of a size and capacity sufficient to service the Subdivision and such additional areas as May be required pursuant to Chapter 16.36; provided, however, that the minimum line size Shall be eight inches. 
2.  The water system Shall be a looped-type system as much as practical, and adequate main line valves Shall be supplied so as to allow maintenance with minimum inconvenience to Users. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 20 § 4, 1977)  
16.80.060 - Gas supply. 
Gas mains Shall be sufficient in size to serve the Subdivision and such additional areas as May be required pursuant to Chapter 16.36. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 20 § 5, 1977)  
16.80.070 - Electrical, telephone and Street lighting. 
A.  All such systems and appurtenances thereto Shall be installed underground. For the purposes of this section, appurtenances such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, concealed ducts and pedestal-mounted Terminal boxes and meter cabinets May be placed aboveground. 
B.  Street lights Shall be placed at two-hundred-foot intervals; provided, however, that at least one light Shall be located at each Street intersection. Lights Shall be staggered from one side of the Street to the other. Lamps, luminairs and standards Shall be of a type, size and design Approved by the City Electric Department. 
C.  Overhead Utilities. The Advisory Agency May recommend to the City Council that undergrounding be waived if topographic, soil or other dominant conditions make such installation impractical. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 20 § 6, 1977)  
16.80.080 - Fire protection. 
The Following Shall be considered minimum requirements for fire protection: 
A.  Single-Story Dwellings. A combination of any two standard 6 × 4 × 2½ hydrants Shall flow not less than 1500 g.p.m. Hydrants Shall be Attached to minimum size eight-inch mains. Hydrants Shall be located so as not to exceed six-hundred-foot spacing. 
B.  1½ and/or 2 Story Dwellings (Single-Family). A combination of any two standard 6 × 4 × 2½ hydrants Shall flow not less than 2000 g.p.m. during peak demand in residential areas. 
C.  2, 2½ or 3 Story Dwellings of More than Eight Rooms or Having Living Quarters for Two to Four Families. The Following requirements Shall be supplied: 
1.  No exposure — 1500 g.p.m. 
2.  Mile exposure — 2000 g.p.m. 
3.  Moderate exposure — 2500 g.p.m. 
4.  Severe exposure — 5000 g.p.m. 
D.  Determinations relating to all fire-protection problems Shall be made by the City Fire Chief or by a qualified Fire-Protection Engineer and Approved by the Fire Chief. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 20 § 7, 1977)  
16.80.090 - Drainage, erosion and Flood control. 
A.  All Lots Shall be designed so as to drain to the Street upon which they front or to a drainage Facility designed to accept the water. Drainage onto or across adjacent Properties will not be allowed. Drainage swales and/or ditches common to a number of Lots, which run along Rear Lot Lines, Shall be avoided unless dominant topographic conditions make other means of providing drainage impractical. 
B.  Drainage and Flood-control systems and/or Structures Shall be of a size and capacity sufficient to serve the Subdivision and such additional areas as May be required pursuant to Chapter 16.52. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 20 § 8, 1977)  
16.80.100 - Calculations. 
The City Engineer May require the submission by the Engineer preparing any Improvement plans of any calculations Used in the design of said Improvements. Such calculations May relate to, but May not be limited to, areas, quantities, volumes, Grades and hydraulic calculations. Such calculations Shall be submitted in a neat, easily interpreted form, and copies of any engineering charts or nomographs Used Shall accompany said calculations, along with a statement as to the source of the charts and nomographs. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 20 § 9, 1977)  
16.80.110 - Waiver of standards. 
The City Engineer may, after review of circumstances, allow variation from minimum design standards, provided a finding is made that such variation does not, and will not in the future, create a circumstance or condition detrimental to the orderly Development and Use of the Subdivision or Property in the vicinity thereof. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 20 § 10, 1977)  
Chapter 16.84 - CONSTRUCTION 
Sections: 
 
16.84.010 - Conformance with City Standards required. 
All construction within the public rights-of-way Shall conform to the current standards and specifications of the City. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 21 § 1, 1977)  
16.84.020 - Schedule. 
A schedule of proposed construction of Improvements Shall be submitted to the Engineering Division prior to the beginning of work. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 21 § 2, 1977)  
16.84.030 - Utilities and laterals to be constructed when. 
All underground utilities and service laterals to be installed within the public Right-of-Way Shall be constructed, tested and Approved prior to Street and/or Alley paving. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 21 § 3, 1977)  
Chapter 16.88 - PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
16.88.010 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any Person, firm, corporation or partnership violating any of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title Shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than ninety Days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each such Person, firm, corporation or partnership Shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every Day during any portion of which any provision heretofore mentioned, including any physical condition by such Person, firm, corporation or partnership, and Shall be punishable therefore as provided for in this chapter. Any Lot, Street, Alley or other feature made the subject of this title maintained contrary to the provisions hereof Shall constitute a Public Nuisance. 
(Ord. 1520 Art. 22 § 1, 1977)  
DIVISION II. - SCHOOL FACILITIES  
Chapter 16.92 - FEES AND DEDICATIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.92.010 - Title. 
This chapter Shall be known and May be cited as the School facilities Fee Ordinance. 
(Ord. 1681 § 1, 1985)  
16.92.020 - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4.7 (commencing with Section 65970) of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 1681 § 2, 1985)  
16.92.030 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a method for financing interim School facilities necessitated by Conditions of Overcrowding caused by new Residential Developments. 
(Ord. 1681 § 3, 1985)  
16.92.040 - Regulations. 
The City Council May from time to time by Resolution issue regulations to provide for the administration and implementation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1681 § 4, 1985)  
16.92.050 - General Plan. 
The City General Plan provides for the location of public Schools. Where facilities are to be constructed from Fees or land required to be dedicated hereunder or both, they Shall be consistent with the General Plan. 
(Ord. 1681 § 5, 1985)  
16.92.060 - Definitions. 
As Used in this chapter: 
A.  "Conditions of Overcrowding" means that the total enrollment of a School attendance area, including enrollment from proposed Development, exceeds the capacity of such School attendance area as determined by the Governing Body of the District. 
B.  "Decision-Making Body" means the City Council, Planning Commission, and such other Board, Commission, Office or Official as May be authorized or empowered to approve or make recommendations for Approval of any Residential Development. 
C.  "Dwelling Unit" means a Building or portion thereof, or a Mobilehome, designed for residential occupation by one Person or a group of two or more Persons living together as a domestic unit. Dwelling Unit Shall not mean room additions to existing residential Structures. 
D.  "Approve a Residential Development" means for Residential Development: 
1.  To grant a Building Permit; 
2.  To approve or recommend Approval of a tentative, final or Parcel map for a Subdivision of land; 
3.  To grant or recommend the granting of a Variance or Conditional Use Permit. 
E.  "Reasonable Methods of Mitigating Conditions of Overcrowding" Shall include but are not limited to concepts such as: 
1.  Agreements between a Developer and the affected School District whereby temporary Use Buildings will be leased to or for the benefit of the School District or temporary Use Buildings owned by the Developer or School District will be Used; 
2.  The Use of relocatable Structures, student transportation, classroom double sessions, Year-round School programs, School boundary realignments, and elimination of low priority School Facility Uses; 
3.  The Use of available tax, and bond, and other revenue procedures, to the extent authorized by Law; 
4.  The Use of funds available from any other sources. 
F.  "Residential Development" means: 
1.  The construction of one or more Dwelling Units; 
2.  The construction of a Mobilehome Park; 
3.  The Subdivision of Real Property for the purpose of such construction; or 
4.  The conversion to a residential Use of an existing Structure or Part thereof pursuant to a Variance, Conditional Use Permit, or other discretionary planning Permit. 
(Ord. 1681 § 6, 1985)  
16.92.070 - Findings by School District. 
Pursuant to Government Code Sections 65970 et seq., the governing Board of any School District operating an Elementary, Junior High, or High School may, with respect to any of its attendance areas located in whole or in Part within the incorporated territory of the City make and file with the City Council Written findings supported by clear and convincing evidence that: 
A.  Conditions of Overcrowding exist in the School or Schools of such attendance area which will impair the normal functioning of educational programs, including the reasons for such conditions existing; and 
B.  All reasonable methods for mitigating Conditions of Overcrowding have been evaluated, and no feasible method for reducing such conditions exists. 
(Ord. 1681 § 7, 1985)  
16.92.080 - Content of findings. 
Findings filed pursuant to Section 16.92.070 Shall contain the Following: 
A.  A precise description of the geographic boundaries of the attendance areas to which the findings relate; 
B.  A list of the mitigation measures evaluated by the governing Board of the School District and a statement of the reasons why such measures were found to be infeasible; 
C.  A summary of the evidence upon which such findings were based; 
D.  Such other information as May be required by regulations adopted by the City Council pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1681 § 8, 1985)  
16.92.090 - Concurrence by City Council. 
After receipt of findings complying with the requirements of this chapter the City Council Shall by Resolution either concur in or reject such findings. Such findings May be rejected only if the Council determines that such findings are not supported by the weight of the evidence. At any time after it has concurred in or rejected such findings, the Council May reconsider the Matter. 
(Ord. 1681 § 9, 1985)  
16.92.100 - School District schedule. 
Any School District which files findings Shall also file with the City Council a schedule specifying how the School District will Use Fees or land received by it pursuant to this chapter to solve the Conditions of Overcrowding. The schedule Shall include the School sites to be Used, the classroom facilities to be made available, and the time when such facilities will be available. If the School District cannot meet the schedule, it Shall file modifications with the City Council together with a statement of the reasons for the modifications. 
(Ord. 1681 § 10, 1985)  
16.92.110 - Findings by City Council. 
After receipt of the schedule the City Council Shall by Resolution determine whether the facilities and land Use specified in such schedule are consistent with the General Plan. 
(Ord. 1681 § 11, 1985)  
16.92.120 - Findings by Decision-Making Body. 
Within any attendance area where it has been determined pursuant to this chapter that Conditions of Overcrowding exist, no Decision-Making Body Shall approve or recommend the Approval of a Residential Development unless such Decision-Making Body first determines one of the Following: 
A.  That the School District has entered into an agreement with the Applicant or some other Person which provides a feasible means for mitigating any aggravation of such Conditions of Overcrowding which would be caused by the Residential Development; 
B.  Where the Application is for a Building Permit, that the Applicant has paid the School Fees as required by this chapter; 
C.  Where the Application is for an Approval which does not include the grant of a Building Permit, that such Approval is conditioned upon the payment of School Fees pursuant to this chapter; 
D.  That there are specific, overriding physical, economic, social or environmental factors which justify Approval of the Residential Development without requiring the payment of Fees which would otherwise be required pursuant to this chapter; or 
E.  That both the City and the School District have Approved conditions, covenants and restrictions of record which prohibit the residence of Minor children in the proposed Development. 
(Ord. 1681 § 12, 1985)  
16.92.130 - Facilities Fee. 
A.  Every Person carrying out a Residential Development in an area where School overcrowding has been determined to exist, Shall pay a facilities Fee for each Elementary, Junior High School, and Senior High School student generated by the Development. The amount of the facilities Fee per student Shall be set by Resolution of the City Council after consultation with the affected School Districts and Shall bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim Elementary, Junior High and High School facilities and Shall be reasonably related and limited to the need for Schools caused by the Residential Development. However, the Fee Shall not exceed the amount necessary to pay five annual lease payments for interim facilities prorated per student. The Fee Shall be paid at the time of the issuance of a Building Permit. 
B.  Upon Written Application by the Person carrying out the Development and appropriate security to guarantee payment, the City Manager is authorized to defer payment of such Fee. However, deferral of such Fee for any Development Shall not extend the time for payment after the occurrence of the first of any of the Following events: 
1.  Electrical hook-up; or 
2.  Certificate of Occupancy; or 
3.  Transfer of title by the Developer. 
(Ord. 1681 § 13, 1985)  
16.92.140 - Determination of student population density and Dwelling Units. 
A.  Student population density for the purpose of this chapter Shall be determined by Resolution of the City Council based upon the number of students reasonably expected to be housed in each Dwelling Unit in the Development. 
B.  The number of Dwelling Units Shall be determined by reference to the Building Permits issued Permitting Residential Development or by reference to the discretionary Permit or map Permitting conversion of existing Structures to residential Use. 
(Ord. 1681 § 14, 1985)  
16.92.150 - Dedication or provision of facilities in lieu of Fees. 
A.  Upon agreement by the Developer, the City, and the affected School District, a Developer May dedicate land in lieu of paying the Fees required by this chapter. The Fair Market Value of the land so dedicated Shall be equivalent to the amount of Fees otherwise required. 
B.  The Developer May at his option and expense, provide interim facilities meeting the standards and at a location established by the affected School District. The Developer Shall remove such facilities at the conclusion of the fifth School Year at his expense unless the Developer and the School District agree that such facilities May remain. 
(Ord. 1681 § 15, 1985)  
16.92.160 - Application of Fees. 
A.  The Fees collected pursuant to this chapter Shall be remitted to the School Districts to be expended as required by this section. 
B.  The Fees or land, or both, Shall be Used by the School Districts in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 4.7, Division 1, Title 7 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 1681 § 16, 1985)  
16.92.170 - School District report—Frequency—Contents. 
A.  Any School District receiving funds pursuant to this chapter Shall maintain a separate account for any Fees received and Shall file a report with the City Council on the balance in the account at the end of the previous fiscal Year and the facilities leased, purchased, or constructed during the previous fiscal Year. In addition, the report Shall specify which attendance areas will continue to be overcrowded when the fall term begins, and where Conditions of Overcrowding will no longer exist. Such report Shall be filed by August 1st of each Year and Shall be filed more frequently at the request of the City Council. 
B.  If overcrowding conditions no longer exist, the City Shall cease levying Fees pursuant to this chapter for Residential Development in that attendance area. 
(Ord. 1681 § 17, 1985)  
Title 18 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior Ordinance history: Ords. 1594, 1602, 1611, 1626, 1631, 1633, 1635, 1668, 1671, 1676, 1677, 1678, 1694, 0-14-86, 0-14-87, 0-2-87, 0-3-87, 0-17-87, 0-12-88, 0-13-88, 0-13-90, 0-18-90, 0-19-90 and 0-10-91. 
 
Chapter 18.01 - TITLE AND PURPOSES 
 
18.01.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the City of Colton Zoning Ordinance, hereafter referred to as the "Zoning Code or Code". 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(1)), 10-10-2013)  
18.01.020 - Authority. 
This Zoning Code is the primary tool for implementing the goals, objectives, and policies of the Colton General Plan, pursuant to the mandated provisions of the State Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code Section 65000 et seq.), California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code 21000 et seq.), and other applicable State and local requirements. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(1)), 10-10-2013)  
18.01.030 - Purposes and objectives. 
It is the purpose and intent of the City Council that this Title promote the following purposes: 
A.  General. 
1.  To preserve and enhance the present qualities and advantages that exist in the City; 
2.  To promote the public health, safety, general welfare and preserve and enhance the aesthetic quality of the City by providing regulations to ensure an appropriate mix of land uses in an orderly manner; 
3.  To encourage the most appropriate use of land, water and natural resources consistent with the public interest; 
4.  To overcome present problems and effectively manage future challenges that may result from the use and development of land and property; 
5.  To protect human, environmental, social, natural and economic resources; 
6.  To ensure that required on-site and off-site dedications and public improvements are properly installed or guaranteed; and 
B.  City and Region. 
1.  To ensure that development patterns should not blur or eradicate the edges of the city. Infill development within existing urban centers should conserve environmental resources, promote economic investment, and enhance social fabric, while reclaiming marginal and abandoned areas; 
2.  To prevent the impacts of both overcrowding of land and undue concentrations of population as well as the negative effects of leapfrogging sprawl and underutilization of land and property; 
3.  To restore downtown and existing urban centers and reconfigure conventional development into a City of real neighborhoods and diverse districts, to conserve natural environments, and preserve our built legacy; and 
4.  To support the physical organization of the region by a framework of transportation alternatives. Transit, pedestrian, and bicycle systems should maximize access and mobility throughout the region while reducing dependence upon the automobile. 
C.  Neighborhoods, District and Corridor. 
1.  To improve economic health and harmonious evolution of neighborhoods, districts and corridors through the use of graphic urban design codes that serve as predictable guides for change; 
2.  To develop transit corridors, when properly planned and coordinated, to help or organize the regional structure and revitalize urban centers. In contrast, highway corridors should not displace investment from existing centers; 
3.  To plan for appropriate building densities and land uses within walking distance of transit stops, permitting public transit to become a viable alternative to the automobile; 
4.  To concentrate civic, institutional, and commercial activity to be embedded in neighborhoods and districts, not isolated in remote, single-use complexes. Schools should be sized and located to enable children to walk or bicycle to them; and 
5.  To organize a range of parks, from tot-lots and village greens to soccer fields/ball fields and community gardens should be distributed within neighborhoods. Conservation areas and open lands should be used to define and connect different neighborhoods and districts. 
D.  Block, Street and Building. 
1.  To place civic buildings and public gathering places on important sites to reinforce community identity and the culture of democracy. They deserve distinctive form because their role is different from that of other buildings and places that constitute the fabric of the city; 
2.  To ensure safety and security are considered as they are important in revitalizing of rural, urban, and special districts of the City. The design of streets and buildings should reinforce safe environments, but not at the expense of accessibility and openness; 
3.  To place all buildings so that they provide their inhabitants with a clear sense of location, weather and time. Natural methods of heating and cooling can be more resource-efficient than mechanical systems; 
4.  To adequately accommodate the automobile. It should do so in ways that respect the pedestrian and the form of public space; and 
5.  To place streets and squares to be designed in a safe, comfortable, and interesting manner to the pedestrian. Properly configured, they encourage walking and enable neighbors to know each other and protect their surroundings. 
E.  Implementation of the Colton General Plan. To coordinate and ensure the execution of the City's General Plan through effective implementation of development review requirements, adequate facility and services review and other goals, policies or programs contained in the General Plan. All development within the unincorporated area of the City's Sphere of Influence, should be consistent with the Colton General Plan. All development in the incorporated area of the City shall be consistent with the General Plan. 
F.  Comprehensive, Consistent and Equitable Regulations. To establish a system of fair, comprehensive, consistent and equitable regulations, standards and procedures for the review and approval of all proposed development, divisions, and mapping of land within the City in a manner consistent with State law. 
G.  Efficiently and Effectively Managed Procedures. To promote fair procedures that are efficient and effective in terms of time and expense and that appropriate process is followed in the review and approval of applications made under this Title; 
To be effective and responsive in terms of the allocation of authority and delegation of powers and duties among ministerial, appointed and elected officials; and 
To foster a positive customer service attitude and to respect the rights of all applicants and affected citizens. 
H.  Environmental Review. The City of Colton will conduct an environmental review of each project submitted for City approval in accordance with the City's adopted guidelines for implementing the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Depending on the nature and scope of the proposed project, an exemption, a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or environmental impact report may need to be completed. Negative declarations, mitigated negative declarations and environmental impact reports shall be prepared based on CEQA, implementing guidelines and City of Colton environmental guidelines. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(1)), 10-10-2013)  
18.01.040 - Overall relationship to the general plan. 
The adoption of this Title is consistent and compatible with and furthers the goals, policies, objectives and programs of the General Plan. It is the intent of the City Council that all regulatory decisions made pursuant to this Title be consistent with the General Plan. 
For purposes of this Section, "consistency with the General Plan" means not only consistency with the Plan's land use and density designations, but also consistency with all elements, policies and programs of the General Plan, including those that promote compatibility of uses and densities, and orderly development consistent with available resources. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(1)), 10-10-2013)  
18.01.050 - Relationship of zoning districts to the general plan. 
The establishment of zoning districts is intended to be one of the means of implementing the City's General Plan and any amendments thereto, as such implementation is permitted and required by State Law. The General Plan serves as a guideline and framework for the zoning and regulatory provisions of this Title. With respect to the Land Use and Housing Elements of the General Plan, there are goals, objectives and provisions for use categories and density ranges, but also for the achievement of other planning objectives such as appropriate mixing and buffering of uses to ensure overall compatibility. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(1)), 10-10-2013)  
18.01.060 - Application. 
This chapter shall apply to all property within the incorporated limits of the City. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(1)), 10-10-2013)  
Chapter 18.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
18.04.002 - Purpose. 
The purpose of these provisions is to promote consistency and precision in the Application and interpretation of this title. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.004 - Definitions generally. 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this title, phrases and terms Shall be deemed to have the meanings ascribed to them in the Following sections covering definitions. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.006 - Interpretation of language. 
A.  The word "Shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "May" is permissive and not discretionary. 
B.  Any form of the word or phrase defined Shall be construed to have the meaning given in the definitions regardless of tense and whether it is singular or plural. 
C.  The word "used" Shall include arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, Rented, leased, occupied, or intended to be utilized. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.008 - Access. 
"Access" means a place or way by which Pedestrians and Vehicles Shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a Property or Use as required by this title. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.010 - Accessory Structure. 
"Accessory Structure" means a Building, Part of a Building, or Structure which is subordinate to, and the Use of which is Incidental to that of the Main Building Structure or Use of the same Lot. Where an accessory Building is a Part of, or joined to the Main Building, such accessory Building Shall be counted as Part of the Main Building. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.012 - Accessory Use. 
"Accessory Use" means a Use Incidental or subordinate to and devoted exclusively to the principal Use or Building thereon, and located on the same Lot with the principal Use. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.014 - Addition. 
"Addition" means any construction which increases the size of a Building or Facility in terms of site coverage, height, length, width or gross Floor Area. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.016 - Administrative/Professional Services. 
"Administrative/Professional Services" means offices of private firms or organizations primarily Used for the provision of professional, executive, management or administrative offices, legal offices, architectural firms, physicians offices, insurance agencies, real estate firms and other similar activities where a service is rendered, as distinguished from the handling of commodities. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.020 - Agriculture. 
"Agriculture" means the Use of land for farming, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, including Accessory activities such as equipment storage and harvesting. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.022 - Airport. 
"Airport" means any area which is Used or intended to be Used for the taking off and landing of aircraft, including helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are Used or are intended to be Used for Airport Building or facilities, including Open Spaces, taxiways and tiedown areas. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.023 - Alcoholic Beverage Sales. 
"Alcoholic Beverage Sales" means any Premises engaged in the Sale of Alcoholic Beverages, including Beer and Wine Sales and liquor and bottled spirits Sales for On-Premises or Off-Premises consumption, pursuant to State licensing, excluding therefrom temporary Beer and Wine Sales conducted by charitable or Nonprofit Organizations. 
(Ord. No. O-08-09, § 3, 1-19-2010)  
18.04.024 - Alley. 
"Alley" means a public or private way, at the rear or side of Property, permanently reserved as a means of vehicular Access to abutting Property. Frontage on said Alley Shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this chapter related to Frontage on a dedicated Street. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.026 - Animal Boarding. 
"Animal Boarding" means board services for dogs, cats and similar small animals as well as horses. Typical Uses include kennels, pet Motels, dog training centers and stables. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.028 - Animal Grooming. 
"Animal Grooming" means grooming of dogs, cats and similar small animals. Typical Uses include dog bathing and clipping salons or pet grooming shops, but excludes Animal Boarding. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.030 - Animal Health Care. 
"Animal Health Care" means veterinary services for animals. Typical Uses include pet clinics, dog and cat Hospitals or animal Hospitals. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.032 - Antenna. 
"Antenna" means any system of wires, poles, rods, towers, whips, reflecting discs or similar devices Used for transmission or reception of signals. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.033 - Antique Shop. 
"Antique Shop" means a place offering, antiques for sale. An antique, for the purposes of this Code, shall be a work of art, piece of furniture, decorative object, or the like, of or belonging to the past, at least thirty years old. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.034 - Apartment. 
"Apartment" means a room or suite of two or more rooms in a multiple Dwelling Structure, occupied or suitable for Occupancy as a residence for one Family. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.036 - Apartment, Bachelor. 
"Bachelor Apartment" means a Dwelling Unit that combines sleeping, living, cooking and dining facilities into one Habitable Room. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.038 - Apartment, Efficiency. 
"Efficiency Apartment" means a Dwelling Unit that combines sleeping, living, cooking and dining facilities into two Habitable Rooms, one of which Shall be a Kitchen. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.040 - Apartment, One-Bedroom. 
"One-Bedroom Apartment" means a Dwelling Unit in an Apartment house that contains three Habitable Rooms, one of which Shall be a Kitchen. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.042 - Apartment, Two or More Bedroom. 
"Two or More Bedroom Apartment" means Dwelling Unit in an Apartment house that contains more than three Habitable Rooms. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.044 - Applicant. 
"Applicant" means a Person who requests in writing the Approval of a lease, Permit, license, certificate or other entitlement for Use from one or more public agencies. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.046 - Application. 
"Application" means the form and information submitted by an Applicant. The form and information is to be Used to determine whether to approve or deny Permits or other entitlement for Use. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.048 - Approval. 
"Approval" means the issuance or commitment of issuance by a public agency of each lease, Permit, license, certificate or other entitlement for which an Application was accepted as complete. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.050 - Arcade. 
"Arcade" means any Establishment containing four or more amusement devices. This definition Shall not apply to recreational Premises such as bowling Alleys or skating rinks, where an Arcade is Part of the primary Use. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.052 - Architectural Feature. 
"Architectural Feature" means a Part, portion or Projection that contributes to the beauty or elegance of a Building or Structure and is not intended for Occupancy, which May extend beyond the face of the exterior Wall, but Shall not include Signs. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.054 - Area, Gross. 
"Gross Area" means the entire area within the boundaries of a Project site, Building or Lot, measured to the centerline of adjoining Streets rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.056 - Area, Net. 
"Net Area" means that area of a Lot or Parcel of land exclusive of: 
A.  Public Alleys, Highways or Streets; 
B.  Proposed public facilities such as Alleys, Highways or Streets or other public sites when included within proposed Development Project; or 
C.  Other public or private Easements where the Owner of the servient tenement does not have the right to Use the entire surface of land. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.057 - Assembly Use. 
"Assembly Use" means Banquet Hall, Bar, Entertainment Facility, Institution, Lodge or Private Club, Meeting Hall or Place of Assembly, Nightclub, Religious Assembly or Place of Worship, or other Use involving the gathering or assembly of people in a Building or Facility. 
(Ord. 0-11-08 § 2, 2008)  
18.04.058 - Assessor. 
"Assessor" means the County Assessor of the County of San Bernardino. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.059 - Assisted Living Facility. 
"Assisted Living Facility" means a facility that provides twenty-four-hour nonmedical care for seniors, with chronic, life-threatening illness in need of personal services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance, or training essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual. Does not include convalescent homes, nursing homes, and similar facilities licensed by the state to provide twenty-four-hour medical care. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.060 - Attach. 
"Attach" means to connect, fasten or structurally affix permanently to a Building or Structure. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.061 - Automobile. 
"Automobile" means passenger cars, motorcycles, and trucks less than twenty feet long, not including semi-trailer truck cabs. For purposes of this title, this includes light trucks, all terrain vehicles (ATVs), buses and recreational vehicles that may be more than twenty feet long. 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.062 - Automobile Dismantling. 
"Automobile Dismantling" means the dismantling or wrecking of motor Vehicles required to be registered under the Vehicle Code of the State, including the buying, selling or dealing in such Vehicles or integral Parts or Component Materials thereof and the storage, Sale or salvage of dismantled, partially dismantled, or wrecked, inoperative or disabled Vehicles in connection with the legal operation on an Automobile Repair garage or body and fender shop. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.064 - Automobile Impound Yard. 
"Automobile Impound Yard" means an area Designated or maintained for the temporary storage of Vehicles legally removed or Impounded from public or Private Property as prescribed by Law. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.066 - Automobile Parking. 
"Automobile Parking" means the same as "Automobile Storage," as defined by this Title. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.067 - Automobile Rental. 
"Automobile Rental" means the rental of automobiles, not including trucks or trailers. 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.068 - Automobile Repair. 
"Automobile Repair" means repair of automobiles, not including trucks, as well as the Sale, installation and servicing of automotive equipment and Parts together with body repair, painting, steam cleaning and welding. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.070 - Automobile Sales. 
"Automobile Sales" means Sale, retail or wholesale of automobiles, not including trucks. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.072 - Automobile Servicing. 
"Automobile Servicing" means fueling, washing and polishing, installation and servicing of automobiles, not including trucks, and automotive equipment and parts including minor tuneups, battery charging, tube and tire repairs and carwashes, but excluding body work, engine overhauling and other similar activities. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.074 - Automobile Storage. 
"Automobile Storage" means storage or parking of automobiles, not including trucks, temporarily or for extended periods of time as a primary or accessory use. Typical Uses include bus yard operation without passenger loading or unloading, recreational Vehicle storage and fleet storage. For the purpose of this title, automobile storage shall not include parking for vehicles twenty feet long or less kept available for use by customers and employees of a building on the same lot. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.075 - Banner, Flag, Pennant or Balloon. 
"Banner, Flag, Pennant or Balloon" means any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper or similar Material Used for advertising purposes Attached to or appended on or from any Structure, staff, pole, line, framing or Vehicle. 
(Ord. 0-11-08 § 3, 2008; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.076 - Banquet Hall. 
"Banquet Hall" means a large room or hall available to the public for functions and events where food and drink May also be served. 
(Ord. 0-11-08 § 4, 2008)  
18.04.077 - Bar. 
"Bar" means any Premises engaged primarily in the Sale of beer, wine, liquor and/or bottled spirits for On-Premises consumption, pursuant to State licensing, excluding therefrom temporary Beer and Wine Sales. 
(Ord. 0-11-08 § 5, 2008)  
18.04.078 - Basement. 
"Basement" means a space wholly or partially underground, and having more than one-half of its height below the average adjoining Grade. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.079 - Beer and Wine Sales. 
"Beer and Wine Sales" means any Premises engaged in the Sale of beer and wine for On-Premises or Off-Premises consumption, pursuant to State licensing, excluding therefrom temporary Beer and Wine Sales conducted by charitable or Nonprofit Organizations. 
(Ord. 0-13-93 § 3, 1993) 
(Ord. No. O-08-09, § 4, 1-19-2010)  
18.04.080 - Berm. 
"Berm" means a mound of earth usually Used to provide Screening or sound attenuation. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.082 - Block. 
"Block" means a Parcel of land bounded by Public Streets, Highways, Freeways, Railroad rights-of-way, Flood control channels, creeks, washes, rivers or acreage unsubdivided into urban Lots or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.083 - Boarding, Lodging or Rooming House. 
"Boarding, Lodging or Rooming House" means a residence or Dwelling, other than a Hotel, wherein one or more rooms, with or without individual or group cooking facilities, are Rented, leased or subleased to individuals under separate Rental Agreements, leases or subleases, either Written or oral, whether the Owner resides at the residence or Dwelling or does not reside at the residence or Dwelling, but excluding Residential, Community or Group Care Facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-01-10, § 2, 3-2-2010)  
18.04.084 - Breezeway. 
"Breezeway" means a roofed passage, open on two sides, where the roof is in keeping with the design and construction of the Main Building. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.086 - Buildable Area. 
"Buildable Area" means any portion of a Lot or Building Site not contained within required Setbacks. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.088 - Building. 
"Building" means any Structure built and maintained for the support, shelter or Enclosure of Persons, animals, chattels or Property of any kind. The word "Building" includes the word "structure." 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.090 - Building Area. 
"Building Area" means the sum in square feet of the ground areas occupied by all Buildings and Structures on a Lot. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.092 - Building Height. 
"Building Height" means the vertical distance from the finished Grade at the exterior Wall to the highest point of the roof Structure. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.094 - Building, Main. 
"Main Building" means a Building within which is conducted the principal Use Permitted on a Lot, as provided by this title. Where fifty percent or more of the Wall of an accessory Building constitutes a common Wall with the Main Building, or where an opening is contained that Permits direct passage from one to the other, or where the roof of the accessory is a physical continuation of the roof of the Main Building, then such accessory Building Shall be considered a Part of the Main Building. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.096 - Building Setback Line. 
"Building Setback Line" means the minimum distance as prescribed by this title, between the Property line of a Lot or Parcel of land, or rights-of-way of Alleys, Streets or Highways, or the centerline thereof, and any point on a Building or Structure related thereto, exclusive of those Architectural Features Permitted to extend thereinto. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.098 - Building Site. 
"Building Site" means a Lot, or contiguous Lots of land, which provides the area and Open Spaces required by this title for construction of a Building or Buildings, and which abuts a public or private Street or Alley, or Easement determined to be adequate for the purpose of Access. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.100 - Business or Commerce. 
"Business or Commerce" means the purchase Sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, substance, or commodity for profit or a livelihood, including in Addition, Motels, public garages, office Buildings, offices of doctors and other professionals, outdoor advertising Signs and Structures, public stables, recreation and amusement enterprises conducted for profit, shops for the Sale of personal services, places where commodities or services are sold or are offered for Sale, either by direct handling of merchandise or by agreements to furnish them, but not including dumps and junkyards. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.102 - Business Support Services. 
"Business Support Services" means Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services of a clerical, employment, protective, maintenance, janitorial or Minor processing nature to firms rather than individuals. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.104 - Camper. 
"Camper" means a Structure designed to be mounted upon a motor Vehicle and to provide facilities for human habitation or camping purposes. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.106 - Carport. 
"Carport" means a permanent roofed Structure with not more than two enclosed sides Used or intended to be Used for automobile shelter. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.108 - CC and Rs. 
"CC and Rs" means conditions, covenants and restrictions which establish a set of private regulations for the Development and Use of Private Property. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.110 - Cemeteries. 
"Cemeteries" means land Used or intended to be Used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for Cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematoriums, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such Cemetery. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.112 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. 2(2)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed § 18.04.112, which pertained to child care services and derived from Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992.  
18.04.114 - Church. 
"Church" means a Building, the principal purpose of which is religious worship and including Uses in the principal Structure or separate Buildings, including assembly rooms, Kitchen, library and Day nurseries operated by and located on the same Lot or site as the Church, but excluding facilities for residences of or training of religious orders. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.116 - City. 
"City" means the City of Colton. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.118 - City Council. 
"City Council" means the City Council of the City of Colton. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.120 - Cluster Development. 
"Cluster Development" means a Development design technique that concentrates Buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be Used for recreation, common Open Space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive areas. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.122 - Commission. 
"Commission" means the Planning Commission of the City of Colton. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.124 - Committee. 
"Committee" means the Application Review Committee. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-03-14, § 3, 3-4-2014)  
18.04.126 - Communication Services. 
"Communication Services" means Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the Use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms, but excluding television studios, telecommunication Service centers and telegraph service offices. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.128 - Community Recreation. 
"Community Recreation" means recreational, social or multipurpose Uses of open areas as well as within Buildings. Typical Uses include Parks, community meeting centers and public Swimming Pools. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.130 - Compact Car. 
"Compact Car" means a Vehicle capable of movement under its own power having a wheel base of one hundred inches or less. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.132 - Compatible Use. 
"Compatible Use" means a Use that, by its manner of operation, is suitable in the zone in which it May be Nonconforming. Said Use of land and/or Buildings Shall be in harmony with the Uses on abutting Properties in the same zone. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.133 - Composting. 
"Composting" means the Use of a Parcel, or portion thereof, for producing or storing, for Commercial Purposes, a mixture that consists largely of decayed organic Matter including, without limitation, human waste, in the form of processed sewer sludge, to be Used for the purpose of creating any product primarily for fertilizing or conditioning land. Composting includes, but is not limited to, mulching and related green waste land Uses. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.134 - Conditional Use. 
"Conditional Use" means a Use which, because of special site or design requirements, operating characteristics, or potential adverse effects on surrounding Use, is only Permitted after review by Planning Commission, and Application of pertinent conditions of Approval. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.136 - Condominium. 
"Condominium" means an estate in Real Property consisting of an undivided interest in common in portion of a Parcel of Real Property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or Commercial Building on such Real Property. A Condominium May include, in Addition, a separate interest in other portions of such Real Property. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.138 - Conforming Building. 
"Conforming Building" means a Building which fully conforms to the requirements of the State Housing Act, Fire Zone, Uniform Building Code, the requirements of this and any other applicable chapters of this Code as prescribed for the zone in which the Building is located. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.139 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-01-10, § 3, adopted March 2, 2010, repealed § 18.04.139, which pertained to congregate residence. See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List.  
18.04.140 - Construction Sales and Services. 
"Construction Sales and Services" means places of Business primarily engaged in constriction activities and Incidental storage on Lots other than construction sites as well as the retail or wholesale, from the Premises, of Materials Used in the construction of Buildings or Structures other than retail Sale of paint, fixtures and hardware. Typical Uses include Building Materials, stores, tool and equipment Rentals or Sales. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.142 - Convalescent Home. 
"Convalescent Home" means places that provide nursing, dietary and other personal services to convalescents, invalids and aged Persons, but excluding surgery or primary treatments such as are customarily provided in sanitariums and Hospitals. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.144 - Convenience Sales and Services. 
"Convenience Sales and Services" means the retail Sales, from the Premises, of groceries, fruits or vegetables, flowers, bakery Goods, health aids and frequently needed small personal convenience items such as toiletries, tobacco and magazines, as well as the provision of personal convenience services such as barber and beauty care, self-service laundromats and dry-cleaning pickup stations and other similar accommodations primarily intended for Residents of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.146 - Corporation Yard. 
"Corporation Yard" means any land or Structure Used primarily for the storage of equipment, Vehicles, machinery, new or Used, Building Materials, paints, pipe or electrical Components Used by the Owner or Occupant of the Premises in the conduct of any Building trades or crafts. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.148 - County. 
"County" means the County of San Bernardino. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.150 - County Recorder. 
"County Recorder" means the County Recorder of the County of San Bernardino. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.152 - Court. 
"Court" means an open, unoccupied space, other than a Yard, on the same Lot with a Building and bounded on two or more sides by such Building. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.154 - Cultural Institutions. 
"Cultural Institutions" means Establishments such as museums, art galleries, botanical and zoological gardens of historic, educational or cultural interest which are not operated for profit. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.155.1 - Day Care Center—Child. 
"Day Care Center—Child" means a Child Day Care Facility other than a Family Day Care Home, including infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities and school-age Child Care Centers. (see California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.76). 
(Ord. No. O-03-15, § 3, 3-3-2015)  
18.04.155.2 - Day Care Center—Adult. 
"Day Care Center—Adult" means a facility that provides supervision and non-medical care for more than six adults, including elderly Persons, on a less than twenty-four-hour basis. 
(Ord. No. O-03-15, § 3, 3-3-2015)  
18.04.156 - Days. 
"Days" means calendar Days, unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.158 - Decibel. 
"Decibel" means the "A" weighted logarithmic Decibel scale (dab) which measures sound intensity within the range of human perception. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.160 - Density, Gross. 
"Gross Density" means the number of Residential Dwelling Units per acre of land based on the gross acreage contained within a given area, including Street rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.162 - Density, Net. 
"Net Density" means the number of Residential Dwelling Units per acre of land based on the net developable acreage remaining after Street rights-of-way have been subtracted. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.164 - Department. 
"Department" means the Development Services Department of the City. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992; Ord. No. O-03-14, § 3, 3-4-2014)  
18.04.166 - Development. 
"Development" means the division of land into two or more Parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance; and any expansion of the use of land. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-03-15, § 3, 3-3-2015)  
18.04.168 - Director. 
"Director" means the Director of the Development Services Department, or their appointed Representative. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.170 - Drive-In Business. 
"Drive-In Business" means any Establishment or Business, which, whether by design or operation, provides services or products directly to Occupants of motor Vehicles, or directly to Pedestrian traffic from exterior openings or counters, or a combination thereof. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.172 - Driveway. 
"Driveway" means a paved Access to a required Off-Street Parking Facility. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.174 - Dwelling. 
"Dwelling" means a Building or portion thereof designed and Used exclusively for residential Occupancy, with the exception of Permitted Home Occupations, but not including Hotels, Motels, boarding homes or lodginghouses. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.176 - Dwelling, Caretaker. 
"Caretaker Dwelling" means a Dwelling Designated and Used exclusively for residential Occupancy, which May be allowed only in conjunction to an industrial Use within an Industrial Zone. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.178 - Dwelling, Group. 
"Group Dwelling" means any living situation including motels and hotel buildings that are not for temporary use, that accommodates more than six unrelated individuals, and may include but not be limited to the following types of facilities: (1) licensed alcohol and drug treatment facilities; (2) licensed board and care homes for the elderly including convalescent or rest homes and nursing homes; (3) licensed homes for minor children; (4) licensed homes from mental patients; (5) licensed homes for the developmentally disabled; and (6) single-room occupancy (SRO) projects. Group housing would typically involve a living arrangement where either support services are provided to the occupants, where cooking, living or support sanitary facilities are shared in common between the occupants or where there is a formal program establishing rules of conduct and purpose of the facility. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.180 - Dwelling, Multiple-Family. 
"Multiple-Family Dwelling" means a Building containing more than two Dwelling Units, each unit designed for Occupancy by one Family. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.182 - Dwelling, Single-Family. 
"Single-Family Dwelling" means a Building designed for Occupancy by one Family. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.184 - Dwelling, Two-Family. 
"Two-Family Dwelling" means a Building containing two Dwelling Units, each unit designed for Occupancy by one Family. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.185 - Dwelling Unit, Second. 
"Second Dwelling Unit" means an attached or detached dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, with permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation sited on the same parcel as the primary dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.186 - Dwelling Unit. 
"Dwelling Unit" means one or more rooms in Dwelling Structure designed for, or occupied by, one Family for living or sleeping purposes and having only one Kitchen. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.188 - Easement. 
"Easement" means an area on a Lot or Parcel of land, and so indicated on a Subdivision map or in a deed, reserved for and/or Used for public utilities, public Uses and/or private Uses. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.190 - Eating/Drinking Establishments, Indoor Only. 
"Eating/Drinking Establishments, Indoor Only" means a place of Business, excluding Nightclubs, Banquet Halls, Bars or Entertainment Facilities, primarily engaged in the Sale of prepared food and beverages for On-Premises consumption inside an enclosed building, such as Restaurants and short order eating places. Subject to all other applicable requirements, beer, wine and liquor May be served if Incidental to the primary food Business. 
(Ord. 0-11-08 § 6, 2008: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.191 - Eating/Drinking Establishments with Outdoor Seating. 
"Eating/Drinking Establishments with Outdoor Seating" means a place of business, excluding nightclubs, banquet halls, bars or entertainment facilities, primarily engaged in the sale of prepared food and beverages for on-premises consumption, such as restaurants and short order eating places, which includes outdoor seating for dining and drinking purposes. Subject to all other applicable requirements, beer, wine and liquor may be served if Incidental to the primary food business. 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.192 - Eave. 
"Eave" means the Projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging from the Wall of Building. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.194 - Educational Institution. 
"Educational Institution" means a School, college or university, public or private, giving general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.196 - Elevation. 
"Elevation" means a flat scale drawing of the front, rear or side of a Building or Structure. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.197 - Emergency Shelter. 
"Emergency Shelter" means a facility for the temporary shelter and feeding of indigents or disaster victims and operated by a public or nonprofit agency as defined by California Health and Safety Code § 50801. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.198 - Enclosed Building. 
"Enclosed Building" means a Building enclosed by a permanent roof and on all sides by solid exterior Walls pierced only by windows and customary entrance and exit doors. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.200 - Enclosed Space. 
"Enclosed Space" means an area enclosed on all sides by a solid physical barrier, such as solid wood Fence or masonry Wall. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.202 - Entertainment Facility. 
"Entertainment Facility" means Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of cultural, entertainment, athletic and other events to spectators as well as those involving social or fraternal gatherings. Typical Uses include small theaters and Meeting Halls. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.204 - Environmental Impact Report. 
"Environmental Impact Report" means a detailed statement setting forth the environmental effects and considerations pertaining to a Project as specified in Section 21100 of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.205 - Farmers Market. 
"Farmers Market" means a farmers market which operates multiple times per year and is organized for the purpose of facilitating personal connections that create mutual benefits for local farmers, shoppers and communities. A farmers market consists principally of farms selling directly to the public products that the farms have produced. In addition, secondary use hand-made arts and crafts and food sales are permitted pursuant to approval of a "California Certified Farmers Market." 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.206 - Family. 
"Family" means one or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. See "Single housekeeping unit" 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-06-14, § 3, 5-22-2014)  
18.04.207.1 - Family Day Care Center, Large. 
"Family Day Care Home, Large" means State-licensed facilities that provide nonmedical care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than twenty-four hours within a single-family or multi-family dwelling. The occupant of the residence provides care and supervision generally for seven to fourteen children. As described in the California Health and Safety Code, large family day care homes may provide services for up to fourteen children when specific conditions are met. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.207.2 - Family Day Care Home, Small. 
"Family Day Care Home, Small" means State-licensed facilities that provide nonmedical care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than twenty-four hours within a single-family or multi-family dwelling. The occupant of the residence provides care and supervision generally to six or fewer children. As described in the California Health and Safety Code, small family day care homes for children may provide services for up to eight children when specific conditions are met. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.208 - Federal. 
"Federal" means the Government of the United States of America. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.210 - Fence. 
"Fence" means any structural device forming a physical barrier which is so constructed that at least fifty percent of the vertical surface is open to Permit the transmission of light, air and vision through said surface in a horizontal plane. This Shall include wire and steel mesh, chain link, stake and other similar Materials. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.212 - Financial Institutions. 
"Financial Institutions" means Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of financial services including banks and savings and loan Institutions. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.214 - Floor Area. 
"Floor Area" means the total horizontal area of all the floors of a Building measured from the exterior surface of the outside including all floors below ground level but exclusive of vent shafts and Courts. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.216 - Floor Area Ratio. 
"Floor Area Ratio" means the ratio of gross building floor area to total lot area expressed as a percentage. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.220 - Fortunetelling. 
"Fortunetelling" means the telling of fortunes, the reading of cards, the throwing of stone, palmistry and the rewarding of other such devices of chance, forecasting of the future, communicating with past spirit lives or furnishing any other information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary processes of knowledge. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.222 - Foster Home. 
"Foster Home" means a certified or licensed home providing care on a twenty-four-hour a Day basis for mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped Persons, or dependent and neglected children, including Family care homes and group homes. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.224 - Frontage. 
"Frontage" means all Property fronting on one side of a Street between a Street and Right-of-Way, or between intersecting or intercepting Streets, the end of a dead-end Street, or City boundary measured along a Street Line. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.226 - Front Wall. 
"Front Wall" means the Wall of a Building or Structure nearest the Street on which the Building fronts, but excluding certain Architectural Features such as cornices, canopies, Eaves or embellishments. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.228 - Funeral Services. 
"Funeral Services" means Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation or disposition of human dead other than Cemeteries. Typical Uses include funeral homes and mortuaries. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.230 - Garage, Private. 
"Private Garage" means a detached accessory Building or a portion of a Main Building on the same Lot as a Dwelling, Used for the housing of Vehicles of the Occupants of the Dwelling, including Carports. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.232 - General Plan. 
"General Plan" means the General Plan for the City, as adopted by City Council, and as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.234 - Glare. 
"Glare" means a sensation of brightness within the visual Field that causes annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.236 - Grade. 
"Grade" means the average of the finished ground level at the center of all the exterior Walls of a Building. In cases where the Front Wall is parallel to and within five feet of a Sidewalk, the Grade Shall be measured at the Sidewalk at the centerline of the front of the Lot. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.238 - Guesthouse. 
"Guesthouse" means living quarters within a detached accessory Building located on the same Premises with the Main Building, for Use by temporary Guests or the Occupant of the Premises, such quarters having no Kitchen facilities and not Rented or otherwise Used as a separate Dwelling Unit. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.240 - Half-Story. 
"Half-Story" means a Story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, plates of which are not more than four feet above the floor of such Story. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.241 - Health and Fitness Clubs. 
["Health and Fitness Clubs" means] a fitness center or health club, charging a membership or use fee, including private clubs and gymnasiums, that provides exercise machines, free weights, swimming pool, spa, steam room or fitness training and classes for use by clients. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.242 - Hedge. 
"Hedge" means a plant or series of plants, shrubs or other landscape Material so arranged as to form a physical barrier or Enclosure. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.244 - Home for the Aged. 
"Home for the Aged" means any Institution, boarding home or other place for the reception or care of one or more ambulatory aged Persons sixty-five Years of age or older, except any Hospital defined in Section 1401 of the Health and Safety Code of the State. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.246 - Home Occupation. 
"Home Occupation" means any Use customarily conducted entirely within only one room in a Dwelling or Accessory Structure and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which Use is clearly Incidental and secondary to the Structure for Dwelling purposes and which does not change the character thereof or does not adversely effect the Uses Permitted in the Zone of which it is a Part. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.248 - Homeowners Association. 
"Homeowners Association" means an association of Property Owners organized to own, maintain and operate common facilities and to protect and enhance their own interest. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.250 - Hospital. 
"Hospital" means any Building or portion thereof Used for the accommodation and medical care of sick, injured or infirm Persons, and includes sanitariums, rest homes, homes for the aged, alcoholic sanitariums, Institutions for the cure of chronic drug addicts and mental Patients, and sites providing on-site medical aid. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.252 - Hotel. 
"Hotel" means a building, or group of buildings, containing guest rooms or suites provided as temporary lodging or sleeping accommodations for consideration to tourists, sojourners or transients, but not used as the legal residence or principal dwelling place of the occupant(s) and where no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or site, except for one or more caretaker/manager residential units(s). 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.254 - Household Pet. 
"Household Pet" means any domesticated animal commonly maintained in residence with man. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.256 - Improvement. 
"Improvement" means any construction, building, grading, paving or landscaping that materially adds to the value of a facility, substantially extends its useful life, adapts it to new uses or enhances its physical attributes. It also refers to the construction of streets and related appurtenances as noted in Title 12. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-03-15, § 3, 3-3-2015)  
18.04.258 - Incidental. 
"Incidental" means depending on, directly and immediately pertaining to, involved in, but not an essential Part of. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.260 - Industry. 
"Industry" means the manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction or destruction of any article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment thereof in such a manner as to change the form, character, or appearance thereof, and including storage elevators, truck storage Yards, warehouses, wholesale storage and other similar types of enterprise. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.262 - Institution. 
"Institution" means an Establishment maintained and operated by a society, corporation, individual, foundation or public agency for the purpose of providing charitable, social, educational or similar services to its public, groups or individuals. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.264 - Instructional Services. 
"Instructional Services" means an Establishment primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal Improvements and similar services of a nonprofessional nature. Typical Uses include driving Schools and reducing salons. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.266 - Junk and Salvage Yard. 
"Junk and Salvage Yard" means any Premises Used for the storage or keeping of old, Used or secondhand scrap metals, paper and paper products, roofing and tar paper, cloth and clothing, wood and wood products, paints, clay and porcelain products, and similar Materials including dismantling of machinery, equipment and Parts and the baling of cardboard boxes, paper and paper products, but Shall not include any Business defined as an Automobile Dismantling Yard. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.268 - Kitchen. 
"Kitchen" means any room designed to be Used or maintained for the cooking and/or preparation of food. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.270 - Landscaping. 
"Landscaping" means the planting and maintenance of a combination of trees, shrubs, vines, groundcovers, flowers or lawns. In Addition, the combination of design May include natural features such as rock and stone; and structural features, including but not limited to foundations, reflecting pools, art works, screens, Walls, Fences and benches. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.272 - Laundry Services, Heavy. 
"Heavy Laundry Services" means Establishments primarily engaged in the process of laundering, dry-cleaning or dyeing clothing or other Materials. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.274 - Laundry services, Light. 
"Light Laundry Services" means Establishments primarily engaged in providing laundering, dry-cleaning or dyeing services directly to the consumer. Typical Uses include laundromats and dry-cleaning stores. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.276 - Library Services. 
"Library Services" means public Uses involving the collection of books, manuscripts, audio-visual Materials, etc., for study and reading pleasure. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.278 - Liquor Sales. 
"Liquor Sales" means any Premises where hard liquor is sold pursuant to State License, including cocktails consumed on the Premises and bottled spirits, such as whiskey, for Off-Premises consumption. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.279 - Live/Work. 
"Live-Work" means a structure or complex of structures that integrates space for both residential and nonresidential uses within an individual unit. Nonresidential uses should operate with limited noise, odor and other similar impacts, consistent with applicable City ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.280 - Loading Space. 
"Loading Space" means an Off-Street space or berth on the same Lot with a Main Building, or contiguous to a group of Building, for the temporary parking of commercial Vehicles while loading or unloading. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.281 - Lodge or Private Club. 
"Lodge" or "Private Club" means a Building or Facility at which people belonging to a fraternal organization, or other private group or association of people, regularly gather or meet. 
(Ord. 0-11-08 § 7, 2008)  
18.04.282 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a recorded Parcel of land, in single or joint ownership, and occupied or to be occupied by a Building and its accessory Buildings, or by a Dwelling Group and its accessory Buildings together with such Open Spaces as are required by the terms of this title and having its principal Frontage on Street, road or Highway. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.284 - Lot Area. 
"Lot Area" means the total horizontal area within the boundary lines of Lot. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.286 - Lot, Corner. 
"Corner Lot" means a Lot located at the intersection of two or more Streets. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.288 - Lot Coverage. 
"Lot Coverage" means the area of site covered by Buildings or roofed areas, excluding allowed Projecting Eaves, balconies and similar features. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.290 - Lot Depth. 
"Lot Depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and Rear Lot Lines measured in the mean direction of the Side Lot Lines. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.292 - Lot, Flag. 
"Flag Lot" means Lot with Access provided to the bulk of the Lot by means of a narrow corridor. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.294 - Lot, Interior. 
"Interior Lot" means Lot other than a Corner Lot. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.296 - Lot, Key. 
"Key Lot" means any Lot where side Property line abuts the rear Property line of one or more other Lots, and not separated by an Alley. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.298 - Lot, Reversed Corner. 
"Reversed Corner Lot" means a Corner Lot, the side line of which is substantially a continuation of the Front Lot Lines of the Lots to its rear, whether across an Alley or not. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.300 - Lot Line. 
"Lot Line" means any line bounding a Lot as defined in Section 18.04.282. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.302 - Lot Line, Front. 
"Front Lot Line" means all Property fronting on one side of a Street between a Street Right-of-Way, or between intersecting or intercepting Streets, the end of a dead-end Street, or City boundary measures along a Street Line. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.304 - Lot Line, Rear. 
"Rear Lot Line" means a Lot Line which is opposite and most distant from the Front Lot Line. In the case of an irregular, triangular or gore-shaped Lot, a line within the Lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the Front Lot Line, having a length of not less than ten feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.306 - Lot Line, Record. 
"Record Lot Line" means a Parcel of land as shown on the records of the Assessor at the time of the adoption of the Ordinance codified in this title. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.308 - Lot Line, Side. 
"Side Lot Line" means any Lot boundary not a front line or a Rear Lot Line. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.310 - Lot, Through. 
"Through Lot" means a Lot having Frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel dedicated Streets. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.312 - Lot Width. 
"Lot Width" means the horizontal distance between the Side Lot Lines, measured at right angles to the Lot Depth at the established Building Setback Line. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.314 - Manufactured Structure. 
"Manufactured Structure" means any Structure or portion of a Structure which is manufactured away from the site on which it will be ultimately located, including Mobilehomes and office units. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.316 - Manufacturing, Custom. 
"Custom Manufacturing" means Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of Goods by hand manufacturing which involves only the Use of hand tools or domestic mechanical equipment, and the direct Sale to consumers of only those Goods produced on-site. Typical Uses include ceramic studios, candlemaking shops and custom jewelry manufacturers. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.318 - Manufacturing, Heavy. 
"Heavy Manufacturing" means industrial operations involving the compounding of radioactive Materials, petroleum refining, manufacturing of explosives, or any other operation of a dangerous nature or creating high levels of air, water or Noise Pollution. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.320 - Manufacturing, Light. 
"Light Manufacturing" means industrial plants primarily engaged in manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling, packaging, treatment or fabrication of Materials and products including concrete batch plants. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.321 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-01-16, § 2, adopted Jan. 19, 2016, repealed § 18.04.321, which pertained to medical marijuana dispensary and derived from Ord. No. O-03-13, § 3, adopted July 2, 2013.  
18.04.322 - Medical Services. 
"Medical Services" means Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of personal health services ranging from prevention, diagnosis and treatment or rehabilitation to medical testing and analysis services, but not providing in-patient services or overnight accommodations. Typical Uses include medical offices, dental laboratories and health maintenance organizations. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.323 - Meeting Hall or Place of Assembly. 
"Meeting Hall" or "Place of Assembly" means a Building or Facility, not including a Banquet Hall, where people gather for meeting services or other similar purpose. 
(Ord. 0-11-08 § 8, 2008) 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-03-15, § 3, 3-3-2015)  
18.04.325 - Mixed Use Development. 
"Mixed Use Development" means the development of a parcel or building with two or more different land uses such as, but not limited to, a combination of residential, office, retail, public or entertainment in a single or physically integrated group of structures. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.326 - Mobilehome Park. 
"Mobilehome Park" means any Lot or Parcel of land where one or more Mobilehome Lots are Rented, leased, sold or held out for Rent, lease or Sale to accommodate Mobilehomes for purposes of human habitation only. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.328 - Motel. 
"Motel" means a building, or group of buildings, containing guest rooms or suites, with outdoor guest parking located conveniently to, and directly accessible from, each guest room or suite, provided as temporary lodging or sleeping accommodations for consideration to tourists, sojourners or transients, but not used as the legal residence or principal dwelling place of the occupant(s), except for one or more caretaker/manager residential unit(s). 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.328.1. - Motor Vehicle. 
"Motor Vehicle" means automobiles and trucks as defined by this title. 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.329 - Nightclub. 
"Nightclub" means any Dine and Dance Club, Nightclub, Public Dance, Dance Club or Public Dance Hall, as defined in Title 5, Chapter 5.32, Section 5.32.010 of this municipal code. 
(Ord. 0-11-08 § 9, 2008)  
18.04.330 - Noise. 
"Noise" means any undesirable audible sound radiated by any Use of Facility measured at the boundary line of the Property on which the sound is generated. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.332 - Nonconforming. 
"Nonconforming" means a Building, Structure or portion thereof, or Use of Building or land which does not conform to the regulations of this Code and which lawfully existed at the time the regulations became effective through adoption, revision or amendment. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.334 - Nonconforming Lot. 
"Nonconforming Lot" means a Lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Code, but which fails by such reason to conform to the present requirements of the Zone. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.336 - Nonconforming Sign. 
"Nonconforming Sign" means a Sign which was installed in conformance with the Laws or Ordinances in effect at the time, but which is in conflict with the current provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.338 - Nonconforming Structure. 
"Nonconforming Structure" means a Structure or Building, the size, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Code, but which fails by such reason to conform to the present requirements of the zone. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.340 - Nonconforming Use. 
"Nonconforming Use" means a Use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Code, but which fails by such reason to conform to the present requirements of the zone. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.342 - Off-Street Loading Facility. 
"Off-Street Loading Facility" means an Approved space or portion of a space for the loading or unloading of Vehicles including ingress and egress, Access drives and other such requirements. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.344 - Off-Street Parking Facility. 
"Off-Street Parking Facility" means an Approved space or spaces located within a Building or Structure, or on surface parking areas, public or private, for the parking of Vehicles. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.346 - Open Space. 
"Open Space" means that portion of a Lot which is not covered by a Building, Buildings or Structure and is open from the ground up, except for normal roof overhang and ground covered by manmade Materials such as concrete or asphalt. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.348 - Overlay Zone. 
"Overlay Zone" means a zone established by this title, which May be applied to a Lot or a portion thereof only in combination with a base zone. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.350 - Parapet. 
"Parapet" means the extension of the main Walls of a Building above the roof level. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.352 - Parcel. 
"Parcel" means a continuous quantity of land in the possession of or owned by, or recorded as the Property of, the same Person or Persons. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.354 - Parking Bay. 
"Parking Bay" (parking stall) means the parking module consisting of one or two rows of Parking Spaces and the aisle from which motor Vehicles enter and leave the spaces. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.356 - Parking Lot. 
"Parking Lot" means an Off-Street, ground level area, usually surfaced and improved, for the temporary storage of motor Vehicles. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.358 - Parking Space. 
"Parking Space" (parking stall) means a space Designated for the parking of a motor Vehicle within a public or private parking area. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.359 - Parolee. 
Shall mean one of the Following: 
"Parolee, Federal" means an individual convicted of a Federal crime, sentenced to a United States Federal prison, and received conditional and revocable release in the community under the supervision of a Federal Parole Officer. 
"Parolee, State Adult" means an individual who is serving a period of supervised community custody, as defined in Penal Code Section 3000, Following a term of imprisonment in a State prison, and is under the jurisdiction of the California Department of Correction, Parole and Community Services Division. 
"Parolee, Youth Authority" means an adult or Juvenile individual sentenced to a term in the California Youth Authority and received conditional and revocable release in the community under the supervision of a Youth Authority Parole Officer. 
(Ord. No. O-01-10, § 2, 3-2-2010)  
18.04.360 - Performance Standards. 
"Performance Standards" means a set of criteria or limits relating to Nuisance elements which a particular Use or process May not exceed. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.362 - Permit. 
"Permit" means Written governmental Permission issued by an authorized official, empowering the holder thereof to do some Act not forbidden by Law, but not allowed without such authorization. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.364 - Permitted Use. 
"Permitted Use" means any Use allowed in a zone and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zone. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.365 - Personal Services. 
"Personal Services" means an establishment providing nonmedical services as a primary use, including, but not limited to, barber and beauty shops (including permanent makeup), weight loss clinics, day spas (including one accessory massage room), home electronics, computers, cell phones and small appliance repair, shoe repair shops, and tailors. These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.366 - Planned Development. 
"Planned Development" means the planning, construction, or implementation and operation of any Use or Structure or a combination of Uses and Structures, on a single Parcel of land, based on a comprehensive and complete design or plan treating the entire complex of land, Structures and Uses as a single Project. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.367 - Plant Nursery. 
"Plant Nursery" means a commercial agricultural establishment engaged in the production of ornamental plants and other nursery products, grown under cover either in containers or in the soil on the site, or outdoors in containers. The outdoor production of ornamental plants in the soil on the site is instead included under "Crop Production, Horticulture, Orchard, Vineyard." Also includes establishments engaged in the sale of these products (e.g., wholesale and retail nurseries) and commercial-scale greenhouses. The sale of house plants or other nursery products entirely within a building is also included under "General Retail." 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.368 - Postal Services. 
"Postal Services" means mailing services, excluding major processing owned or operated by governmental agencies as traditionally provided by the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.369 - Private Transportation Facilities. 
"Private Transportation Facilities" means facilities such as bus terminals, Airports and train tracks devoted to one or more of the various means of private transit. Said facilities May include, but are not limited to, private bus company or shuttle pick-up and drop-off locations with regularly scheduled services, whether on private or public property. 
(Ord. No. O-01-13, § 4, 5-7-2013)  
18.04.370 - Public Hearing. 
"Public Hearing" means a meeting announced and advertised in advance and open to the public, where the public is given an opportunity to make comment on the items advertised. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.372 - Public Notice. 
"Public Notice" means the advertisement of a Public Hearing or meeting in a paper or general circulation in the area, by posting or otherwise, indicating the time, place and nature of the Public Hearing. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.374 - Public Maintenance Services. 
"Public Maintenance Services" means Yards, or other space, whether enclosed or unenclosed, devoted to the storage of equipment needed by public agencies to maintain public facilities. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.376 - Public Transportation Facilities. 
"Public Transportation Facilities" means facilities such as bus Terminals, Airports and train tracks devoted to one or more of the various means of public transit. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.378 - Recreational Facilities. 
"Recreational Facilities" means Establishments or places primarily engaged in the provision of sports and recreation by and for participants. Any spectators would be Incidental and on a nonrecurring basis. Typical Uses include bowling Alleys, billiard parlors, driving ranges and miniature golf courses. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.380 - Recreation Space. 
"Recreation Space" means any area, whether enclosed or unenclosed, covered or open, at ground level or in, or on Structure, Used exclusively for active or passive recreational purposes. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.382 - Recreational Vehicle. 
"Recreational Vehicle" means a Camper, motor home, travel trailer or tent trailer, with or without motor power, designed for human habitation for recreational or Emergency Occupancy. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.384 - Recycling Facility. 
"Recycling Facility" means an operation which accepts directly from consumers and pays or provides the redemption value for empty containers intended to be recycled, paper and other recyclable material. Recycling facilities may include the following: 
A.  Reverse vending machine(s). 
B.  Small recycling/collection facility occupying a maximum floor area of five hundred square feet which may include: a mobile unit, bulk reverse vending machine, kiosk-type units, and unattended containers placed for donation of recyclable materials. 
C.  Large recycling/collection facility occupying a floor area of more than five hundred square feet, with or without permanent buildings. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.385 - Recycling Processing Facility. 
"Recycling Processing Facility" means a facility or center for the collection and processing of recyclable material and which does not accept recyclable material directly from consumers. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end user's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the following: 
A.  Light recycling processing facility: A facility occupying an area of under forty-five thousand square feet of gross collection, processing and storage area and has an average of two outbound truck shipments per day. Processing operations are limited to briquetting, crushing, grinding, and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials sufficient to qualify as a Certified Processing Facility. Operations may also include shredding, compacting or baling of food and beverage containers. 
B.  Heavy recycling processing facility: Any recycling facility other than a light processing facility. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.386 - Religious Assembly or Place of Worship. 
"Religious Assembly" or "Place of Worship" means a Building or Facility where people gather for religious services such as a synagogue, temple or Church, and also nontraditional places of worship such as tents, auditoriums, Parks, etc. 
(Ord. 0-11-08 § 10, 2008: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.388 - Repair Services. 
"Repair Services" means Establishments primarily engaged in the repair of household appliances, clothing apparel and musical instruments for individuals and households. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.389 - Resale/Secondhand Stores. 
"Resale/Secondhand Stores" means retail store that re-sells products or materials that have been previously owned by a third party, other than a wholesaler or original fabricator. Resale/Secondhand Stores Shall include pawn shops or consignment shops that sell products or materials currently owned by a third party. Resale of raw materials, such as gold and/or silver, Shall be included in said definition. 
(Ord. No. O-01-13, § 3, 5-7-2013)  
18.04.390 - Research Services. 
"Research Services" means Establishments primarily engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature provided as a service or conducted by and for a private firm, excluding medical testing and analysis and product testing. Typical Uses include electronics research laboratories, space research and Development firms and pharmaceutical research laboratories. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.391 - Residential or Group Care Facility. 
"Residential, Community or Group Care Facility" means any Facility, place, or Building that is maintained and operated to provide non-medical residential care, Day treatment, adult Day care, or foster Family agency services for children, adults, or children and adults, including, but not limited to, the physically handicapped, mentally impaired, incompetent Persons, and abused or neglected children, and includes the Following, as defined by the California Community Care Facilities Act (Health & Safety Code, §§ 1500 et seq.): "Residential Care Facility", "Adult Day Program", "Therapeutic Day Services Facility", "Foster Family Agency", "Foster Family Home", "Small Family Home", "Social Rehabilitation Facility", "Community Treatment Facility", "Full-Service Adoption Agency", "Non-Custodial Adoption Agency", "Transitional Shelter Care Facility", and "Transitional Housing Placement Facility". The term "Residential, Community or Group Care Facility" is limited to those facilities, places, or Buildings that are both subject to regulation by the State of California and actually licensed by the State of California. No Facility, place or Building that May otherwise be regulated by the State of California, but which is not actually licensed by the State of California, Shall be deemed a "Residential, Community or Group Care Facility" for purposes of this title. Whether or not unrelated Persons are living together, a Residential, Community or Group Care Facility licensed by the State of California that serves six or fewer Persons Shall be considered a residential Use of Property for the purposes of this title. A Residential, Community or Group Care Facility that is not licensed by the State of California Shall be deemed a Boarding, Lodging or Rooming House. 
(Ord. 0-15-99 § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. O-01-10, § 4, 3-2-2010)  
18.04.392 - Retail Sales, Indoor. 
"Indoor Retail Sales" means places of Business primarily engaged in the Sale or Rental to the ultimate consumer of commonly Used Goods and merchandise for personal or household Use from an enclosed Structure, but excluding bulk Sales and storage. Typical Uses include Department stores, apparel stores, sporting Goods stores and furniture stores. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.394 - Retail Sales, Outdoor. 
"Outdoor Retail Sales" means the display, exchange, barter or Sale to the ultimate consumer of new or commonly Used household items, office equipment, furnishings or other personal Goods as well as food and beverages in an outdoor setting outside a fully enclosed Structure, except for outdoor seating for a eating/drinking establishment. Typical Uses include Swap Meets, flea markets, fanners' markets and craft fairs. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.396 - Right-of-Way. 
"Right-of-Way" means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, crosswalk, Railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or Gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer and other similar Uses. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.398 - Room, Habitable. 
"Habitable Room" means an enclosing Subdivision in a Building commonly Used for sleeping, living, cooking or dining purposes, excluding closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, connecting corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers, storage spaces, cellars, Utility rooms and similar spaces. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.399 - Salvage Operations. 
"Salvage Operation" means places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling, or other processing of used or waste materials not intended for re-use in their original forms. Typical uses include automobile dismantling yards, junkyards, and paper salvage yards. 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.400 - Satellite Dish Antenna. 
"Satellite Dish Antenna" means a round parabolic Antenna intended to receive signals from orbiting satellites and other sources. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.401 - School, Vocational. 
"Vocational School" means a specialized instructional establishment that provides on-site training of business, commercial and/or trade skills such as accounting, data processing and computer repair. This classification excludes establishments providing training in an activity that is not otherwise permitted in the zone. Incidental instructional services in conjunction with another primary use shall not be considered a business and trade school. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.402 - Screening. 
"Screening" means a method of visually sealing, concealing and effectively hiding from view a Structure or Use from another Structure or Use by a Fence, Wall, Hedge, Berm or similar architectural or landscape feature. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.404 - Setback. 
"Setback" means the required minimum horizontal distance between the Building line and the related front, side or rear Property line. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.405 - Shopping Center or Industrial Center. 
"Shopping Center" or "Industrial Center" means a unit group of buildings used for commercial and/or industrial purposes together with open space and vehicle parking areas where the occupants of the buildings and their customers have a joint right to use the open space and vehicle parking areas. 
(Ord. No. O-01-13, § 5, 5-7-2013)  
18.04.406 - Sign. 
"Sign" means any method of display or Part thereof, for visual communication that Shall include any announcement, declaration, display, illustration or Insignia, which is Used to advertise or promote the interests of any Person, Business or enterprise. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.408 - Sign Structure. 
"Sign Structure" means any Structure which supports or is capable or supporting any Sign. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.409 - Single-Room Occupancy Facility. 
"Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Facility" means multi-unit housing for extremely low- or very low-income persons that typically consists of a single room and shared bath and also may include a shared common kitchen and common activity area. SROs may be restricted to seniors or be available to persons of all ages. Subsidized versions may be supervised by a government housing agency. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.409.1 - Single Housekeeping Unit. 
"Single Housekeeping Unit" means the functional equivalent of a traditional family, whose members are an interactive group of persons jointly occupying a single dwelling unit, including the joint use of and responsibility for common areas, and sharing household activities and responsibilities (e.g., meals, chores, household maintenance, expenses, etc.) and where, if the unit is rented, all adult residents have chosen to jointly occupy the entire premises of the dwelling unit, under a single written lease with joint use and responsibility for the premises, and the makeup of the household occupying the unit is determined by the residents of the unit rather than the landlord or property manager. 
(Ord. No. O-06-14, § 3, 5-22-2014)  
18.04.410 - Site Plan. 
"Site Plan" means a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all Buildings, Structures, Uses and principal site Development features proposed for a specific Parcel of land. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.412 - Slope. 
"Slope" means the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degrees. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.414 - Solar Collector. 
"Solar Collector" means a fixed device or Structure or Part of a device or Structure, which is Used primarily to transform solar energy into thermal, chemical or electrical energy. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.416 - State. 
"State" means the State of California. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.418 - Story. 
"Story" means a space in a Building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, then the space between such floor and the ceiling or roof above. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.420 - Street. 
"Street" means a public thoroughfare or Right-of-Way dedicated, deeded or condemned for Use as such, other than an Alley, which affords the principal means of Access to abutting Property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, Highway, road and any other thoroughfare. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.422 - Street Centerline. 
"Street Centerline" means the centerline of a Street or Right-of-Way as established in official Surveys. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.424 - Street Line. 
"Street Line" means the boundary line between Street and abutting Property. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.426 - Street, Local. 
"Local Street" means any Street serving as the principal means of Access to Property, other than a major or secondary Highway or major traffic Street. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.428 - Street, Side. 
"Side Street" means that Street bounding a Corner Lot and which extends in the same general direction as the line determining the depth of the Lot. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.430 - Structural Alterations. 
"Structural Alterations" means any change in the supporting members of a Building, such as a bearing Wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joists, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles, or retaining Walls or similar Components. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.432 - Structure. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or built, an edifice or Building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of Parts jointed together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground or is Attached to something having a location on the ground. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.434 - Subdivision. 
"Subdivision" means the division of a Lot, tract or Parcel of land into two or more Lots, tracts, Parcels or other divisions of land for Sale, Development or lease. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.435 - Swap Meets (indoor and outdoor). 
"Swap Meets" means any event where new or secondhand goods are offered or displayed for sale or exchange by ten or more independent vendors and at least one of the following: (i) a fee is charged by a Swap Meet operator for the privilege of offering or displaying new or secondhand goods for sale or exchange; or (ii) a fee is charged to prospective buyers for admission to the area where new or secondhand goods are offered or displayed for sale or exchange. An independent Swap Meet vendor is any individual, partnership, corporation, business association or other person or entity who is not an employee of the owner or lessee of the subject building. The provisions of this section Shall not apply to a retail store or shop in a "Shopping Center" or in an "Industrial Center" as defined in Section 18.04.405, unless that store or shop is being used as the location of a Swap Meet as defined above. 
(Ord. No. O-01-13, § 6, 5-7-2013)  
18.04.435.1 - Supportive Housing. 
"Supportive Housing" has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 65582(f) of the Government Code. Supportive housing is a residential use of property that is subject only to the same standards and procedures as apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-06-14, § 3, 5-22-2014)  
18.04.435.2 - Therapeutic Services. 
"Therapeutic Services" are defined as massage, acupressure, acupuncture or similar body therapy treatments intended to benefit health. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013)  
18.04.436 - Transient. 
"Transient" means a Person who requests accommodation for a price, with or without meals, for a period of not more than one hundred eighty Days. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.438 - Transient Habitation. 
"Transient Habitation" means Establishments primarily engaged in the provisions of lodging service on a less than weekly basis with Incidental food, drink and other Sales and services intended for the convenience of Guests. Typical Uses include Hotels, Motels and Recreational Vehicle Parks. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.438.1 - Transitional Housing. 
"Transitional housing" has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 65582(h) of the Government Code and Section 50675.2 of the Health and Safety Code. Transitional housing is a residential use of property that is subject only to the same standards and procedures as apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(2)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-06-14, § 3, 5-22-2014)  
18.04.438.2 - Truck. 
"Truck" shall mean any motor vehicle with a length over twenty feet, excluding buses and recreational vehicles. For purposes of this title, this shall include trailers designed for transportation of goods, mobilehomes, aircraft, construction equipment, farm equipment and boats. 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.438.3 - Truck Parking. 
"Truck Parking" means the same as "Truck and Trailer Storage". 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.438.4 - Truck Rental. 
"Truck rental" means the rental of trucks, as defined by this Title. 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.438.5 - Truck Repair. 
"Truck Repair" means repair of motor Vehicles as well as the Sale, installation and servicing of truck equipment and Parts together with body repair, painting, engine steam cleaning and welding. 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.438.6 - Truck Sales. 
"Truck sales" means sale, retail or wholesale of trucks. 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.438.7 - Truck Servicing. 
"Truck Servicing" means fueling, washing and polishing, installation and servicing of truck equipment and Parts including Minor tuneups, battery charging, tube and tire repairs and truck washes, but excluding body work, engine overhauling and other similar activities. 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.439.1 - Truck and Trailer Storage. 
"Truck and Trailer Storage" means the storage or parking of any truck and/or towable (trailer) designed primarily for transportation of goods temporarily or for extended periods of time either as a primary or accessory use. For the purposes of this title, truck and trailer storage shall not include trucks or trailers parked or stored within approved loading zones of an approved building. 
(Ord. No. O-03-15, § 3, 3-3-2015; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 3, 12-18-2018)  
18.04.439.2 - Twenty-Four-Hour Retail or Restaurant Operations. 
"Twenty-Four-Hour Retail or Restaurant Operations" means any retail outlet or restaurant, including fast food and drive-thru restaurant, which operates continuously for one or more twenty-four-hour period during a single week. 
(Ord. No. O-01-13, § 7, 5-7-2013; Ord. No. O-03-15, § 3, 3-3-2015)  
18.04.440 - Use. 
"Use" means the purpose for which land or a Building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or Building is or May be occupied or maintained. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.442 - Utility Distribution Facilities. 
"Utility Distribution Facilities" means utilities which are necessary to support principal Development and involve only Minor Structures such as lines and poles. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.444 - Utility Operations Facilities. 
"Utility Operations Facilities" means facilities involved in the operation of various public and quasi-public utilities such as telephone switchboard center, electrical generating plants and Terminals, Sewage treatment plants and water pumping stations or reservoirs. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.446 - Valuation. 
"Valuation" means the estimated cost to replace the Building in kind, based on current replacement cost. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.448 - Variance. 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the substantive provisions of this title due to special circumstances applicable to the Property. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.450 - Visual Obstruction. 
"Visual Obstruction" means any combination of fencing, Hedges, trees, shrubs and Walls which limit the visibility of Persons at intersecting or intercepting Streets and Alleys between three feet and ten feet above the ground measured in vertical plane of the Sidewalk area. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.452 - Wall. 
"Wall" means any Structure or device forming physical barrier, which is so constructed that fifty percent or more of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of light, air and vision through said surface in horizontal plane. This Shall also include concrete Block, wood or other Materials that are solid and are so assembled as to form a solid barrier. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.454 - Warehousing. 
"Warehousing" means the Use of a Building or Buildings primarily for the storage of Goods of any type, but excluding bulk storage of Materials which are flammable or explosive or which create Hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.456 - Wholesaling. 
"Wholesaling" means the Use engaged primarily in the selling of any type of Goods for purpose of resale, including Incidental storage and distribution. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.458 - Yard. 
"Yard" means an Open Space other than a Court, on a Lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.460 - Yard, Front. 
"Front Yard" means a Yard extending the full width of the Lot between the Front Lot Line and line parallel thereto and passing through the nearest point of the Building; provided, that if future Street Right-of-Way has been established, such measurement Shall be from the future Right-of-Way line. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.462 - Yard, Rear. 
"Rear Yard" means Yard extending the full width of the Lot between the Rear Lot Line and line parallel thereto. For Through Lots, if a future Street Right-of-Way has been established, such measurement Shall be from the future Right-of-Way line. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.464 - Yard, Side. 
"Side Yard" means a Yard between the Side Lot Line and a line parallel thereto and extending from the Front Yard to the Rear Yard. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.466 - Zoning Map. 
"Zoning Map" means the Official Zoning Map of the City of Colton. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.04.468 - Zoning Ordinance. 
"Zoning Ordinance" means the comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Colton. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.06 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exhs. B, C), adopted August 2, 2016, repealed the former chapter 18.06, §§ 18.06.010—18.06.060, and enacted a new chapter 18.06 as set out herein. The former chapter 18.06 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
18.06.010 - Designation of Land Use Zones. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this title, the City is divided into eighteen Zones designated as follows: 
Symbol 	Zone Name 
V-L 	Very-Low Density Residential Zone 
R-1 	Low Density Residential Zone 
R-2 	Medium Density Residential Zone 
R-3 	Multiple-Family Residential Zone 
R-4 	Multiple Family Residential Zone 
C-1 	Neighborhood Commercial Zone 
C-2 	General Commercial Zone 
C-2/D 	General Commercial—Downtown Overlay Zone 
M-U/D 	Mixed-Use—Downtown Zone 
M-U/N 	Mixed-Use—Neighborhood Zone 
I-P 	Industrial Park Zone 
M-1 	Light Industrial Zone 
M-2 	Heavy Industrial Zone 
O-S/R 	Open Space Recreational 
O-S/Res 	Open Space Resources 
P-I 	Public/Institution Zone 
R-U 	Railroad/Utility/ROW Zone 
SDA 	Sensitive Development Area Overlay Zone 
R-O 	Residential Overlay 
SP 	Specific Plan Zone 
 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.06.020 - Official Zoning Map. 
The boundaries of the Zones listed in Section 18.06.010 are shown on a map referenced herein to and made a Part of this title, Designated as the "Official Zoning Map." This map and all the notations, references and other information shown on it Shall be considered as a Part of this title. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exhs. B, C), 8-2-2016)  
18.06.030 - Filing of Zoning Map. 
The original of the Official Zoning Map, Shall be kept on file with the Community Development Department and shall constitute the original record. A Copy of said map shall also be maintained by the Department. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exhs. B, C), 8-2-2016)  
18.06.040 - Uncertainty as to boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any Zone as shown on the Zoning Map, the Director of the Community Development Department Shall determine the boundaries with the Application of the Following guidelines: 
A.  Street, Alley or Lot Lines. 
1.  Where indicated Zone boundaries are approximately Street, Alley or Lot Lines, such lines are determined to be the boundaries of the Zone. Otherwise, the boundaries shall be determined by the dimensions shown on the map. In the absence of a dimension, the boundary shall be determined by Use of the scale shown on the map. 
2.  A Street, Alley, Railroad or Railway Right-of-Way, Watercourse, channel or body of water included on the Zoning Map Shall, unless otherwise indicated, be included within the Zone of adjoining Property on either side thereof; and where such Street, Alley, Right-of-Way, Watercourse, channel or body of water serves as boundary between two or more different Zones, a line midway in such Street, Alley, Right-of-Way, etc., extending in the general direction of the long dimension thereof Shall be considered the boundary between Zones. 
B.  Further Uncertainties. Where further uncertainties exist, the Commission shall, by Written Decision, determine the location of the Zone boundary or Building Setback Line. 
C.  Vacations. In the event that a vacated Street, Alley, Right-of-Way or Easement was the boundary between two Zones, the new Zone boundaries shall be at the new Property line. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.06.050 - Amendments to Zoning Map. 
All amendments and changes in the Official Zoning Map shall be recorded at the end of each fiscal year on additional Official Zoning Maps and all individual amendments shall be recorded by the Community Development Director not later than forty-eight hours after such amendment becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.06.060 - Uses Permitted in each Zone. 
A.  Allowed Uses. Generally, a land use is either allowed by right, allowed through issuance of a conditional use permit, or not permitted. In addition to the requirements for planning permits or entitlements listed herein, other permits and entitlements may be required prior to establishment of the use (e.g., Building Permit or permits required by other agencies). The requirements for planning permits or entitlements identified in Tables: 18.06.060-E, 18.06.060-F and 18.06.060-G below include: 
1.  Permitted (P). A land use shown with a "P" indicates that the land use is permitted by right in the designated zoning district, subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this Title (e.g., development standards) as well state and federal law. 
2.  Conditionally Permitted (C). A land use shown with a "C" or "MC" indicates that the land use is permitted in the designated zoning district upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit or Minor Conditional Use Permit, respectively, from the designated approving authority, subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this Zoning Code (e.g., development standards) as well as state and federal law. 
3.  Not Permitted (N). A land use shown with an "N" is not allowed in the applicable zoning district. 
4.  Adult Use Development Permit (A). A land use shown with an "A" indicates that the land use is permitted in the designated zoning district upon issuance of an Adult Use Development Permit from the Planning Commission subject to compliance with all provisions of Chapter 18.49 of this Zoning Code. 
5.  The conformity to the property Development Standards of this title may include the provisions of required walls, landscaping, parking, trash enclosures, street improvements, aesthetic improvements and all other Improvements determined by the Development Services Director to be necessary or required by any regulating ordinance for a particular use. 
6.  Permitted within Marijuana Cultivation Candidate Sites Overlay Zone (O) upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and other applicable provisions contained in Chapter 18.48.130 of this Title 18. 
B.  Uses Not Listed. Land uses that are not listed in Table 18.06.060-1 below or in the zoning district tables are not allowed, except as otherwise provided for in this Title; Land uses listed in one of the tables but not listed in the table that corresponds to a particular zone are not permitted in that particular zone. 
C.  Illegal Uses. No use that is illegal under local, state, or federal law shall be allowed in any zoning district within the City. 
D.  Special Use Regulations. Additional use regulations for specific land uses, such as Residential or Group Care Facility, are listed in Chapter 18.48 (Special Provisions). 
E. Residential Districts Table 	V-L 	R1 	R2 	R3/R4 
Administrative/Professional Services 	N 	C 1 	C 1 	N 
Animal Boarding 	P 	N 	N 	N 
Assisted Living Facilities 	N 	N 	N 	P 
Boarding, lodging, or rooming houses, pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Cemeteries 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Community Gardens 	N 	P 	P 	P 
Day Care Center Child or Adult 	MC 	MC 	MC 	N 
Dance, Martial Arts, Yoga Studio 	N 	C 1 	C 1 	N 
Dwelling—Compact Lots Subdivision, pursuant to Section 18.48.190 of Title 18. 	N 	N 	C 	P 
Dwelling—Single-Family 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Dwelling—Two-Family 	N 	N 	P 	P 
Dwelling—Multiple-Family 	N 	N 	P 	P 
Dwellings—Cluster Development 	C 	C 	P 	P 
Dwelling—Group 	N 	N 	N 	P 
Educational Institution 	N 	C 	C 	C 
Family Day Care Home—Small 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Family Day Care Home—Large 	MC 	MC 	MC 	C 
Home Occupation pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Manufactured Home, pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Mobilehome Park, pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	N 	N 	C 	C 
Office Ancillary to Multi-Family/Model Home 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Plant Nursery (grown in containers only)), excluding marijuana 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Plant Nursery, marijuana 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Religious Assembly 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Residential or Group Care Facility—Small (serving six or fewer persons) 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Residential or Group Care Facility—Large (serving seven or more persons) 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Utility Distribution Facilities 	P 	P 	P 	P 
1 Only applicable in Downtown Area as shown on Zoning Map. 				
 
F. Commercial Districts Table 	C-1 	C-2 	MU-D 	MU-N 
Administrative/Professional Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Adult Businesses 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Alcoholic Beverage Sales—On- or Off-Site, pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	MC 	MC 	MC 	MC 
Amusement Arcade, pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	N 	P 	C 	C 
Animal Boarding 	N 	C 	N 	N 
Animal Grooming 	N 	P 	P 	P 
Animal Health Care 	N 	MC 	P 	P 
Antique Shops 	P 	P 	P 	N 
Assembly Uses 	C 	C 	C 	N 
Automobile Rental 	N 	C 1 	N 	N 
Automobile Repair 	N 	C 1 	N 	N 
Automobile Sales 	N 	C 1 	N 	N 
Automobile Servicing 	N 	C 	N 	N 
Automobile Storage or Parking 	N 	C 1 	C 	C 
Bar 	N 	C 	C 	N 
Business Support Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Cemeteries 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Communication Services 	N 	P 	P 	P 
Community Recreation 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Construction Sales/Service 	N 	P 	N 	N 
Composting 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Convenience Sales and Service 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Cultural Institutions 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Dance, Martial Arts or Yoga Studio 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Day Care Center Child or Adult 	MC 	MC 	MC 	MC 
Dwelling—Compact Lots Subdivision, pursuant to Section 18.48.190 of Title 18. 	N 	N 	P 	P 
Dwelling—Single Family 	N 	N 	P 	P 
Dwelling—Manufactured Home, pursuant to Section 18.48.060 of this Title 	N 	N 	N 	P 
Dwelling—Multiple-Family 	N 	N 	P 	P 
Dwelling—Live/Work 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Eating/Drinking Establishments, Indoor Only 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Eating/Drinking Establishments with Outdoor Seating 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Eating/Drinking Establishments—Drive-Thru 	C 	C 	C 1 	C 
Educational Institutions and Vocational Schools 	C 	P 	C 	C 
Entertainment Facilities 	C 	P 	P 	P 
Family Day Care Home, Large 	MC 	MC 	MC 	MC 
Family Day Care Home, Small 	P 	N 	P 	P 
Farmers Market, pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Financial Institutions 	N 	P 	P 	P 
Florist 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Fortunetelling, pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	N 	MC 	N 	N 
Funeral Services 	N 	P 	N 	N 
Health and Fitness Club 	N 	P 	P 	P 
Home Occupations, pursuant to Chapter 18.44 of this Title. 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Hospitals 	N 	P 	N 	N 
Hotels and Motels 	N 	C 	C 	N 
Instructional Services 	C 	P 	P 	N 
Laundry services—Heavy 	N 	P 	N 	N 
Laundry services—Light 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Library Services 	MC 	P 	P 	P 
Manufacturing—Custom, pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	N 	P 	N 	N 
Medical/Dental/Optical Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Movie Theaters 	N 	P 	P 	N 
Nightclub 	N 	C 	C 	N 
Personal Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Plant Nursery (grown in containers only), excluding marijuana 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Plant Nursery, marijuana 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Postal Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Recreational Facilities 	N 	P 	P 	P 
Recycling Facilities—Small Collection 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Recycling Facilities—Large Collection 	N 	C 	N 	N 
Recycling Facilities—Reverse Vending Machines 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Recycling Processing Facility—Light 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Recycling Processing Facility—Heavy 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Repair Services 	N 	P 	P 	P 
Resale/Secondhand Stores 	MC 	MC 	MC 	MC 
Research Services 	N 	P 	N 	N 
Retail Sales—Indoors 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Retails Sales—Outdoors 	N 	C 	C 	C 
Single-Room Occupancy Facility 	N 	C 	C 	N 
Swap Meets (Indoor and Outdoor), pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	N 	C 	N 	N 
Therapeutic Services, pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Transportation Facilities—Public. 	C 	P 	P 	P 
Transportation Facilities—Private. 	N 	C 	N 	N 
Truck Rental 	N 	C 1 	N 	N 
Utility Distribution Facilities 	P 	P 	N 	N 
Utility Operations Facilities 	N 	MC 	MC 	N 
Warehousing (accessory use only, maximum fifteen percent of floor area) 	N 	P 	N 	N 
Wholesaling 	N 	P 	N 	N 
Twenty-four-hour Retail or Restaurant Operations, pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	C 	C 	C 	C 
1 Not permitted in General Commercial—Downtown Overlay Zone and Mixed-Use Downtown Zone. 				
 
G. Industrial Districts Table 	I-P 	M-1 	M-2 
Administrative/Professional Services 	P 	P 	P 
Adult Businesses 	N 	N 	A 
Alcoholic Beverage Sales—On- or Off-Site Sale 	MC 	MC 	MC 
Amusement Arcade, pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	P 	P 	P 
Animal Boarding 	N 	N 	P 
Animal Grooming 	P 	P 	P 
Animal Health Care 	P 	P 	P 
Assembly Uses 	C 	C 	P 
Automobile Impound Yard 	N 	N 	C 
Automobile Rental 	C 	C 	P 
Automobile Repair 	C 	C 	P 
Automobile Sales 	C 	C 	P 
Automobile Servicing 	C 	C 	P 
Automobile Storage or Parking 	C 	C 	C 
Business Support Services 	P 	P 	P 
Cemeteries 	N 	C 	P 
Communication Services 	P 	P 	P 
Community Recreation 	P 	P 	P 
Construction Sales/Service 	P 	P 	P 
Composting, Mulching and Related Green Waste 	N 	C 	C 
Convenience Sales and Service 	P 	P 	P 
Contractors' Storage Yard/Corporation Yards 	N 	C 	C 
Cultural Institutions 	P 	P 	P 
Dance, Martial Arts or Yoga Studio 	P 	P 	N 
Day Care Center Child or Adult 	MC 	N 	N 
Dwelling—Caretaker 	P 	P 	P 
Dwelling—Live/Work 	P 	P 	N 
Eating/Drinking Establishments, Indoor Only 	P 	P 	P 
Eating/Drinking Establishments with Outdoor Seating 	C 	C 	C 
Eating/Drinking Establishments—Drive Thru 	P 	P 	C 
Educational Institutions and Vocational Schools 	P 	P 	P 
Emergency Shelter 	N 	P 	N 
Entertainment Facilities 	P 	P 	N 
Farmers Market, pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	P 	P 	P 
Financial Institutions 	P 	P 	P 
Funeral Services 	P 	P 	P 
Health and Fitness Club 	P 	P 	N 
Hospitals 	P 	P 	P 
Hotels and Motels 	C 	N 	N 
Instructional Services 	P 	P 	P 
Laundry services—Heavy 	P 	P 	P 
Laundry services—Light 	P 	P 	P 
Library Services 	P 	P 	P 
Lodge or Private Club 	C 	C 	C 
Manufacturing—Custom 	P 	P 	P 
Manufacturing—Light 	P 	P 	P 
Manufacturing—Heavy 	N 	N 	P 
Marijuana Cultivation, Indoor (see Chapter 18.48.130 of this Title 18) 	O 	O 	O 
Marijuana Cultivation, Outdoor 	N 	N 	N 
Marijuana Testing Facility (see Chapter 18.48.130 of this Title 18) 	C 	C 	C 
Medical/Dental/Optical Services 	P 	P 	P 
Miniwarehouse 	C 	C 	P 
Personal Services 	P 	P 	P 
Plant Nurseries (grown in containers), excluding marijuana 	P 	P 	P 
Plant Nurseries (grown in soil), excluding marijuana 	C 	C 	C 
Postal Services 	P 	P 	P 
Public Maintenance Services 	P 	P 	P 
Recreational Facilities 	P 	P 	P 
Recreational Vehicle Parks 	C 	N 	N 
Recycling Facilities—Small Collection 	P 	P 	P 
Recycling Facilities—Large Collection 	C 	C 	C 
Recycling Facilities—Reverse Vending Machines 	P 	P 	P 
Recycling Processing Facility—Light 	N 	C 	C 
Recycling Processing Facility—Heavy 	N 	N 	C 
Repair Services 	P 	P 	P 
Research Services 	P 	P 	P 
Retail Sales—Indoor 	P 	P 	P 
Retail Sales—Outdoor 	C 	C 	C 
Salvage Operations 	N 	N 	C 
Swap Meets (Indoor and Outdoor), pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	C 	C 	C 
Transportation Facilities—Public 	P 	P 	P 
Transportation Facilities—Private 	C 	P 	P 
Truck Rental 	C 	C 	C 
Truck Repair 	N 	C 	C 
Truck Sales 	N 	C 	C 
Truck Servicing 	N 	C 	C 
Truck and Trailer Storage or Parking 	N 	C 	C 
Utility Distribution Facilities 	P 	P 	P 
Utility Operations Facilities 	N 	N 	P 
Warehousing 	P 	P 	P 
Warehousing with Truck Storage, as defined by CMC 18.04.439.1 	C 	C 	C 
Wholesaling 	P 	P 	P 
Twenty-four-hour Retail or Restaurant Operations, pursuant to Chapter 18.48 of this Title. 	C 	C 	C 
Other such uses that the Director or designee may find to be similar with those uses previously listed, pursuant to Section 18.060.060 K. 
 
H. Open Space Districts Table 	O-S Recreation 	O-S Resources 
Basins for Groundwater Recharge 	N 	P 
Cemeteries 	N 	C 
Equestrian Uses 	MC 	MC 
Flood Control Facilities 	N 	P 
Flood Plains 	N 	P 
Habitat Conservation Areas 	N 	P 
Nature Preserves 	N 	P 
Passive Recreation Areas (public and private) 	P 	MC 
Permanent Open Space 	N 	P 
Private Parks 	C 	N 
Private Recreational 	C 	N 
Public Parks 	P 	N 
Recreational Activity Fields, including but not limited to private or public golf courses 	P 	C 
Trails (public and private) 	P 	C 
Other such uses that the Director or designee may find to be similar with those uses previously listed, pursuant to Section 18.060.060 K. 
 
I. Public/Institutional District Table 	Public/ 
Institutional 
Zone 
Affordable Housing owned by City Housing Authority or other public entity 	P 
Cemeteries 	P 
Civic Center and City Hall 	P 
Community Recreation 	P 
Fire Stations 	P 
Flood Control Facilities 	P 
Flood Plains 	P 
Hospitals 	P 
Library Services 	P 
Parks 	P 
Postal Services 	P 
Public Maintenance Services 	P 
Public Safety Facilities (Police and Fire Stations) 	P 
Public Schools 	P 
Public Transportation Facilities 	P 
Recreation Activity Fields (public only), including golf courses 	P 
Recreation Uses (public only) 	P 
Trails 	P 
Utility Operations and/or Distribution Facilities 	P 
All facilities, including buildings and grounds, owned by the City, County, State of California, the United States government, a school district, library district, water district, sanitary district, or other type of public service district 	P 
Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site with and necessary for the operation of a permitted use 	P 
Other such uses that the Director or designee may find to be similar with those uses previously listed, pursuant to Section 18.060.060 K. 
 
J. Railroad/Utility Corridor Table 	Railroad/Utility 
Corridor 
Zone 
Community Gardens within Utility Corridor 	P 
Flood Plains 	P 
Public Transportation Facilities 	P 
Railroads 	P 
Trails 	P 
Utility Operations and/or Distribution Facility 	
Incidental and accessory equipment and uses located on the same site with and necessary for the operation of a permitted use 	P 
Other such uses that the Director or designee may find to be similar with those uses previously listed, pursuant to Section 18.060.060 K. 
 
K.  Similar Uses Permitted. When a use is not specifically listed in this Zoning Code, it shall be understood that the use may be permitted if it is determined by the Director that the use is similar to other uses listed. 
It is further recognized that every conceivable use cannot be identified in this Zoning Code, and anticipating that new uses will evolve over time, this Section establishes the Director's authority to compare a proposed use and measure it against those listed in this Zoning Code and the Standard Industrial Classification Manual for determining similarity. The Director may administer a fee via the Code Interpretation Letter in accordance with the most current adopted fee schedule. 
1.  In determining "similarity," the Director shall consider all of the following: 
a.  The proposed use meets the intent of, and is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan; and 
b.  The proposed use meets the stated purpose and general intent of the district in which the use is proposed to be located; and 
c.  The proposed use will not adversely impact the public health, safety and general welfare of the City's residents; and 
d.  The proposed use shares characteristics common with, and not be of greater intensity, density or generate more environmental impact, than those uses listed in the land use district in which it is to be located. 
2.  Appeal. Any determination of similarity shall be final ten days after the date the Director's decision letter is issued, unless an appeal to the Planning Commission is filed and fees paid pursuant to adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. O-11-16, § 3, 8-2-2016; Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016; Ord. No. O-11-17, § 2(Exh. A), 12-5-2017; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 4, 12-18-2018)  
Chapter 18.08 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(4)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed chapter 18.08, §§ 18.08.010—18.08.190, which pertained to A Agricultural Zone and derived from Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992.  
Chapter 18.10 - V-L VERY-LOW RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
18.10.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The V-L Zone is characterized by single-family detached homes on large, individual lots in areas where terrain, access, and the presence of natural resources may limit the extent to which development can occur. This designation applies generally to hillside areas, such as La Loma Hills, the Pellissier Ranch area, and Reche Canyon. Within this designation, clustering of dwelling units may be allowed through a discretionary permit process to limit grading and provide opportunities to preserve natural open space. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(5)), 10-10-2013)  
18.10.020 - Uses Generally. 
In the V-L Zone, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the purpose set out in Section 18.10.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(5)), 10-10-2013)  
18.10.030 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table E in Section 18.06.060 E. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(5)), 10-10-2013)  
18.10.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(5)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed § 18.10.040, which pertained to Conditional Uses and derived from Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992; Ord. No. O-01-10, § 9, 3-2-2010.  
18.10.050 - Property Development Standards. 
The following property development standards, set out in Sections 18.10.050-1 through 18.10.160200, shall apply to all land and buildings in the V-L Zone. 
18.10.050-1 Property Development Standards Tables 
Building Placement 	Table 1 	
A. Minimum Lot Size 	20,000 square feet 1 	1. Main Building2. Accessory Building3. Swimming Pool  
B. Minimum Lot Width 	100 feet 1 	
C. Minimum Lot Depth 	120 feet 1 	
D. Minimum Front Yard Setback 	35 feet 1 	
E. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks 	10% of lot width not exceeding 15 feet 1, 2, 3 	
F. Minimum Corner Side Yard Setback 	15 feet 1 	
G. Minimum Rear Yard Setback 	25 feet 1, 2 	
H. Separation Between Buildings 	6 feet 1, 3, 5 	
I. Max. Lot Coverage 	20% of lot area 1 	
J. Dwelling Units per Acre 	.01—2.0 DU/AC 	
K. Minimum Dwelling Unit Size 	2,000 square feet 1 	
L. Maximum Building Height 	2.5 Stories or 35 feet 	
 
  
1.  May be reduced when clustering homes for hillside development. See "cluster development" definition in Chapter 18.04 (Definitions) and Section 18.10.150 (Hillside Setbacks) of this Title. 
2.  Main buildings and garages opening to an alley shall have a side setback of twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley. 
3.  Main buildings shall have a side setback of five feet from the property line for a corner lot and ten feet from the property line for a Reversed corner lot. 
4.  Plus four feet for each story above the first for a facing wall with openings, and three feet plus one foot for each story above the first for a facing wall without openings. The total separation between two facing walls is the sum of that required for each. 
5.  Buildings linked by a common roof shall not be considered separate. Openings must be located in the wall overlap area in order to count as openings for the purpose of calculating building separation. 
Accessory Structures 	Table 2 
M. Side Setback 	5 feet 
N. Rear Setback 	5 feet 
O. Side Setback two-story 	10 feet 1 
P. Rear Setback two-story 	10 feet 1 
Q. Rear Setback with Alley 	25 feet 2 
R. Lot Coverage 	10% of lot area 
 
  
1.  Non-Residential and Residential. 
2.  Garage openings facing alley shall have a rear setback measured from opposite side of the alley. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(5)), 10-10-2013)  
18.10.060 - Building Projections. 
Building projections into yard areas are permitted as follows: 
Projection Standard Table 3 
Front Setback 	Fire escapes, unenclosed and uncovered stairways, unenclosed patios, porches, cornices, Eaves, sills and similar architectural features, which may project up to five feet into the setback. 
 Balconies and fireplaces having a maximum linear dimension of eight feet may project up to thirty inches into the setback. 
Side Setbacks 	Fireplaces having a maximum linear dimension of eight feet and eaves may project two feet into the setback. 
Rear Setbacks 	Fire escapes, unenclosed and uncovered stairways, porches, cornices, eaves, sills and similar architectural features which may project up to five feet into the setback. 
 Balconies and fireplaces having a maximum linear dimension of eight feet may project up to thirty inches into the required setback. 
 Attached unenclosed patios with no freestanding walls may extend up to ten feet into the required setback. 
Swimming Pools and Spas 	Five feet from any lot line, and may only be placed in the rear yard area. 
 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(5)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 5, 12-18-2018)  
18.10.070—18.10.140. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(5)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed §§ 18.10.070—18.10.140, which pertained to Lot dimensions, Density of Development, Maximum coverage, Minimum Dwelling size, Building Height, Front Setback, Side Setback, and Rear Setback and derived from Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992.  
18.10.150 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-03-15, § 7, Mar. 3, 2015, repealed § 18.10.150, which pertained to hillside setbacks and derived from Ord. No. O-14-92, § 1(Exh. A)(part), 1992.  
18.10.160, 18.10.170. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(5)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed §§ 18.10.160, 18.10.170, which pertained to Accessory buildings and Separation between Buildings and derived from Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992.  
18.10.180 - Parking Requirements. 
A.  There Shall not be less than two Parking Spaces in the form of a garage for every Dwelling Unit, with dimensions of not less than ten feet in width and twenty feet in depth. The required Parking Spaces Shall be provided on the same Lot as the Main Building, and Shall be independently accessible with a minimum of twenty-five feet of unobstructed space provided for the maneuvering of Vehicles. 
B.  There Shall be paved vehicular Access to the Off-Street Parking Facilities, with a Driveway not less than ten feet wide and not encumbered by a Projection to a height under eight feet above Grade. 
C.  For a boarding, lodging, or rooming house in the V-L Zone, there Shall be no less than one Parking Space per room or suite, or one space per two beds, whichever is greater. 
D.  No covered or uncovered tandem parking is permitted for parking credit. Each credited parking space shall be so designed that a car need not be moved to gain access to or from any other parking space. 
E.  All driveways and parking areas shall be surfaced or paved with concrete, asphalt, or other non-permeable material to create continuous path with no unpaved areas. 
F.  Driveways in front yards for garages, carports, or approved parking spaces which are adjacent to the front yard shall not exceed the width of the garage, carport, or approved parking space. All other driveways in front yards shall not exceed twelve feet in width. 
G.  Additional paved areas in front yards for parking adjacent to a driveway may be permitted where it does not exceed twenty percent of the front yard area, not including the driveway. 
H.  Parking of vehicles is prohibited in landscape or unpaved areas. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-01-10, § 5, 3-2-2010; Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(5)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 6, 12-18-2018)  
18.10.185 - Mechanical Equipment. 
A.  All heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment, including ducts, meters, plumbing lines and tanks, shall be architecturally screened from public view, with the use of masonry walls when mounted at grade. Roof mounted equipment is prohibited, except with the use of parapet walls when mounted on flat roof. 
B.  Plumbing vent pipes, all heater flues and all roof penetrations shall be gathered and concealed from view in the same manner. 
C.  All new mechanical equipment shall meet the same zoning setback requirement applicable to the building or structure served. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(5)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 7, 12-18-2018)  
18.10.190 - Landscaping. 
A.  Landscaping shall be provided in areas between the building line and the front or street side property lines, except for driveways to approved designated parking spaces and areas screened by a permitted solid fence or wall least six feet high. Additional paving for walkways may be allowed not to exceed four feet, or not to exceed one hundred twenty-five square feet, whichever is greater. 
B.  Drought-resistant landscaping shall be provided for the development of any lot. Landscaping shall conform to the standards of Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance contained in Chapter 13.30 of the Municipal Code when applicable. 
C.  Within the minimum required front setback area, no less than fifty percent of this area shall consist of live plants as ground cover and no more than forty percent shall consist of permeable hardscape ground cover material, such as bark, mulch, wood, stones, rocks, decomposed granite, or decorative colored (non-grey) gravel. In addition, two twenty-four-inch box trees shall be provided in the same area, the type of tree to be determined by the Planning Division. 
D.  The required Landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean, safe, orderly and healthful condition. 
E.  The landscaped areas shall be provided with a suitable permanent method for watering or sprinkling of plants. Wherever possible, the watering system shall utilize the least amount of water. Sprinklers Used to satisfy the requirements of this provision shall be so spaced as to assure complete coverage of the landscaped area. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 8, 12-18-2018)  
18.10.200 - Architectural Compatibility. 
The exterior design of Structures Shall be compatible with the surrounding architecture, in order to preserve neighborhood integrity and promote architectural consistency within the City. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.12 - R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
18.12.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The R-1 Low Density Residential Zone is characterized generally by single-family detached homes on individual lots that form a cohesive neighborhood, residential subdivisions in this category are similar to those found in many of Colton's established residential tracts. Within this designation, clustering of dwelling units may be allowed through discretionary permit process to provide additional opportunity for a diversity of housing types and architectural styles and common open space areas. New development must be compatible and similar in character to the surrounding residential neighborhoods within this designation. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(6)), 10-10-2013)  
18.12.020 - Uses Generally. 
In the R-1 Zone, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the purpose set out in Section 18.12.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(6)), 10-10-2013)  
18.12.030 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table E in Section 18.06.060 E. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(6)), 10-10-2013)  
18.12.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(6)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed § 18.12.040, which pertained to Conditional Uses and derived from Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992; Ord. No. O-01-10, § 10, 3-2-2010.  
18.12.050 - Property Development Standards. 
The following property development standards, set out in Sections 18.12.150-1 through 18.12.190, shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-1 Zone. 
18.12.050-1 Property Development Standards 
Building Placement 	Table 1 	
A. Minimum Lot Size 	7,200 square feet 1 	1 Main Building2 Accessory Building  
B. Minimum Lot Width 	60 feet 1 	
C. Minimum Lot Depth 	100 feet 1 	
D. Minimum Front Yard Setback 	25 feet 1 	
E. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks 	10% of lot width not exceeding 15 feet 1, 2, 3 	
F. Minimum Corner Side Yard Setback 	5 feet 1 	
G. Minimum Rear Yard Setback 	20 feet 1, 2 	
H. Separation Between Buildings 	6 feet 1, 3, 5 	
I. Max. Lot Coverage 	40% of lot area 1 	
J. Dwelling Units per Acre 	2.1—8 DU/AC 	
K. Minimum Dwelling Unit Size 	1,300 square feet 1 	
L. Maximum Building Height 	2.5 Stories or 35 feet 	
 
  
1.  May be reduced when clustering homes for hillside development, subject to discretionary review process. See "cluster development" definition in Chapter 18.04 (Definitions) and Section 18.10.150 (Hillside Setbacks) of this Title. 
2.  Main buildings and garages opening to an alley shall have a setback of at least twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley. 
3.  Main buildings shall have a side setback of ten feet from the property line for a reversed corner lot. 
4.  Plus four feet for each story above the first for a facing wall with openings, and three feet plus one foot for each story above the first for a facing wall without openings. The total separation between two facing walls is the sum of that required for each. 
5.  Buildings linked by a common roof shall not be considered separate. Openings must be located in the wall overlap area in order to count as openings for the purpose of calculating building separation. 
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 	TABLE 2 
M. Side Setback one story 	5 feet 
N. Rear Setback one story 	5 feet 1 
O. Side Setback two story 	10 feet 1 
P. Rear Setback two story 	10 feet 1 
Q. Rear Setback with Alley 	25 feet 2 
R. Lot Coverage 	10% of lot area 
 
1.  Non-Residential and Residential. 
2.  Garage openings facing alley shall have a rear setback measured from opposite side of the alley. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992; Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(6)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-03-15, § 8, 3-3-2015; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 9, 12-18-2018)  
18.12.060 - Building Projections. 
Building projections into yard areas are permitted as follows: 
Projection Standard Table 3 
Front Setback 	Fire escapes, unenclosed and uncovered stairways, unenclosed patios, porches, cornices, Eaves, sills and similar architectural features, which may project up to five feet into the setback. 
 Balconies and fireplaces having a maximum linear dimension of eight feet may project up to thirty inches into the setback. 
 Carports Carports pursuant to CMC 18.12.170.B. 
Side Setbacks 	Fireplaces having a maximum linear dimension of eight feet and eaves may project two feet into the setback. 
Rear Setbacks 	Fire escapes, unenclosed and uncovered stairways, porches, cornices, eaves, sills and similar architectural features which may project up to five feet into the setback. 
 Balconies and fireplaces having a maximum linear dimension of eight feet may project up to thirty inches into the required setback. 
 Attached unenclosed patios with no freestanding walls may extend up to ten feet into the required setback. 
Swimming Pools and Spas 	Five feet from any lot line, and may only be placed in the rear yard area. 
 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992; Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(6)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-10A-16, § 3, 7-5-2016; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 10, 12-18-2018)  
18.12.065 - Hillside Setbacks. 
Refer to Hillside Setbacks in Section 18.10.150. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(6)), 10-10-2013)  
18.12.070—18.12.160 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(6)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed §§ 18.12.070—18.12.160, which pertained to Lot dimensions, Density of Development, Maximum coverage, Minimum Dwelling size, Building Height, Front Setback, Side Setback, Rear Setback, Accessory Buildings, Separation between Buildings and derived from Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992.  
18.12.170 - Parking requirements. 
A.  There shall be no less than two parking spaces in the form of a garage for every dwelling unit, with dimensions of not less than ten feet in width and twenty feet in depth. The required parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the main building, and shall be independently accessible with unobstructed space provided for the maneuvering of Vehicles. Vehicles maneuvering area shall comply with appropriate vehicular turning radius as specified by the Director for appropriate driveway width. 
B.  For existing dwelling units with an existing one-car garage, and less than two onsite parking spaces as required by Section 18.12.170(A), a maximum of one parking space shall be required in the form of a garage or carport. A carport may project up to twenty feet into the front setback but not less than three feet from the front property line. The carport shall be constructed to California Building Code standards, and fabricated of durable materials and colors that are compatible with the existing single family home and garage located on the parcel. The width of the carport and/or garage shall not be greater than the width of the existing garage, and the height of the carport and/or garage shall be limited to twelve feet. 
C.  There Shall be paved vehicular Access to the Off-Street Parking Facilities, with a Driveway not less than ten feet wide and not encumbered by a Projection to height under eight feet above Grade. 
D.  For a boarding, lodging, or rooming house in the R-1 Zone, there Shall be no less than one Parking Space per room or suite, or one space per two beds, whichever is greater. 
E.  No covered or uncovered tandem parking is permitted for parking credit. Each credited parking space shall be so designed that a car need not be moved to gain access to or from any other parking space. 
F.  All driveways and parking areas shall be surfaced or paved with concrete, asphalt, or other non-permeable material to create continuous path with no unpaved areas. 
G.  Driveways in front yards for garages, carports, or approved parking spaces which are adjacent to the front yard shall not exceed the width of the garage, carport, or approved parking space. All other driveways in front yards shall not exceed twelve feet. 
H.  Additional paved areas in front yards for parking adjacent to a driveway may be permitted where it does not exceed 20 percent of the front yard area, not including the driveway. 
I.  Parking of vehicles is prohibited in landscape or unpaved areas. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-01-10, § 6, 3-2-2010; Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(6)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-10A-16, § 4, 7-5-2016; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 11, 12-18-2018)  
18.12.175 - Mechanical Equipment. 
A.  All heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment, including ducts, meters, plumbing lines and tanks, shall be architecturally screened from public view, with the use of masonry walls when mounted at grade. Roof mounted equipment is prohibited, except with the use of parapet walls when mounted on flat roof. 
B.  Plumbing vent pipes, all heater flues and all roof penetrations shall be gathered and concealed from view in the same manner. 
C.  All new mechanical equipment shall meet the same zoning setback requirement applicable to the building or structure served. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(6)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 12, 12-18-2018)  
18.12.180 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-12-18, § 13, adopted Dec. 18, 2018, repealed former § 18.12.180 in its entirety which pertained to landscaping and derived from Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), adopted in 1992.  
18.12.190 - Landscaping. 
A.  Landscaping shall be provided in areas between the building line and the front or street side property lines, except for driveways to approved designated parking spaces and areas screened by a permitted solid fence or wall least six feet high. Additional paving for walkways may be allowed not to exceed four feet, or not to exceed one hundred twenty-five square feet, whichever is greater. 
B.  Drought-resistant landscaping shall be provided for the development of any lot. Landscaping shall conform to the standards of Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance contained in Chapter 13.30 of the Municipal Code when applicable. 
C.  Within the minimum required front setback area, no less than fifty percent of this area shall consist of live plants as ground cover and no more than forty percent shall consist of permeable hardscape ground cover material, such as bark, mulch, wood, stones, rocks, decomposed granite, or decorative colored (non-grey) gravel. In addition, two twenty-four-inch box trees shall be provided in the same area, the type of tree to be determined by the Planning Division. 
D.  The required Landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean, safe, orderly and healthful condition. 
E.  The landscaped areas shall be provided with a suitable permanent method for watering or sprinkling of plants. Wherever possible, the watering system Shall utilize the least amount of water. Sprinklers Used to satisfy the requirements of this provision shall be so spaced as to assure complete coverage of the landscaped area. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(6)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 14, 12-18-2018)  
Chapter 18.14 - R2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL 
 
18.14.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The R-2 Medium Density Residential Zone is intended to allow detached and attached units, townhouses, and condominiums. Development is characterized generally by detached and attached single family homes on small lots, alley-loaded homes, duplexes, triplexes, condominiums, and townhouses with common open space and small private patios or yards. Other uses such as mobile home parks and schools are permitted subject to Conditional Use Permit consistent with the City's R-2 zone regulations. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(7)), 10-10-2013)  
18.14.020 - Uses Generally. 
In the R-2 Zone, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the purpose set out in Section 18.14.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(7)), 10-10-2013)  
18.14.030 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table E in Section 18.06.060 E. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(7)), 10-10-2013)  
18.14.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(7)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed § 18.14.040, which pertained to Conditional Uses and derived from Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992; Ord. No. O-01-10, § 11, 3-2-2010.  
18.14.050 - Property Development Standards. 
The following property development standards, set out in Sections 18.14.050-1 through 18.14.230, shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-2 Zone. A reduction in the property development standards may be permitted in the case of the development of housing for senior citizens, through the application of a Conditional Use Permit. 
18.14.050-1 Property Development Standards 
Building Placement 	Table 1 	
A. Minimum Lot Size 	7,200 square feet 1 	1. Main Building2. Accessory Building  
B. Minimum Lot Width 	60 feet 1 	
C. Minimum Lot Depth 	100 feet 1 	
D. Minimum Front Yard Setback 	25 feet 1 	
E. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks 	10% of lot width not exceeding 15 feet 1, 2, 3 	
F. Minimum Corner Side Yard Setback 	5 feet 1 	
G. Minimum Rear Yard Setback 	20 feet 1, 2 	
H. Separation Between Buildings 	6 feet 1, 3 	
I. Max. Lot Coverage 	40% of lot area 1 	
J. Dwelling Units per Acre 	8.1—16 DU/AC 	
K. Minimum Dwelling Unit Size 		
 3 Bedroom, Plus 	1,200 square feet 	
 2 Bedroom 	1,000 square feet 	
 1 Bedroom 	800 square feet 	
 Efficiency/Bachelor 	600 square feet 	
L. Maximum Building Height 	2.5 Stories or 35 feet 	
 
  
1.  May be reduced when clustering homes, subject to discretionary process. 
2.  Main buildings and garages opening to an alley shall have a side Setback of twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley. 
3.  Main buildings shall have a side setback of ten feet from the property line for a reversed corner lot. 
4.  Plus four feet for each story above the first for a facing wall with openings, and three feet plus one foot for each story above the first for a facing wall without openings. The total separation between two facing walls is the sum of that required for each. 
5.  Buildings linked by a common roof shall not be considered separate. Openings must be located in the wall overlap area in order to count as openings for the purpose of calculating building separation. 
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 	TABLE 2 
M. Side Setback one story 	5 feet 
N. Rear Setback one story 	5 feet 
O. Side Setback two story 	10 feet 1 
P. Rear Setback two story 	10 feet 1 
Q. Rear Setback with Alley 	25 feet 2 
R. Lot Coverage 	10% of lot area 
 
  
1.  Non-Residential and Residential. 
2.  Garage openings facing alley shall have a rear setback measured from opposite side of the alley. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(7)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-03-15, § 9, 3-3-2015)  
18.14.060 - Building Projections 
Building projections into yard areas are permitted as follows: 
Projection Standard Table 3 
Front Setback 	Fire escapes, unenclosed and uncovered stairways, unenclosed patios, porches, cornices, Eaves, sills and similar architectural features, which may project up to five feet into the setback. 
 Balconies and fireplaces having a maximum linear dimension of eight feet may project up to thirty inches into the setback. 
Side Setbacks 	Fireplaces having a maximum linear dimension of eight feet and eaves may project two feet into the setback. 
Rear Setbacks 	Fire escapes, unenclosed and uncovered stairways, porches, cornices, eaves, sills and similar architectural features which may project up to five feet into the setback. 
 Balconies and fireplaces having a maximum linear dimension of eight feet may project up to thirty inches into the required setback. 
 Attached unenclosed patios with no freestanding walls may extend up to ten feet into the required setback. 
Swimming Pools and Spas 	Five feet from any lot line, and may only be placed in the rear yard area. 
 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(7)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 15, 12-18-2018)  
18.14.070—18.14.160 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(7)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed §§ 18.14.070—18.14.160, which pertained to Lot dimensions, Density of Development, Maximum coverage, Minimum Dwelling size, Building Height, Front Setback, Side Setback, Rear Setback, Accessory Buildings, Separation between Buildings and derived from Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992.  
18.14.170 - Recreation Space. 
All Developments zone Shall provide a minimum of one square foot of outdoor Recreation Space for every three square feet of gross Floor Area within each Dwelling Unit. 
A.  At least half of the space required Shall be in the form of private Recreation Space, with a minimum dimension of eight feet and a minimum area of one hundred fifty square feet per Dwelling. The private space May be provided in the form of patios, porches, balconies or recessed areas open on at least two sides, and May only be located in the side and Rear Yard areas. 
B.  Common Recreation Space Shall contain a minimum area of five hundred square feet and a minimum dimension of twenty feet. It May be provided in the form of pools, putting greens or recreation Buildings. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.14.180 - Parking Requirements. 
A.  There Shall be not less than two Parking Spaces, in the form of an enclosed garage, for every Dwelling Unit, with dimensions of not less than ten feet in width and twenty feet in depth. The required Parking Spaces Shall be provided on the same Lot as the Main Building, and Shall be independently accessible with unobstructed space provided for the maneuvering of Vehicles. Vehicles maneuvering area shall comply with appropriate vehicular turning radius as specified by the Director for appropriate driveway width. 
B.  There Shall be paved vehicular Access to the Off-Street Parking Facilities, with a Driveway not less than twelve feet wide and not encumbered by a Projection to a height under eight feet above Grade. 
C.  Every parking stall adjoined on one or both sides of its length by a curb, face, wall partition, column, post or similar obstruction, that is located less than four feet from an access aisle measured along the length of the stall or continues to form the end of an access aisle, Shall have a minimum width of 11.5 feet. 
D.  For a boarding, lodging, or rooming house in the R-2 Zone, there Shall be no less than one parking space per room or suite, or one space per two beds, whichever is greater. 
E.  All driveways and parking areas shall be surfaced or paved with concrete, asphalt, or other non-permeable material to create continuous path with no unpaved areas. 
F.  Parking of vehicles is prohibited in landscape or unpaved areas. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-01-10, § 7, 3-2-2010; Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(7)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 16, 12-18-2018)  
18.14.190 - Landscaping. 
A.  Landscaping shall be provided in areas between the building line and the front or street side property lines, except for driveways to approved designated parking spaces and areas screened by a permitted solid fence or wall least six feet high. Additional paving for walkways may be allowed not to exceed four feet, or not to exceed one hundred twenty-five square feet, whichever is greater. 
B.  Drought-resistant landscaping shall be provided for the development of any lot. Landscaping shall conform to the standards of Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance contained in Chapter 13.30 of the Municipal Code when applicable. Landscaping Shall provide a mixture of shrubs, vines, groundcover, flowers or lawns throughout the entire Front Yard area, Side Yard area, and throughout Open Spaces between Buildings not occupied by a Sidewalk. In addition, two fifteen-gallon trees Shall be provided per Dwelling Unit, in the Front Yard area. The types of tree(s) proposed must be approved by the Planning Division. 
C.  Within the minimum required front setback area, no less than fifty percent of this area shall consist of live plants as ground cover and no more than forty percent shall consist of permeable hardscape ground cover material, such as bark, mulch, wood, stones, rocks, decomposed granite, or decorative colored (non-grey) gravel. 
D.  The required Landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean, safe, orderly and healthful condition. 
E.  The landscaped areas shall be provided with a suitable permanent method for watering or sprinkling of plants. Wherever possible, the watering system Shall utilize the least amount of water. Sprinklers Used to satisfy the requirements of this provision Shall be so spaced as to assure complete coverage of the landscaped area. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(7)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 17, 12-18-2018)  
18.14.200 - Trash and storage areas. 
A.  A trash storage area Shall be provided at a size not less than a fifty-gallon capacity container per Dwelling Unit. Such containers Shall be completely enclosed or screened with a solid masonry Wall and Shall be located as to allow for convenient pickup and disposal. 
B.  In Addition, at least sixty cubic feet of enclosed accessory storage space Shall be provided for each Dwelling Unit. Said space May be located in a garage or Carport provided that it does not interfere with the parking of Vehicle. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.14.210 - Mechanical Equipment. 
A.  All heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment, including ducts, meters, plumbing lines and tanks, shall be architecturally screened from public view, with the use of masonry walls when mounted at grade. Roof mounted equipment is prohibited, except with the use of parapet walls when mounted on flat roof. 
B.  Plumbing vent pipes, all heater flues and all roof penetrations shall be gathered and concealed from view in the same manner. 
C.  All new mechanical equipment shall meet the same zoning setback requirement applicable to the building or structure served. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(7)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 18, 12-18-2018)  
18.14.220 - Architectural Compatibility. 
The exterior design of Structures Shall be compatible with the surrounding architecture, in order to preserve neighborhood integrity and promote architectural consistency within the City. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.14.230 - Design Review. 
Site plans and elevations shall be submitted to the Design Review Committee for review and approval whenever ten dwelling units are proposed for any building site. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(7)), 10-10-2013)  
Chapter 18.16 - R-3 AND R-4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
18.16.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The R-3 and R-4 Multiple-Family Zone is intended to accommodate multi-family housing and specifically housing development of a more intensive form, including condominiums, apartments, stacked flats, and senior housing. Higher densities are intended for specialized housing, such as senior housing at locations where adequate support infrastructure exists. Other uses such as mobile home parks and family day care homes may be permitted consistent with the City's R-3 and R-4 zone regulations. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(8)), 10-10-2013)  
18.16.020 - Uses Generally. 
In the R-3 and R-4 Zone, no building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the purpose set out in Section 18.16.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(8)), 10-10-2013)  
18.16.030 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table E in Section 18.06.060 E. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(8)), 10-10-2013)  
18.16.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(8)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed § 18.16.040, which pertained to Conditional Uses and derived from Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992; Ord. No. O-01-10, § 12, 3-2-2010.  
18.16.050 - Property Development Standards. 
The following property development standards, set out in Sections 18.16.150 through 18.16.230, shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-3 and R-4 Zone. A reduction in the property development standards may be permitted in the case of the development of housing for senior citizens, through the application of a Conditional Use Permit. 
18.16.050-1 Property Development Standards 
Building Placement 	Table 1 
A. Minimum Lot Size 	7,200 square feet 1 
B. Minimum Lot Width 	60 feet 1 
C. Minimum Lot Depth 	100 feet 1 
D. Minimum Front Yard Setback 	25 feet 1 
E. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks 	10% of lot width not exceeding 15 feet 1, 2, 3 
F. Minimum Corner Side Yard Setback 	5 feet 1 
G. Minimum Rear Yard Setback 	20 feet 1, 2 
H. Separation Between Buildings 	6 feet 1, 3, 5 
I. Max. Lot Coverage 	70% of lot area 1 
J. Dwelling Units per Acre 	16.1—22 DU/Acre 
Up to 30 dwelling units/acre 6, 7 
K. Minimum Dwelling Unit Size 	
 3 Bedroom, Plus 	1,200 square feet 8 
 2 Bedroom 	1,000 square feet 8 
 1 Bedroom 	800 square feet 8 
 Efficiency/Bachelor 	600 square feet 8 
L. Maximum Building Height 	2.5 Stories or 35 feet 7 
 
  
1.  40 feet minimum on cul-de-sac bulb. 
2.  Main buildings and garages opening to an alley shall have a side setback of twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley. 
3.  Main buildings shall have a side setback of ten feet from the property line for a reversed corner lot. 
4.  Plus four feet for each story above the first for a facing wall with openings, and three feet plus one foot for each story above the first for a facing wall without openings. The total separation between two facing walls is the sum of that required for each. 
5.  Buildings linked by a common roof shall not be considered separate. Openings must be located in the wall overlap area in order to count as openings for the purpose of calculating building separation. 
6.  Minimum twenty dwelling units per acre is required for properties within the Housing Element, Appendix D Site. 
7.  For projects developed exclusively for senior residents as income-subsidized housing, conditional densities of up to sixty dwelling units per acre is allowed with approval of a conditional use permit. 
8.  The minimum dwelling unit sizes and building height may be reduced in size or increased in height (maximum three stories or thirty-five feet) for affordable housing projects, subject to review and approval by appropriate review body. 
ACCESSORY 
STRUCTURES 	TABLE 2 
M. Side Setback one story 	5 feet 
N. Rear Setback one story 	5 feet 
O. Side Setback two story 	10 feet 1 
P. Rear Setback two story 	10 feet 1 
Q. Rear Setback with Alley 	25 feet 2 
R. Lot Coverage 	35% of lot area 
 
  1.\Non-Residential and Residential. 
2.  Garage openings facing alley shall have a rear setback measured from opposite side of the Alley. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(8)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-03-15, § 10, 3-3-2015)  
18.16.060 - Building Projections. 
Building projections into yard areas are permitted as follows: 
Projection Standard Table 3 
Front Setback 	Fire escapes, unenclosed and uncovered stairways, unenclosed patios, porches, cornices, Eaves, sills and similar architectural features, which may project up to five feet into the setback. 
 Balconies and fireplaces having a maximum linear dimension of eight feet may project up to thirty inches into the setback. 
Side Setbacks 	Fireplaces having a maximum linear dimension of eight feet and eaves may project two feet into the setback. 
Rear Setbacks 	Fire escapes, unenclosed and uncovered stairways, porches, cornices, eaves, sills and similar architectural features which may project up to five feet into the setback. 
 Balconies and fireplaces having a maximum linear dimension of eight feet may project up to thirty inches into the required setback. 
 Attached unenclosed patios with no freestanding walls may extend up to ten feet into the required setback. 
Swimming Pools and Spas 	Five feet from any lot line, and may only be placed in the rear yard area. 
 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(8)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 19, 12-18-2018)  
18.16.070—18.16.160 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(8)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed §§ 18.16.070—18.16.160, which pertained to Lot dimensions, Density of Development, Maximum coverage, Minimum Dwelling size, Building Height, Front Setback, Side Setback, Rear Setback, Accessory buildings, Separation between Buildings and derived from Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992.  
18.16.170 - Recreation Space. 
All Residential Developments Zone Shall provide a minimum of one square foot of outdoor Recreation Space for every three square feet of gross Floor Area within each Dwelling Unit. 
A.  At least half of the space required Shall be in the form of private Recreation Space, with minimum dimension of eight feet and a minimum area of one hundred fifty square feet per Dwellings. The private space May be provided in the form of patios, porches, balconies or recessed areas open on at least two sides, and May only be located in the side and Rear Yard areas. 
B.  Common Recreation Space Shall contain a minimum area of five hundred square feet and a minimum dimension of twenty feet. It May be provided in the form of pools, putting greens or recreation Buildings. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.16.180 - Parking Requirements. 
A.  Parking Requirements for Multiple-Family Dwellings. 
1.  There Shall be no less than two Parking Spaces, in the form of enclosed garages, for every Dwelling Unit, with dimensions of not less than ten feet in width and twenty feet in depth. Where there are six or more Dwelling Units on one Lot, there Shall be an additional one-half Unenclosed Space per Dwelling Unit for Guest parking. 
2.  One bedroom and efficiency dwelling units parking requirement is a minimum one car garage or carport, plus guest parking as required in [Subsection] 18.16.180.A.1. 
3.  There Shall be paved vehicular Access to the Off-Street Parking Facilities with a Driveway not less than twelve feet wide and not encumbered by any Projection to a height under twelve feet above Grade. 
B.  Parking Requirements for Single-Family Dwellings shall conform to the R-1 zone in Section 18.12.170. 
C.  Parking requirements for a boarding, lodging, or rooming house. There Shall be no less than one Parking Space per room or suite, or one space per two beds, whichever is greater. 
D.  General Requirements. 
1.  All Off-Street Parking Spaces required in a Residential Zone Shall be provided on the same Lot as the Main Buildings, and Shall be independently accessible with unobstructed space provided for the maneuvering of Vehicles. No parking stall Shall be designed so that a Vehicle May back onto a Public Street. Vehicles maneuvering area shall comply with appropriate vehicular turning radius as specified by the Director or designee for appropriate driveway width. 
2.  All Driveway approaches, Driveway and parking areas Shall be surfaced or paved with concrete, asphalt concrete or other bituminous surfacing of at least 2.5-inch thickness and Shall be thereafter maintained in good condition. 
3.  Where two Driveways are provided, each Shall be clearly marked as to the direction of ingress and egress. 
4.  Parking requirements for Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit shall be subject to provisions of Section 18.36 of this Title. 
5.  Parking of vehicles is prohibited in landscape or unpaved areas. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-01-10, § 8, 3-2-2010; Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(8)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 22, 12-18-2018)  
18.16.190 - Landscaping. 
A.  Drought-resistant Landscaping Shall be provided for the Development of any Lot with a minimum Landscaping coverage of thirty percent of the Lot Area. Landscaping shall conform to the standards of Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance contained in Chapter 13.30 of the Municipal Code where applicable. The Landscaping Shall provide a mixture of shrubs, vines, groundcover, flowers or lawns throughout the entire Front Yard area, Side Yard areas, Parkways and throughout Open Spaces not occupied by accessways, parking areas and Sidewalks. Two trees per Dwelling Unit or one tree per two hundred square feet of gross Floor Area (administrative and Professional Services) Shall be provided and planted throughout the landscape areas. Twenty percent of the trees Shall be of twenty-four-inch box size, another twenty percent of thirty-six-inch box size, and the remainder May be a minimum of fifteen-gallon size. Landscape and irrigation plans Shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect and submitted to the Planning Division along with the general Building plans, for review and Approval. 
B.  The required Landscaping Shall be maintained in a neat, clean, safe, orderly and healthful condition. 
C.  The landscaped areas shall be provided with a suitable permanent method for watering or sprinkling of plants. Wherever possible, the watering system shall utilize the least amount of water. Sprinklers used to satisfy the requirements of this provision shall be so spaced as to assure complete coverage of the landscaped areas. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 20, 12-18-2018)  
18.16.200 - Trash and Storage Areas. 
A.  Trash Areas. 
1.  Trash areas for Multiple-Family Dwellings Shall provide the equivalent of not less than a fifty-gallon capacity container per Dwelling Unit. Where commercial trash containers are Used, there Shall be not less than one such container for every fifteen Dwelling Units. 
2.  For office Uses, trash containers Shall be provided with a sufficient capacity to contain all Refuse generated by the Use. 
3.  All outside trash and Garbage collection areas Shall be enclosed or screened with a six-foot-high Wall with Gates and Shall be located as to allow for convenient pickup and disposal. The location design Shall also incorporate Access separate than Pedestrian Access. 
4.  All trash containers Shall be provided with lids. 
B.  For Multiple-Family Dwellings, at least sixty cubic feet of enclosed accessory storage space Shall be provided for each Dwelling Unit. Said space May be located in a garage or Carport; provided, that it does not interfere with the parking of a Vehicle. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(8)), 10-10-2013)  
18.16.210 - Mechanical Equipment. 
A.  All heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment, including ducts, meters, plumbing lines and tanks, shall be architecturally screened from public view, with the use of masonry walls when mounted at grade. Roof mounted equipment is prohibited, except with the use of parapet walls when mounted on flat roof. 
B.  Plumbing vent pipes, all heater flues and all roof penetrations shall be gathered and concealed from view in the same manner. 
C.  All new mechanical equipment shall meet the same zoning setback requirement applicable to the building or structure served. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(8)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 21, 12-18-2018)  
18.16.220 - Architectural Compatibility. 
The exterior design of Structures Shall be compatible with the surrounding architecture in order to preserve neighborhood integrity and promote architectural consistency within the City. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.16.230 - Design Review. 
Architectural and Site Plan Review for all development in the R-3 and R-4 zone shall be submitted to the appropriate decision-making body for review and approval pursuant to Chapter 18.58. Affordable housing projects shall be reviewed through administrative review process. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(8)), 10-10-2013)  
Chapter 18.18 - C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE 
 
18.18.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The C-1 Neighborhood Commercial Zone is intended to provide for a variety of retail, office, and service-oriented business activities that serve a local neighborhood area and population. The approach to development incorporates a smaller scale, and commercial uses of lower intensity for compatibility with the character of surrounding residential neighborhoods. Corner locations for Neighborhood Commercial uses are preferable to minimize disruption within residential neighborhoods. Neighborhood Commercial uses will be located along roadways traveled by localized or residential commuter traffic, and at intersections bisecting residential neighborhoods. Drive-through and auto service/repair businesses may be restricted through zoning regulations to minimize traffic and noise impacts on adjacent residential uses. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(9)), 10-10-2013)  
18.18.020 - Uses Generally. 
In the C-1 Zone, no building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the purpose set out in Section 18.18.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(9)), 10-10-2013)  
18.18.030 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table F in Section 18.06.060 F. 
(Ord. 0-11-08 § 11, 2008: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(9)), 10-10-2013)  
18.18.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(9)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed § 18.18.040, which pertained to Conditional Uses and derived from Ord. 0-11-08 § 12, 2008: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992; Ord. No. O-08-09, § 5, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. O-01-13, § 8, 5-7-2013.  
18.18.050 - Property Development Standards. 
The Following Property Development standards, set out in Sections 18.18.060 through 18.18.110, Shall apply to all land and Buildings in the C-1 Zone. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.18.060 - Lot Area. 
Each Lot Shall have a minimum area of ten thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.18.070 - Lot Dimensions. 
A.  Each Lot Shall have a minimum width of eighty feet. 
B.  Each Lot Shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.18.080 - Maximum Intensity. 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio is 0.5. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(9)), 10-10-2013)  
18.18.090 - Building Height. 
Buildings and Structures Shall have a height not greater than one Story or twenty feet. A second Story May be Permitted with the Application of a Conditional Use Permit. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.18.100 - Front Setback. 
Each Lot Shall have a front Setback of not less than twenty-five feet extending across the full width of the Lot, with the exceptions of cornices, Eaves, Sills and similar Architectural Features which May Project up to five feet into the required Setback. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.18.110 - Side and Rear Setbacks. 
A.  Each Lot Shall have a side Setback of fifteen feet from a Street. There Shall be no side Setback required for Interior Lots adjacent to other commercial Lots. In the case where the side of a Lot abuts a Residential Zone, the minimum side Setback Shall be fifteen feet, with a masonry Wall separation between the two Uses. In the case where the side of a Lot abuts an existing residential Use, a masonry Wall separation Shall be required between the two Uses. 
B.  Each Lot Shall have a rear Setback of ten feet from a Street. There Shall be no Setback required for Interior Lots adjacent to other commercial Lots. In the case where the rear of a Lot abuts a Residential Zone, the minimum rear Setback Shall be fifteen feet, with masonry Wall separations between the two Uses. In the case where the rear of a Lot abuts an existing residential Use, a masonry Wall separation Shall be required between the two Uses. 
C.  Where a Building is provided with a Vehicle Access door facing the side or rear of a Lot, the Building Shall be set back twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the Alley. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 8, 2007: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.18.120 - Parking Requirements. 
See Chapter 18.36 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 2, 2007: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 23, 12-18-2018)  
18.18.130 - Landscaping. 
In all Commercial and Industrial Zones: 
A.  Landscaping Shall be provided for the Development of any Lot with a minimum Landscaping coverage of fifteen percent of the Lot Area. The Landscaping Shall provide a mixture of shrubs, trees, groundcover, flowers and lawns throughout the entire Front Yard area, Side Yard areas, Parkways and throughout Open Spaces not occupied by accessways, parking areas and Sidewalks. One tree per three Parking Spaces Shall be provided and planted throughout the landscaped areas. Twenty-five percent of the trees Shall be of twenty-four inch box size, another twenty-five percent of thirty-six inch box size, and the remainder May be a minimum of fifteen-gallon size. Landscape and irrigation plans Shall be prepared by a licensed Landscape Architect or Engineer, and submitted to the Community Development Director along with the general Building plans for review and Approval. 
B.  The required Landscaping Shall be maintained in a neat, clean, safe, orderly and healthful condition. 
C.  The landscaped areas Shall be provided with a suitable permanent method for watering or sprinkling of plants. Wherever possible, the watering system Shall utilize the least amount of water. Sprinklers Used to satisfy the requirements of this provision Shall be so spaced as to assure complete coverage of the landscaped areas. 
D.  Areas proposed for Development in another phase Shall be temporarily turfed, seeded and irrigated for dust and soil erosion control, if said phase will not begin construction within six Months of completion of previous phase. 
(Ord. 0-13-01 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.18.140 - Trash Areas. 
For commercial and industrial Uses, trash containers Shall be provided with a sufficient capacity to contain all Refuse generated by the Use. All outside trash and Garbage collection areas Shall be enclosed or screened with a six-foot-high Wall with Gates and Shall be located as to allow for convenient pickup and disposal. The design of the trash Enclosure Shall follow the guidelines of the City specifications on trash Enclosures. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.18.150 - Mechanical Equipment. 
A.  All heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment, including ducts, meter, plumbing lines and tanks, Shall be architecturally screened from public view, with the Use of masonry Walls when mounted at Grade, or with the Use of Parapet Walls when mounted on flat and pitched roofs. 
B.  Plumbing vent pipes, all heater flues and all roof penetrations Shall be gathered and concealed from view in the same manner, and painted to match the roof color. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.18.160 - Design Review. 
Site Plans and Elevations Shall be submitted for review and Approval whenever a Structure or number of Structures are proposed for the Development of a site. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.22 - C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE 
 
18.22.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The C-2 General Commercial Zone is intended to permit a wide range of retail and commercial services, professional offices, and medical facilities. The General Commercial designation supports higher-intensity commercial uses such as fast-food and sit-down restaurants, offices, auto services, and community-wide and regional retail establishments. Since many of these uses tend to be large in scale, appropriate locations provide regional exposure, high traffic visibility, and contain sites capable of accommodating expansive floor area and customer parking. The General Commercial designation should not apply to areas along low-volume residential roadways or in the midst of a residential neighborhood. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(11)), 10-10-2013)  
18.22.020 - Uses Generally. 
In the C-2 Zone, no building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the purpose set out in Section 18.22.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(11)), 10-10-2013)  
18.22.030 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table F in Section 18.06.060 F. 
(Ord. 0-11-08 § 15, 2008: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-07-09, § 5, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(11)), 10-10-2013)  
18.22.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 18.22.040, adopted October 10, 2013, repealed § 18.22.040, which pertained to Conditional Uses and derived from Ord. 0-11-08 § 16, 2008: Ord. 0-01-06 § 1, 2006: Ord. 0-02-97 § 4, 1997; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992; Ord. No. O-07-09, § 6, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. O-08-09, § 7, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. O-01-13, § 10, 5-7-2013.  
18.22.050 - Property Development standards. 
The Following Property Development standards, set out in Sections 18.22.060 through 18.22.110 Shall apply to all land and Buildings in the C-2 Zone. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.22.060 - Lot Area. 
Each Lot Shall have a minimum area of ten thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.22.070 - Lot Dimensions. 
A.  Each Lot Shall have a minimum width of eighty feet. 
B.  Each Lot Shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.22.080 - Maximum Intensity. 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio is 1.0. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(11)), 10-10-2013)  
18.22.090 - Building Height. 
The maximum Building Height for all Uses Shall be three stories or forty feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.22.100 - Front Setback. 
Each Lot Shall have a front Setback of not less than twenty feet extending across the full width of the Lot, with the exceptions of cornices, Eaves, Sills and similar Architectural Features which May Project up to five feet into the required Setback. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.22.110 - Side and Rear Setbacks. 
A.  Each Lot Shall have a side Setback of fifteen feet from a Street. There Shall be no side Setback required for Interior Lots adjacent to other commercial Lots. In the case where the side of a Lot abuts a Residential Zone, the minimum side Setback Shall be fifteen feet, with a masonry Wall separation between the two Uses. In the case where the side of a Lot abuts an existing residential Use, a masonry Wall separation Shall be required between the two Uses. 
B.  Each Lot Shall have a rear Setback of ten feet from a Street. There Shall be no Setback required for Interior Lots adjacent to other commercial Lots. In the case where the rear of a Lot abuts a Residential Zone, the minimum rear Setback Shall be fifteen feet, with a masonry Wall separation between the two Uses. In the case where the rear of a Lot abuts an existing residential Use, a masonry Wall separation Shall be required between the two Uses. 
C.  Where a Building is provided with a Vehicle Access door facing the side or rear of a Lot, the Building Shall be set back twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the Alley. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 10, 2007: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.22.120 - Parking requirements. 
See Chapter 18.36. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 3, 2007: Ord. 0-24-04 § 2 (part), 2004; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(11)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 24, 12-18-2018)  
18.22.130 - Landscaping. 
A.  Landscaping Shall be provided for the Development of any Lot with a minimum Landscaping coverage of fifteen percent of the Lot Area. The Landscaping Shall provide a mixture of shrubs, trees, groundcover, flowers and lawns throughout the entire Front Yard area, Side Yard areas, Parkways and throughout Open Spaces not occupied by accessways, parking areas and Sidewalks. One tree per three Parking Spaces Shall be provided and planted throughout the landscaped areas. Twenty-five percent of the trees Shall be of twenty-four inch box size, another twenty-five percent of thirty-six inch box size, and the remainder May be a minimum of fifteen-gallon size. Landscape and irrigation plans Shall be prepared by a licensed Landscape Architect or Engineer, and submitted to the Community Development Director along with the general Building plans for review and Approval. 
(Ord. 0-13-01 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.22.140 - Trash Areas. 
The requirements for trash areas Shall be as outlined in Section 18.18.140 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.22.150 - Mechanical Equipment. 
The requirements for Screening of mechanical equipment Shall be as outlined in Section 18.18.150 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.22.160 - Design Review. 
Site Plans and Elevations Shall be submitted for review and Approval whenever a Structure or number of Structures are proposed for the Development of a site. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.23 - M-U MIXED-USE—DOWNTOWN ZONE 
 
18.23.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The Mixed-Use Downtown Zone (M-U/D) integrates civic, public, commercial, office, and residential uses. Supporting convenience retail and personal service commercial uses are permitted to serve the needs of local residents, employees, and visitors. Higher-density residential uses are encouraged to add vibrancy and presence. Long-established, low-density residential areas containing homes dating to Colton's early years are encouraged to retain their density and character. 
Live/work development approaches are permitted as well where they contribute to the function and character of Downtown. All development within this zone should reflect attractive, pedestrian-oriented design that complements the area's historic character. Public and shared parking facilities are encouraged. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.020 - Reserved.  
18.23.030 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table F in Section 18.06.060 F. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.040 - Reserved.  
18.23.050 - Property Development Standards. 
The following property development standards, set out in Table 18.23.050-1, shall apply to all land and buildings in the M-U Mixed-Use Downtown Zone. 
18.23.050-1 Property Development Standards 
Building Placement 	Table 1 
A. Minimum Lot Size 	Two thousand square feet 	Minimum Lot Dimensions  
B. Minimum Lot Width 	Twenty-five feet 1 	
C. Minimum Lot Depth 	fifty feet 1 	
Stand Alone Residential Maximum Density 	Residential: 30.0 dwelling units/acre. 2 	
Mixed-Use/Commercial Maximum Intensity 	3.0 Floor Area Ratio (FAR) for non-residential components. 	
Building Height 	Three stories or forty-five feet. Up to four stories or fifty-five feet with CUP. 1 	Building Height  
Street Setback 	H Street and La Cadena Drive: Zero feet to ten feet maximum. Setback area shall include plaza, courtyard, outdoor dining, or enhanced pedestrian connections. 	
	7th Street, 9th Street, 10th Street, G Street, and Valley Boulevard: Maximum ten feet landscaped to building; Minimum fifteen feet landscaped to parking area. 	Setbacks: H Street and La Cadena Drive Setbacks: 7th Street, 9th Street, 10th Street, G Street, and Valley Boulevard   
Side Setbacks 	There shall be no side setback required for interior lots. 	
Rear Setbacks 	There shall be no rear setback required for interior lots. 	Setbacks with Landscaping: 7th Street, 9th Street, 10th Street, G Street, and Valley Boulevard  
Ground Floor Transparency 	The ground floor building facade facing a street frontage line, where the ground floor use is non- residential, shall consist of a minimum forty-five percent area of glass doors, windows, or other transparent materials. 	Ground Floor Transparency  
Good Neighbor 	Where the side of a lot abuts a residential zone, the minimum side setback shall be ten feet. 
Where the rear of a lot abuts a residential zone, the minimum rear setback shall be fifteen feet. 
Those portions of a building that abut a residential zone, where the proposed structure is over thirty-five feet tall, shall be setback a minimum of twenty feet from that property line. 
Where vehicular access is taken from the side or rear of a lot, the building shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five feet from that side. 	Setbacks Adjacent to Residential Zones  
 
1.  For buildings with ground floor commercial uses, the required floor-to-ceiling height at the ground floor level for buildings facing public frontage lines shall be a minimum of twelve feet. 
2.  For projects developed exclusively for senior residents as income-subsidized housing, densities of up to sixty dwelling units per acre are allowed with approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.060 - Residential Open Space. 
In the form of private and common area, all M-U Mixed-Use Downtown residential developments shall provide a minimum of twenty-five square feet of Residential Open Space each Dwelling Unit. 
 
Residential Open Space 
A.  A minimum of one hundred square feet of required Residential Open Space shall be in the form of private open space, with a minimum dimension of eight feet. Private open space may be provided in the form of patios, porches, balconies, or recessed areas open on at least one side. 
B.  Common Residential Open Space shall be provided at a minimum of twenty-five square feet per unit. Common Residential Open Space areas shall have a minimum dimension of ten feet. When common open space is designed for public/private use, a minimum of twenty square feet per unit is required. These Common Residential Open Space areas may be provided in the form of pools, playgrounds, recreation fields, or recreation buildings, but no less than fifty percent of the Common Residential Open Space area shall be outdoor, landscaped Common Residential Open Space. 
C.  Provide sidewalk connections from homes to public sidewalks, and between homes and Residential Open Space. 
D.  Residential Open Space credit may be considered for park and/or common areas located within two hundred feet of the project site, subject to review and approval by the Development Services Director. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.070 - Parking Requirements. 
A.  Specific Requirements. 
1.  The following number of parking spaces shall be required to serve the uses or buildings listed, as established in Table 18.23.070-1 (M-U Downtown Zone Parking Requirements). All uses must provide the sum of the requirements for each individual use. 
2.  "Square feet" means "gross square feet" and refers to the sum gross square feet of the floor area of a building and its accessory buildings unless otherwise specified. For a mixed-use building, "square feet" means "gross square feet" and refers to the sum gross square feet of the publicly accessible floor area of a building and its accessory buildings. 
3.  Residential parking requirements for dens, studies, or other similar rooms that may be used as bedrooms shall be defined and calculated based upon the Building Code. 
4.  When the calculation of the required number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction of a space, the total number of spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
Table 18.23.070-1 M-U—Downtown Zone Parking Requirements 
Land Use 	Spaces Required 
Commercial Land Uses 
MU/D—H Street and La Cadena Drive 	One space/one thousand square feet 
MU/D—All Others 	One space/five hundred square feet 
Residential Land Uses 
Multiple-Family (apartments, condominiums, and townhomes)—H Street and La Cadena Drive 	One space/dwelling unit 
Multiple-Family (apartments, condominiums, and townhomes)—All Others 	One and a half spaces/dwelling unit 
Minimum two spaces required for dwelling units with three or more bedrooms 
Live/Work Units—Residential Portion 	One space/dwelling unit 
Single-Family Residential 	Two spaces/dwelling unit within a garage or carport 
 
B.  General Requirements. The general requirements for off-street parking shall be as outlined in Chapter 18.36 of this Code. 
C.  Tandem Parking. For lots less than ten thousand square feet in area, mixed-use developments, and/or multi-family residential projects, tandem parking spaces may be used for residential parking, and receive parking credit when serving the same residential unit subject to approval by the Development Services Director. Tandem parking spaces shall be a minimum of eleven feet wide and twenty feet deep per space. 
D.  Shared Parking. In addition to the shared parking requirements outlined in Section 18.36.040 of this Code, the use of shared parking agreements for mixed-use residential, retail, and office is encouraged within the Mixed-Use Downtown Zone. Developments incorporating shared parking strategies and/or joint use agreements may receive up to a ten percent reduction in the total number of parking spaces required for the proposed mix of uses subject to approval by the Development Services Director. 
E.  Off-site parking may be permitted for nonresidential projects subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit, based on the approval process outlined in Section 18.58.060 of this code. In addition to the findings in Section 18.58.060, the following criteria shall apply: 
1.  All off-site parking facilities shall be located within one thousand feet of the property where the use in question is located, unless a binding agreement is provided to provide transportation access from the parking facility to the use in question on a regular basis. 
2.  Public transit service shall be available within one-half mile of the use in question. 
F.  On-street parking spaces adjacent to a project site may be counted toward meeting minimum on-site parking requirements where no parking restrictions are in place, subject to the review and approval of the Development Services Director. 
G.  Bicycle Parking. Provide facilities for the temporary storage of bicycles as outlined in Chapter 18.36 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.080 - Landscaping. 
A.  Landscaping shall be provided for the development of any lot with a minimum landscaping coverage of fifteen percent of the lot area not occupied by building footprint. The landscaping shall provide a mixture of shrubs, trees, groundcover, flowers and lawns throughout the entire front yard area, side yard areas, parkways and throughout open spaces not occupied by access ways, parking areas and sidewalks. One tree per three parking spaces shall be provided and planted throughout the landscaped areas. Twenty-five percent of the trees shall be of twenty-four inch box size, another twenty- five percent of thirty-six inch box size, and the remainder may be a minimum of fifteen-gallon size. Landscape and irrigation plans shall be prepared by a licensed Landscape Architect or Engineer and submitted to the Development Services Director along with the general building plans for review and approval. 
B.  The required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean, safe, orderly, and healthful condition. 
C.  The landscaped areas shall be provided with a suitable permanent method for watering or sprinkling of plants. Wherever possible, the watering system shall utilize the least amount of water. Sprinklers used to satisfy the requirements of this provision shall be so spaced as to assure complete coverage of the landscaped areas. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.090 - Trash, Recycling, and Storage Areas. 
A.  Residential. 
1.  Trash and recycling areas for multiple-family dwellings and live/work units shall provide a minimum fifty-gallon capacity container per dwelling unit. Where commercial trash containers are used, there shall be a minimum of one such container for every fifteen dwelling units. 
2.  All outside trash and recycling collection areas shall be enclosed or screened with a six-foot-high wall with gates and shall be located to allow for convenient pickup and disposal. The location and design shall also incorporate access separate from pedestrian access. 
3.  All trash and recycling containers shall be provided with lids. 
4.  For multiple-family dwellings and live/work units, at least sixty cubic feet of enclosed accessory storage space shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Said space may be located in the Dwelling Unit, integrated into a balcony space, or in a garage or carport; provided, that it does not interfere with parking a vehicle. 
5.  Recycling. Separate adequate capacity trash containers shall be provided for recycling. 
B.  Non-Residential. 
1.  Trash containers shall be provided with a sufficient capacity to contain all refuse generated by the use. 
2.  All outside trash and recycling collection areas shall be enclosed or screened with a six-foot-high wall with gates and shall be located to allow for convenient pickup and disposal. 
3.  All trash and recycling containers shall be provided with lids. 
4.  The design of the trash enclosure shall follow City specifications on trash enclosures. 
5.  Separate, adequate capacity trash containers shall be provided for recycling. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.100 - Mechanical Equipment. 
A.  All heating, ventilating, and air conditioning equipment, including ducts, meters, plumbing lines, and tanks, shall be architecturally screened from public view with the use of masonry walls when mounted at grade, or with the use of parapet walls when mounted on flat and pitched roofs. 
B.  Plumbing vent pipes, all heater flues, and all roof penetrations shall be gathered and concealed from view in the same manner and shall be painted to match the roof color. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.110 - Architectural Compatibility. 
The exterior design of structures shall be compatible with the surrounding architecture in order to preserve neighborhood integrity and promote architectural consistency within the City. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.120 - Architectural and Site Plan Review. 
Architectural and Site Plan Review for all development in the M-U/D Mixed-Use Downtown zone shall be submitted to the appropriate decision-making body for review and approval pursuant to Chapter 18.58. The decision-making body shall consider the following criteria: 
A.  The project is located within one-half mile walking distance of transit stops, shops, services, and public schools. 
B.  The project features high-quality market rate and/or affordable housing. Mixed income housing is encouraged. 
C.  The project will provide for, or contribute to, a mix of complementary uses. 
D.  The project will provide for, or contribute to, a range of housing types and densities within the community. 
E.  The project design includes pedestrian-friendly spaces such as plazas, squares, courtyards, and other amenities. 
F.  The project design includes comfortable and accessible open spaces. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.130 - Colton Downtown Design Manual Reference. 
The Colton Downtown Design Manual is a companion document to complement the Downtown Development Code, and has been prepared to establish an achievable vision, shape future development, and implement an action plan for Downtown Colton. Any future development plans within the Downtown must be consistent with the Colton Downtown Design Manual. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
Chapter 18.23.1 - M-U MIXED-USE—NEIGHBORHOOD ZONE 
 
18.23.1.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
M-U Mixed-Use Neighborhood Zone is intended to allow office, commercial, and residential uses within the same structure or adjacent to each other, including as live/work units. This designation is intended to preserve the established housing stock and residential character of a neighborhood while allowing for office or commercial opportunities and adaptive reuse of residential structures, and encouraging connections between residential neighborhoods and commercial and civic land uses. In addition to residential uses, the Mixed Use-Neighborhood designation provides opportunities for office and commercial uses similar to those allowed within the Business Park designation, provided compatibility with the scale and character of the established neighborhood can be achieved. Businesses with environmental nuisances (noise, odor, dust/smoke, glare, etc.) will not be allowed. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(13)), 10-10-2013)  
18.23.1.020 - Reserved.  
18.23.1.030 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table F in Section 18.06.060 F. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(13)), 10-10-2013)  
18.23.1.040 - Reserved.  
18.23.1.050 - Property Development Standards. 
The following property development standards, set out in Table 18.23.1.050-1 shall apply to all land and buildings in the M-U Neighborhood Zone. 
Table 18.23.1.050-1 M-U—Neighborhood Zone Property Development Standards. 
Building Placement 	Table 1 
A. Minimum Lot Size 	5,000 sf 
B. Minimum Lot Width 	50 feet 1 
C. Minimum Lot Depth 	100 feet 1 
Density 	Residential: 2.0—8.0 dwelling units/acre. 2 
Maximum Intensity 	1.0 Floor Area Ratio (FAR) for non-residential components. 
Building Height 	Three stories or forty-five feet. 1 
Front Setback 	Buildings may be built to zero to ten feet from the public sidewalk line. Setback areas not occupied by a structure or driveway shall be landscaped and/or contain semi-public amenities such as courtyards or outdoor seating areas. Where there is no existing or planned public sidewalk, the building setback is ten feet extending across forty percent of the full width of the lot, with the exceptions of cornices, eaves, sills, walking arcades and similar architectural features which may project up to ten to fifteen feet into the required setback and public right-of-way. 
Side Setbacks 	There shall be no side setback required for interior lots adjacent to other commercial lots or corner lots. In the case where the side of a lot abuts a residential zone, the minimum side setback shall be ten feet, with a masonry wall separation between the two uses. In the case where the side of a lot abuts an existing residential use, a masonry wall separation shall be required between the two uses. Where a building is provided with a vehicle access door facing the side of a lot, the building shall be set back twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley. 
Rear Setbacks 	There shall be no setback required for interior lots adjacent to other commercial lots. In the case where the rear of a lot abuts a residential zone, the minimum rear setback shall be fifteen feet, with a masonry Wall separation between the two uses. In the case where the rear of a lot abuts an existing residential use, a masonry wall separation shall be required between the two uses. Where a building is provided with a vehicle access door facing the rear of a lot, the building shall be set back twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley. 
Ground Floor Transparency 	The ground floor building facade facing a street frontage line shall consist of a minimum fifty percent area of glass doors, windows, or other transparent materials. 
 
1.  For buildings with ground floor commercial uses, the minimum required floor to ceiling height at the ground floor level for buildings facing public frontage lines shall be twelve feet. 
2.  For projects developed exclusively for senior residents as income-subsidized housing, densities of up to sixty dwelling units per acre is allowed with approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(13)), 10-10-2013)  
18.23.1.060 - Residential Recreation Space. 
All residential developments shall provide a minimum of one square foot of outdoor recreation space for every three square feet of gross floor area within each dwelling unit. 
A.  At least half of the space required shall be in the form of private recreation space, with minimum dimension of eight feet and a minimum area of one hundred fifty square feet per dwellings. The private space may be provided in the form of patios, porches, balconies or recessed areas open on at least two sides. 
B.  Common recreation space shall contain a minimum area of five hundred square feet and a minimum dimension of twenty feet. It may be provided in the form of pools, putting greens or recreation buildings. 
C.  Provide sidewalk within the public right-of-way along entire street frontage. 
D.  Provide sidewalk connections from homes to public sidewalk, and between homes and recreation space. 
E.  Provide shade shelter at bus stops with bench meeting specifications of City and Omnitrans. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(13)), 10-10-2013)  
18.23.1.070 - Parking Requirements. 
A.  Specific Requirements. 
1.  The following number of parking spaces shall be required to serve the uses or buildings listed, as established in Table 18.23.1.070-1 (M-U Neighborhood Zone Parking Requirements). All uses must provide the sum of the requirements for each individual use. 
2.  "Square feet" means "gross square feet" and refers to the sum gross square feet of the floor area of a building and its accessory buildings unless otherwise specified. 
3.  For the purpose of calculating residential parking requirements, dens, studies, or other similar rooms that may be used as bedrooms shall be considered bedrooms. 
4.  When the calculation of the required number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction of a space, the total number of spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
Table 18.23.1.070-1 M-U Neighborhood Zone Parking Requirements 
Land Use 	Spaces Required (based upon gross floor area) 
Commercial Land Uses 	Spaces Required 
MU/N 	1 space per 500 sf 
Residential Land Uses 	Spaces Required 
Multiple-Family (apartments, condominiums, and townhomes) 	One space/dwelling unit, in the form of enclosed garages, with dimensions of not less than ten feet in width and twenty feet in depth. Where there are ten or more dwelling units on one lot, there shall be two spaces/dwelling unit, in a tandem or side by side parking design. C 
Live/Work Units 	Residential Portion: One space/dwelling unit, in the form of enclosed garages, with dimensions of not less than eleven feet in width and twenty feet in depth. Where there are ten or more dwelling units on one lot, there shall be two spaces/dwelling unit, in a tandem or side by side parking design, plus two guest spaces per dwelling unit. 
 
B.  General Requirements. The general requirements for off-street parking shall be as outlined in Chapter 18.36 of this Code. 
C.  Tandem Parking. Tandem parking spaces may be used for resident (non-guest) parking and receive parking credit, and shall be a minimum of eleven feet wide and 20 feet deep per space. 
D.  Shared Parking. The use of shared parking facilities is encouraged subject to the requirements outlined in Section 18.36.040 of this Code. 
E.  Off-site parking may be permitted for nonresidential projects subject to the approval of a conditional use permit, based on the approval process outlined in Section 18.58.060 of this Code. In addition to the findings in Section 18.58.060, the following criteria shall apply: 
1.  All off-site parking facilities shall be located within one thousand feet of the property where the use in question is located, unless a binding agreement is provided to provide transportation access from the parking facility to the use in question on a regular basis. 
2.  Public transit service shall be available within one-half mile of the use in question. 
F.  Bicycle Parking. Provide facilities for the temporary storage of bicycles as outlined in Chapter 18.36 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(13)), 10-10-2013)  
18.23.1.080 - Landscaping. 
A.  Landscaping shall be provided for the development of any lot with a minimum landscaping coverage of fifteen percent of the lot area not occupied by building footprint. The landscaping shall provide a mixture of shrubs, trees, groundcover, flowers and lawns throughout the entire front yard area, side yard areas, Parkways and throughout open spaces not occupied by access ways, parking areas and sidewalks. One tree per three parking spaces shall be provided and planted throughout the landscaped areas. Twenty-five percent of the trees shall be of twenty-four inch box size, another twenty-five percent of thirty-six inch box size, and the remainder may be a minimum of fifteen-gallon size. Landscape and irrigation plans shall be prepared by a licensed Landscape Architect or Engineer, and submitted to the Development Services Director along with the general building plans for review and approval. 
B.  The required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean, safe, orderly and healthful condition. 
C.  The landscaped areas shall be provided with a suitable permanent method for watering or sprinkling of plants. Wherever possible, the watering system shall utilize the least amount of water. Sprinklers used to satisfy the requirements of this provision shall be so spaced as to assure complete coverage of the landscaped areas. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(13)), 10-10-2013)  
18.23.1.090 - Trash, Recycling and Storage Areas. 
A.  Residential. 
1.  Trash and recycling areas for multiple-family dwellings and live/work shall provide the equivalent of not less than a fifty-gallon capacity container per dwelling unit. Where commercial trash containers are used, there shall be not less than one such container for every fifteen dwelling units. 
2.  All outside trash and recycling collection areas shall be enclosed or screened with a six-foot-high wall with gates and shall be located as to allow for convenient pickup and disposal. The location and design shall also incorporate access separate from pedestrian access. 
3.  All trash and recycling containers shall be provided with lids. 
4.  For multiple-family dwellings and live/work, at least sixty cubic feet of enclosed accessory storage space shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Said space may be located in a garage or carport; provided, that it does not interfere with the parking of a vehicle. 
5.  Recycling. Separate adequate capacity trash containers shall be provided for recycling. 
B.  Non-Residential. 
1.  Trash containers shall be provided with a sufficient capacity to contain all refuse generated by the Use. 
2.  All outside trash and recycling collection areas shall be enclosed or screened with a six-foot-high wall with gates and shall be located as to allow for convenient pickup and disposal. 
3.  All trash and recycling containers shall be provided with lids. 
4.  The design of the trash and recycling enclosure shall follow the guidelines of the City specifications on trash enclosures. 
5.  Recycling. Separate adequate capacity trash containers shall be provided for recycling. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(13)), 10-10-2013)  
18.23.1.100 - Mechanical Equipment. 
A.  All heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment, including ducts, meters, plumbing lines and tanks, shall be architecturally screened from public view, with the use of masonry walls when mounted at grade, or with the use of parapet walls when mounted on flat and pitched roofs. 
B.  Plumbing vent pipes, all heater flues and all roof penetrations shall be gathered and concealed from view in the same manner, and shall be painted to match the roof color. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(13)), 10-10-2013)  
18.23.1.110 - Architectural Compatibility. 
The exterior design of structures shall be compatible with the surrounding architecture in order to preserve neighborhood integrity and promote architectural consistency within the City. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(13)), 10-10-2013)  
18.23.1.120 - Design Review. 
Architectural and Site Plan Review for all development in the Mixed-Use Neighborhood zone shall be submitted to the appropriate decision-making body for review and approval pursuant to Chapter 18.58. The decision-making body shall consider the following criteria: 
A.  The project is located within easy walking distance of transit stops, shops, services, and public schools. 
B.  The project features high-quality market rate or affordable housing. 
C.  The project design includes pedestrian-friendly spaces such as plazas, squares, courtyards, and other amenities. 
D.  The project design includes comfortable and accessible open spaces. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(13)), 10-10-2013)  
Chapter 18.23.2 - R-O RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY 
 
18.23.2.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The R-O Residential Overlay provides, in addition to the base land use, the opportunity to develop residential uses in areas where convenient access to transit and neighborhood-serving uses is available. Together, the base land use designation and the overlay allow for a combination of commercial or office uses with higher-density residential development. The overlay is intended to promote high-quality market rate and affordable housing construction, as well as assisted living facilities, in areas where residents can easily walk to shops, services, schools, and transit stops. Residential development can either occur as part of a mixed-use development or as stand-alone, attractive multi-family housing. Design must include pedestrian-friendly spaces such as plazas, courtyards, and other amenities. The Residential Overlay may apply to four base land use designations: General Commercial, Mixed-Use Neighborhood, Industrial Park, and Light Industrial. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(14)), 10-10-2013)  
18.23.2.020 - Map Designation. 
This zone shall be in the form of an Overlay Zone and shall be established only in conjunction with another zone and shall be designated on the Official Zoning Map with the symbol R-O together with the underlying zone symbol, i.e., C-2/R-O. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(14)), 10-10-2013)  
18.23.2.030 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  All uses permitted by the underlying zone. 
B.  Assisted Living Facility. 
C.  Family Day Care, Small. 
D.  Live/Work Residential. "Live/Work Residential" means individual units that are used jointly for residential and business uses. For the purposes of this chapter, the first floor spaces of live/work units shall be reserved for commercial, office and service businesses that are open to the public. Garage and areas above the first floor shall be reserved for residential use. 
E.  Multiple-Family Dwelling, including condominiums and townhomes 1 . 
1.  Minimum twenty dwelling units per acre for affordable housing projects. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(14)), 10-10-2013)  
18.23.2.040 - Conditional Uses. 
A.  Family Day Care Homes, Large. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(14)), 10-10-2013)  
18.23.2.050 - Property Development Standards. 
All residential development shall conform to the property development standards, set out in the Mixed-Use-Downtown Zone Sections 18.23.050 through 18.23.110. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(14)), 10-10-2013)  
18.23.2.060 - Design Review. 
Architectural and Site Plan Review for all development shall be submitted to the appropriate decision-making body for review and approval pursuant to Chapter 18.58. The decision-making body shall consider the following criteria: 
A.  The project is located within easy walking distance of transit stops, shops, services, and public schools. 
B.  The project features high-quality market rate or affordable housing. 
C.  The project design includes pedestrian-friendly spaces such as plazas, squares, courtyards, and other amenities. 
D.  The project design includes comfortable and accessible open spaces. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(14)), 10-10-2013)  
Chapter 18.23.4 - C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL—DOWNTOWN OVERLAY ZONE 
 
18.23.4.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The General Commercial Downtown Zone (C-2/D) is intended to provide standards to guide its physical form and to encourage a wide range of retail and commercial services, professional offices, and medical facilities in the geographic center of the City's Historic Downtown. The Colton Downtown Design Manual is a companion document that supports the intent and purpose of this Code, and provides the vision and implementation actions to shape future development and implement for Downtown Colton. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.4.020 - Uses Generally. 
In the C-2/D Zone, no building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the purpose set out in Section 18.23.4.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.4.030 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table F in Section 18.06.060 F. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.4.040 - Reserved.  
18.23.4.050 - Property Development Standards. 
The following Property Development Standards, set out in Table 18.23.4.050-1, shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-2/D Zone. 
18.23.4.050-1 Property Development Standards 
Building Placement and Form 	Table 1 
A. Minimum Lot Size 	Four thousand sf 	Minimum Lot Dimensions  
B. Minimum Lot Width 	Forty feet 	
C. Minimum Lot Depth 	One hundred feet 	
D. Commercial Maximum Intensity 	2.0 Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 	Commercial Intensity  
E. Building Height Maximum 	Three stories or forty feet 	Building Height  
H. Street Setback 	The front setback for each lot shall be a maximum of ten feet with an exception up to twenty feet for a plaza or dining area. 	Setbacks: Adjacent to Commercial  
I. Side/Rear Setbacks 	1. Each lot shall have a maximum side setback of ten feet from a street. There shall be no side or rear setbacks required for interior lots adjacent to other commercial lots. 	
	2. Where the side of a lot abuts a residential zone, the minimum side setback shall be ten feet with a masonry wall separation between the two uses. 	
	3. Where the rear of a lot abuts a residential zone, the minimum rear setback shall be fifteen feet with a masonry wall separation between the two uses. 	
	4. Those portions of a Building that abut a residential zone, where the proposed structure is over thirty-five feet tall, shall be setback a minimum of twenty feet from that property line. 	
	5. Where vehicular access is taken from the side of a lot, the building shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five feet from that side. Where vehicular access is taken from the rear of a lot, the building shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five feet. 	
	6. Where a building is provided with a vehicle access door facing the side or rear of a lot, the building shall be set back twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley. 	
J. Building Placement 	1. Buildings located along Valley Boulevard shall be oriented toward the Valley Boulevard street frontage unless proven infeasible by the applicant. 	Building Placement and Form  
	2. Buildings located along Valley Boulevard shall have a primary entrance door facing Valley Boulevard; entrances at building corners may be used to satisfy this requirement. 	
	3. Buildings shall not back onto Valley Boulevard. 	
K. Ground Floor Transparency 	1. First floor building façades facing Valley Boulevard must include a minimum of forty-five percent transparent glazing for commercial or retail uses. A minimum of thirty percent transparent glazing shall apply to office uses. Building code energy and seismic standards must be met. 	Ground Floor Transparency  
	2. Windows must be transparent; opaque or reflective glazing is not permitted. 	
L. Rooftop Screening 	All roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way including Interstate 10. Screening shall be constructed of materials complementary or similar to primary building surfaces. 	
 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.4.060 - Signage Standards. 
The requirements for signs shall be as outlined in Section 18.50 of this Code.  
18.23.4.070 - Vehicular Access and Parking. 
A.  For parcels with less than one hundred linear feet of street frontage, a maximum of one vehicle access from Valley Boulevard is permitted. For parcels with one hundred linear feet or more of street frontage, a maximum of two vehicle access points from Valley Boulevard are allowed. 
B.  Reciprocal ingress and egress access with adjacent properties shall be provided for all properties. This requirement may be waived with City approval due to the following circumstances: 
1.  Extreme site constraints, 
2.  Extreme changes in topography, 
3.  Circumstances that would result in severe environmental impacts, 
4.  The location of existing structures or existing infrastructure, 
5.  The lack of agreement between adjacent owners, or 
6.  Other extreme hardship. 
C.  Parking shall be located behind buildings fronting Valley Boulevard. 
 
Vehicular Access and Parking Location 
 
Reciprocal Access 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.4.080 - Parking Requirements. 
A.  Specific Requirements. 
1.  The following number of parking spaces shall be required to serve the uses or buildings listed, as established in Table 18.23.070-1 (Downtown Zone Parking Requirements). All uses must provide the sum of the requirements for each individual use. 
2.  "Square feet" means "gross square feet" and refers to the sum gross square feet of the floor area of a building and its accessory buildings unless otherwise specified. 
3.  The General Parking Requirements in Subsection 18.18.120 B. shall be met. 
4.  When the calculation of the required number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction of a space, the total number of spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
5.  On-street parking spaces adjacent to a project site may be counted toward meeting minimum on-site parking requirements where no parking restrictions are in place, subject to the review and approval of the Development Services Director. 
Table 18.23.070-1
(Downtown Zone Parking Requirements) 
Land Use 	Spaces Required (based upon gross floor area) 
Commercial Land Uses 	Parking Spaces Required 
C-2/D-O 	1 space per 500 sf 
 
  
B.  General Requirements. The general requirements for off-street parking shall be as outlined in Chapter 18.36 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 25, 12-18-2018)  
18.23.4.090 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be provided for the Development of any Lot with a minimum Landscaping coverage of fifteen percent of the Lot Area. The Landscaping shall provide a mixture of shrubs, trees, groundcover, flowers and lawns throughout the entire Front Yard area, Side Yard areas, Parkways and throughout Open Spaces not occupied by access ways, parking areas and sidewalks. One tree per five parking spaces shall be provided and planted throughout the landscaped areas. Thirty-five percent of the trees shall be of twenty-four-inch box size, another fifteen percent of thirty-six-inch box size, and the remainder may be a minimum of fifteen-gallon size. Landscape and irrigation plans shall be prepared by a licensed Landscape Architect or Engineer, and submitted to the Development Services Director along with the general Building plans for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.4.100 - Trash Areas. 
The requirements for trash areas shall be as outlined in Section 18.18.140 of this Code.  
18.23.4.110 - Mechanical Equipment. 
The requirements for screening of mechanical equipment shall be as outlined in Section 18.18.150 of this Code.  
18.23.4.120 - Architectural and Site Plan Review. 
Site Plans, Floor Plans and Building Elevations shall be submitted for review and approval whenever a structure or number of structures are proposed for the development of a site. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
18.23.4.130 - Colton Downtown Design Manual Reference. 
The Colton Downtown Design Manual is a companion document to complement the Downtown Development Code, and has been prepared to establish an achievable vision, shape future development, and implement an action plan for Downtown Colton. Any future development plans within the Downtown must be consistent with the Colton Downtown Design Manual. 
(Ord. No. O-12-16, § 3(Exh. C), 8-2-2016)  
Chapter 18.24 - I-P INDUSTRIAL PARK ZONE 
 
18.24.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The I-P Industrial Park Zone designation provides for single-tenant and multi-tenant office and industrial buildings that house professional offices, research and development, light industrial, and similar uses. Supporting retail and personal service commercial uses that are subordinate to and compatible with the Industrial Park environment may be permitted to serve the needs of the local business community. Commercial recreation and entertainment uses may be allowed, consistent with zoning regulations. Businesses that generate employment and sales or use tax revenues are preferred. Areas designated as Industrial Park should be visually attractive and reflect high-quality development and design standards within a park-like setting. They should also provide adequate buffering from less-intensive land uses and have adequate access to major transportation routes. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(15)), 10-10-2013)  
18.24.020 - Uses Generally. 
In the I-P Zone, no building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the purpose set out in Section 18.24.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(15)), 10-10-2013)  
18.24.030 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table G in Section 18.06.060 G. 
(Ord. 0-11-08 § 17, 2008: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-07-09, § 7, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(15)), 10-10-2013)  
18.24.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(15)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed § 18.24.040, which pertained to Conditional Uses and derived from Ord. 0-11-08 § 18, 2008: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992; Ord. No. O-07-09, § 8, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. O-08-09, § 8, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. O-01-13, § 11, 5-7-2013.  
18.24.050 - Property Development Standards. 
The Following Property Development standards, set out in Sections 18.24.060 through 18.24.110, Shall apply to all land and Building in the I-P Zone. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.24.060 - Lot Area. 
Each Lot Shall have a minimum area of fifteen thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.24.070 - Lot Dimensions. 
A.  Each Lot Shall have a minimum width of one hundred feet. 
B.  Each Lot Shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.24.080 - Maximum Intensity. 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio is 0.5. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(15)), 10-10-2013)  
18.24.090 - Building Height. 
The maximum Building Height Shall be three stories or forty feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.24.100 - Front Setback. 
Each Lot Shall have a front Setback of not less than twenty feet extending across the full width of the Lot, with the exceptions of cornices, Eaves, Sills and similar Architectural Features which May Project up to five feet into the required Setback. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.24.110 - Side and Rear Setbacks. 
A.  Each Lot Shall have a side Setback of fifteen feet from a Street. There Shall be no side Setback required for Interior Lots adjacent to other commercial or industrial Lots. In the case where the side of a Lot abuts a Residential Zone, the minimum side Setback Shall be fifteen feet, with a masonry Wall separation between the two Uses. In the case where the side of a Lot abuts an existing residential Use, a masonry Wall separation Shall be required between the two Uses. 
B.  Each Lot Shall have a rear Setback of ten feet from a Street. There Shall be no rear Setback required for Interior Lots adjacent to other commercial or industrial Lots. In the case where the rear of a Lot abuts a Residential Zone, the minimum rear Setback Shall be fifteen feet, with a masonry Wall separation between the two Uses. In the case where the rear of a Lot abuts an existing residential Use, a masonry Wall separation Shall be required between the two Uses. 
C.  Where a Building is provided with a Vehicle Access door facing the side or rear of a Lot, the Building Shall be set back twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the Alley. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 11, 2007: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.24.120 - Parking Requirements. 
See Chapter 18.36. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 4, 2007: Ord. 0-24-04 § 2 (part), 2004; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-03-15, § 11, 3-3-2015; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 26, 12-18-2018)  
18.24.130 - Landscaping. 
In all commercial and industrial Developments: 
A.  Landscaping Shall be provided for the Development of any Lot with a minimum Landscaping coverage of fifteen percent of the Lot Area. The Landscaping Shall provide a mixture of shrubs, trees, groundcover, flowers and lawns throughout the entire Front Yard area, Side Yard areas, Parkways and throughout Open Spaces not occupied by accessways, parking areas and Sidewalks. One tree per three Parking Spaces Shall be provided and planted throughout the landscaped areas. Twenty-five percent of the trees Shall be of twenty-four inch box size, another twenty-five percent of thirty-six inch box size, and the remainder May be a minimum of fifteen-gallon size. Landscape and irrigation plans Shall be prepared by a licensed Landscape Architect or Engineer, and submitted to the Community Development Director along with the general Building plans for review and Approval. 
B.  The required Landscaping Shall be maintained in a neat, clean, safe, orderly and healthful condition. 
C.  The landscaped areas Shall be provided with a suitable permanent method for watering or sprinkling of plants. Wherever possible, the watering system Shall utilize the least amount of water. Sprinklers Used to satisfy the requirements of this provision Shall be so spaced as to assure complete coverage of the landscaped areas. 
D.  Areas proposed for Development in another phase Shall be temporarily turfed, seeded and irrigated for dust and soil erosion control, if the phase will not begin construction within six Months of completion of the previous phase. 
(Ord. 0-13-01 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.24.140 - Trash Areas. 
For commercial and industrial Uses, trash containers Shall be provided with a sufficient capacity to contain all Refuse generated by the Use. All outside trash and Garbage collection areas Shall be enclosed or screened with a six-foot-high Wall with Gates and Shall be located as to allow for convenient pickup and disposal. The design of the trash Enclosure Shall follow the guidelines of City specifications on trash Enclosures. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.24.150 - Mechanical Equipment. 
A.  All heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment, including ducts, meters, plumbing lines and tanks, Shall be architecturally screened from public view, with the Use of masonry Walls when mounted at Grade, or with the Use of Parapet Walls when mounted on flat and pitched roofs. 
B.  Plumbing vent pipes, all heater flues and all roof penetrations Shall be gathered and concealed from view in the same manner, and painted to match the roof color. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.24.160 - Design Review. 
Site Plans and Elevations Shall be submitted for review and Approval whenever a Structure or number of Structures are proposed for the Development of a site. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.26 - M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE 
 
18.26.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The M-1 Light Industrial Zone is intended to provide a variety of fabrication, manufacturing, assembly, distribution, and warehouse uses and, to a lesser degree, supporting commercial and office uses. The Light Industrial designation is intended for uses that are compatible with those in nearby commercial and residential districts, and do not produce substantial environmental nuisances (noise, odor, dust/smoke, glare, etc.). Uses may include low-intensity packing, assembly, storage, and similar uses that do not adversely affect surrounding residential, office, educational or commercial land uses. Light Industrial developments should be visually attractive, reflect high-quality development standards, provide adequate buffering from less-intensive land uses, and have adequate access to major transportation routes. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(16)), 10-10-2013)  
18.26.020 - Uses Generally. 
In the M-1 Zone, no building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the purpose set out in Section of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(16)), 10-10-2013)  
18.26.030 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table G in Section 18.06.060 G. 
(Ord. 0-11-08 § 19, 2008: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-07-09, § 9, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(16)), 10-10-2013)  
18.26.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(16)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed § 18.26.040, which pertained to Conditional Uses and derived from Ord. 0-11-08 § 20, 2008: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992; Ord. No. O-07-09, § 10, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. O-08-09, § 9, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. O-01-13, § 12, 5-7-2013.  
18.26.050 - Property Development standards. 
The Following Property Development standards, set out in Sections 18.26.060 through 18.26.110, Shall apply to all land and Buildings in the M-1 Zone. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.26.060 - Lot area. 
Each Lot Shall have a minimum area of fifteen thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.26.070 - Lot Dimensions. 
A.  Each Lot Shall have a minimum width of one hundred feet. 
B.  Each Lot Shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.26.080 - Maximum Intensity. 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio is .0.5. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(16)), 10-10-2013)  
18.26.090 - Building Height. 
The maximum Building Height Shall be three stories or forty feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.26.100 - Front Setback. 
Each Lot Shall have a front Setback of not less than twenty feet extending across the full width of the Lot, with the exceptions of cornices, Eaves, Sills and similar Architectural Features which May Project up to five feet into the required Setback. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.26.110 - Side and Rear Setbacks. 
A.  Each Lot Shall have a side Setback of fifteen feet from a Street. There Shall be no side Setback required for Interior Lots adjacent to other commercial or industrial Lots. In the case where the side of a Lot abuts a Residential Zone, the minimum side Setback Shall be fifteen feet, with a masonry Wall separation between the two Uses. In the case where the side of a Lot abuts an existing residential Use, a masonry Wall separation Shall be required between the two Uses. 
B.  Each Lot Shall have a rear Setback of ten feet from a Street. There Shall be no rear Setback required for Lots adjacent to other commercial or industrial Lots. In the case where the rear of a Lot abuts a Residential Zone, the minimum rear Setback Shall be fifteen feet, with a masonry Wall separation between the two Uses. In the case where the rear of a Lot abuts an existing residential Use, a masonry Wall separation Shall be required between the two Uses. 
C.  Where a Building is provided with a Vehicle Access door facing the side or rear of a Lot, the Building Shall be set back twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the Alley. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 12, 2007: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.26.120 - Parking Requirements. 
See Chapter 18.36. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 5, 2007: Ord. 0-24-04 § 2 (part), 2004; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-03-15, § 12, 3-3-2015; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 27, 12-18-2018)  
18.26.130 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping Shall be provided for the Development of any Lot with a minimum Landscaping coverage of fifteen percent of the Lot Area. The Landscaping Shall provide a mixture of shrubs, trees, groundcover, flowers and lawns throughout the entire Front Yard area, Side Yard areas, Parkways and throughout Open Spaces not occupied by accessways, parking areas and Sidewalks. One tree per three Parking Spaces Shall be provided and planted throughout the landscaped areas. Twenty-five percent of the trees Shall be of twenty-four inch box size, another twenty-five percent of thirty-six inch box size, and the remainder May be a minimum of fifteen-gallon size. Landscape and irrigation plans Shall be prepared by a licensed Landscape Architect or Engineer, and submitted to the Community Development Director along with the general Building plans for review and Approval. 
(Ord. 0-13-01 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.26.140 - Trash Areas. 
The requirements for trash areas Shall be as outlined in Section 18.24.140 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.26.150 - Mechanical Equipment. 
The requirements for Screening of mechanical equipment Shall be as outlined in Section 18.24.150 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.26.160 - Design Review. 
Site Plans and Elevations Shall be submitted for review and Approval whenever a Structure or number of Structures are proposed for the Development of a site. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.28 - M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONE 
 
18.28.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The M-2 Heavy Industrial Zone is intended to include heavy manufacturing, distribution, assembly, resource mining, storage, and similar activities not normally compatible near residential development due to environmental nuisances such as noise and air pollution. Within established areas, Heavy Industrial uses should be buffered from residential neighborhoods by Light Industrial or Industrial Park development wherever possible. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(17)), 10-10-2013)  
18.28.020 - Uses Generally. 
In the M-2 Zone, no building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the purpose set out in Section 18.28.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(17)), 10-10-2013)  
18.28.030 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table G in Section 18.06.060 G. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-07-09, § 11, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. O-02-13, § 3, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(17)), 10-10-2013)  
18.28.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(17)), adopted October 10, 2013, repealed § 18.28.040, which pertained to Conditional Uses and derived from Ord. 0-11-08 § 21, 2008: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992; Ord. No. O-07-09, § 12, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. O-08-09, § 10, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. O-01-13, § 13, 5-7-2013; Ord. No. O-02-13, § 4, 6-18-2013.  
18.28.050 - Property Development Standards. 
The Following Property Development standards, set out in Sections 18.28.060 through 18.28.110, Shall apply to all land and Buildings in the M-2 Zone. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.28.060 - Lot Area. 
Each Lot Shall have a minimum area of fifteen thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.28.070 - Lot Dimensions. 
A.  Each Lot Shall have a minimum width of one hundred feet. 
B.  Each Lot Shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.28.080 - Maximum Intensity. 
Maximum 0.5 Floor Area Ratio (FAR). 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(17)), 10-10-2013)  
18.28.090 - Building Height. 
The maximum Building Height Shall be three stories or fifty feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(17)), 10-10-2013)  
18.28.100 - Front Setback. 
Each Lot Shall have a front Setback of not less than twenty feet extending across the full width of the Lot, with the exceptions of cornices, Eaves, Sills and similar Architectural Features which May Project up to five feet into the required Setback. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.28.110 - Side and Rear Setbacks. 
A.  Each Lot Shall have a side Setback of fifteen feet from a Street. There Shall be no side Setback required for Lots adjacent to other commercial or industrial Lots. In the case where the side of a Lot abuts a Residential Zone, the minimum side Setback Shall be fifteen feet, with a masonry Wall separation between the two Uses. In the case where the side of a Lot abuts an existing residential Use, a masonry Wall separation Shall be required between the two Uses. 
B.  Each Lot Shall have a rear Setback of ten feet from a Street. There Shall be no rear Setback required for Lots adjacent to other commercial or industrial Lots. In the case where the rear of a Lot abuts a Residential Zone, the minimum rear Setback Shall be fifteen feet, with a masonry Wall separation between the two Uses. In the case where the rear of a Lot abuts an existing residential Use, a masonry Wall separation Shall be required between the two Uses. 
C.  Where a Building is provided with a Vehicle Access door facing the side or rear of a Lot, the Building Shall be set back twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the Alley. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 13, 2007: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.28.120 - Parking Requirements. 
See CMC Chapter 18.36. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 6, 2007: Ord. 0-24-04 § 2 (part), 2004; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-03-15, § 13, 3-3-2015; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 28, 12-18-2018)  
18.28.130 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping Shall be provided for the Development of any Lot with a minimum Landscaping coverage of fifteen percent of the Lot Area. The Landscaping Shall provide a mixture of shrubs, trees, groundcover, flowers and lawns throughout the entire Front Yard area, Side Yard areas, Parkways and throughout Open Spaces not occupied by accessways, parking areas and Sidewalks. One tree per three Parking Spaces Shall be provided and planted throughout the landscaped areas. Twenty-five percent of the trees Shall be of twenty-four-inch box size, another twenty-five percent of thirty-six-inch box size, and the remainder May be a minimum of fifteen-gallon size. Landscape and irrigation plans Shall be prepared by a licensed Landscape Architect or Engineer, and submitted to the Community Development Director along with the general Building plans for review and Approval. 
(Ord. 0-13-01 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-03-15, § 13, 3-3-2015)  
18.28.140 - Trash Areas. 
The requirements for trash areas Shall be as outlined in Section 18.24.140 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.28.150 - Mechanical Equipment. 
The requirements for Screening of mechanical equipment Shall be as outlined in Section 18.24.150 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.28.160 - Design Review. 
Site Plans and Elevations Shall be submitted for review and Approval whenever a Structure or number or Structures are proposed for the Development of a site. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.29 - P-I PUBLIC/INSTITUTIONAL ZONE 
 
18.29.010 - Intent and Purposes. 
The Public/Institutional Zone is established to reserve sites throughout the community consistent with the General Plan for public facilities and public service installations and to provide a procedure for their establishment and for the expansion of their operations. It generally includes all major public, quasi-public, and institutional land uses, including the Civic Center, fire stations, hospitals, libraries, community centers, water treatment facilities, waste disposal facilities, and public schools. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(18)), 10-10-2013)  
18.29.020 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table I in Section 18.06.060. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(18)), 10-10-2013)  
18.29.030 - Existing Public Facilities. 
All public uses existing in the Public/Institutional Zone as of the date of the adoption of this chapter are declared to be conforming uses and structures. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(18)), 10-10-2013)  
18.29.040 - Development Standards. 
Table 18.29.040-1 sets forth the standards which govern the size, location, height and other characteristics of structures in the Public/Institutional Zone. 
Table 18-29.040-1: Development Standards 
Category 	Requirement 
Site size 	Sites are to be large enough to accommodate the proposed use and shall be as specified as part of Architectural and Site Plan Review. 
Setbacks 	Front, side and rear yards are to be equivalent or greater than those required in the district that adjoins the site at the front, side or rear, or is located across a public street from the site. Where the site adjoins or faces more than one district, the district regulations providing the greater setback govern. Note that where the side or rear property lines of a site adjoins a Residential District, a six-foot solid masonry steel reinforced wall may be required at the side or rear property lines. 
Building height 	Three and one-half stories, not exceeding fifty feet, subject to the following exceptions: 
	1. Where the site is bounded on all sides by a district with a greater permitted height, the maximum height shall be no greater than ten feet above that permitted by the surrounding district; 
	2. Where the site is bounded by more than one district, and all of the bounding districts permit a greater height, the maximum building height shall be equivalent to the abutting district permitting the next greatest height; 
	3. Where the site is surrounded by nonresidential districts, a height of up to six stories, to a maximum of eighty-four feet, may be permitted by the Design Review Committee. 
	4. Where the site is surrounded by residential district the maximum height shall be no greater than adjacent/abutting district for in the first forty feet setback and increased by ten feet every twenty feet setback from the forty feet setback requirement not exceeding fifty feet. 
Maximum Intensity 	0.5 to 2.0 Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 
Landscaping 	The full depth of all required setback areas adjoining a street; 
Off-street parking lots as prescribed in Chapter 18.36. 
 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(18)), 10-10-2013)  
18.29.050 - Special Requirements. 
The following special requirements apply to all uses in the Public/Institutional Zone: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided, required setback areas adjoining streets may only be used for landscaping, access drives, walkways, lighting standards (poles), and signs; 
B.  The outdoor storage of materials and equipment is permitted only within an area surrounded by a security fence or wall eight feet in height with gates capable of being locked. Within storage areas, except for trucks or other vehicles necessary for the operation, materials may not be stored to a height greater than eight feet. Where the storage area is visible from a public street or from adjoining properties in residential, office, public or institutional use, the storage area is to be screened by an eight foot sight-obscuring wall or fence along the side of the storage area facing the street or use. Storage areas are not to be located in required parking areas, front setback areas or side setback areas on the street side of corner lots; 
C.  Any process or activity deemed by the Design Review Committee or the Planning Commission to be unsightly may be required to be screened from view by use of a solid wall or fence eight feet in height; 
D.  Off-street parking and loading facilities are to be provided as set forth in Chapter 18.36; 
E.  Signs may be permitted as set forth in Chapter 18.50; 
F.  All uses must be operated in a manner consistent with the environmental performance standards established in Chapter 18.42. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(18)), 10-10-2013)  
Chapter 18.29.1 - RAILROAD/UTILITY CORRIDOR ZONE 
 
18.29.1.010 - Intent and Purposes. 
The Railroad/Utility Corridor Zone is established to protect all railroad corridors and associated railroad uses, as well as properties used for energy resource transmission and other utility lines throughout the community consistent. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(19)), 10-10-2013)  
18.29.1.020 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table J in Section 18.06.060. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(19)), 10-10-2013)  
18.29.1.030 - Existing Public Facilities. 
All public uses existing in the Railroad/Utility Corridor Zone as of the date of the adoption of this chapter are declared to be conforming uses and structures. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(19)), 10-10-2013)  
18.29.1.040 - Special Requirements. 
The following special requirements apply to all uses in the Railroad/Utility Corridor Zone: 
A.  The outdoor storage of materials and equipment is permitted only within an area surrounded by a security fence or wall eight feet in height with gates capable of being locked. Within storage areas, except for trucks or other vehicles necessary for the operation, materials may not be stored to a height of eight feet. Where the storage area is visible from a public street or from adjoining properties in residential, office, public or institutional use, the storage area is to be screened by an eight foot sight-obscuring wall or fence along the side of the storage area facing the street or use. Storage areas are not to be located in required parking areas, front setback areas or side setback areas on the street side of corner lots; 
B.  Any process or activity deemed by the Design Review Committee or the Planning Commission to be unsightly may be required to be screened from view by use of a solid wall or fence eight feet in height; 
C.  Off-street parking and loading facilities are to be provided as set forth in Chapter 18.36; 
D.  Signs may be permitted as set forth in Chapter 18.50, except as may be required by the Federal Railroad Administration or United States Department of Transportation; 
E.  All uses must be operated in a manner consistent with the environmental performance standards established in Chapter 18.42. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(19)), 10-10-2013)  
Chapter 18.30 - SDA SENSITIVE DEVELOPMENT AREA OVERLAY ZONE 
 
18.30.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The SDA Overlay Zone is intended to mitigate the impacts of industrial uses near or adjacent to residential neighborhoods. The SDA Overlay Zone allows the Planning Commission to review proposed industrial uses and impose conditions of approval to ensure compatibility between industrial and residential uses. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-15-16, § 4, 10-4-16)  
18.30.020 - Map Designation. 
This zone shall be in the form of an Overlay Zone and shall be established only in conjunction with another zone and shall be designated on the Official Zoning Map with the symbol SDA together with the underlying zone symbol, i.e., R-1/SDA. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-15-16, § 4, 10-4-16)  
18.30.030 - Conditional Use Permit requirements. 
A.  Plans for all development in an SDA Zone Shall be submitted to the Commission for review and Approval under the Conditional Use Permit procedure. 
B.  Plans for Development be submitted to the Commission May be proposed as a Master Conditional Use Permit whereby potential future land uses are identified within particular buildings and/or locations within a site or parcel. Subsequent Conditional Use Permits shall not be required for uses within particular buildings and/or locations as identified by an approved Master Conditional Use Permit. 
C.  Before approving a proposed Development, the Commission must find that the following conditions are satisfied: 
1.  That the proposed development is in conformance with the goals, policies and land use designations in the General Plan for that area; 
2.  That the proposed development will not impose significant noise, traffic, air quality, aesthetic or other environmental impacts on adjacent or nearby residential neighborhoods that cannot be mitigated to a level of insignificance. 
3.  That the proposed development meets all requirements of this title for similar developments permitted by right. 
D.  In granting a permit, the Commission may impose certain conditions that in its opinion will assist to safeguard the health, safety and property values in that zone. 
E.  If the Commission so deems necessary, it may refuse to allow a use which it considers incompatible with adjacent or nearby residential neighborhoods. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-15-16, § 4, 10-4-16)  
Chapter 18.32 - PC PLANNED COMMUNITY OVERLAY ZONE 
 
18.32.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The PC Planned Community Overlay Zone is intended to provide for greater flexibility in design and Development of Parcels of land and to Permit and encourage a variety of housing types and environments; a more creative and imaginative approach to the design of Developments and promote a mixture of residential densities and housing types, community facilities, both public and private, and commercial and industrial areas; more efficient Use of land, resulting in smaller networks of utilities and Streets; the provision of greater amounts of Open Space and amenities for the recreational and visual enjoyment; and, the preservation and enhancement of valuable natural areas. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.32.020 - Map Designation. 
This Zone Shall be in the form of an Overlay Zone and Shall be established only in conjunction with another Zone and Shall be Designated on the Official Zoning Map with the symbol PC together with the underlying Zone symbol, i.e., R-1/PC. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.32.030 - Design Review Requirements. 
Plans for all Development in the PC Zone Shall be submitted to the Commission for design review Approval, except Single Family Dwellings, when Permitted in the Zone, and additions thereto. Before approving a design, the Commission Must find that the Following conditions are satisfied: 
A.  That the proposed Development is in conformance with the guidelines of the General Plan for that area; 
B.  That the proposed Development meets all requirements of this title and the planned community Development standards for similar Developments Permitted by right. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.32.040 - Cooley Ranch Planned Community. 
The Development standards for the Cooley Ranch planned community are included as an addendum to this title, with a map showing suggested land Uses within the community. Standards are provided for Mobilehome Park Development, Multiple-Family Dwellings, commercial and industrial Development in that area, with general standards for Landscaping, parking, loading and Signs. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.32.050 - Additional Standards. 
All the regulations, standards and provisions provided in this title and not specifically outlined or mentioned in the Cooley Ranch planned community Development standards or in Development standards for other residential planned community areas Shall be applicable to all Development in the planned community. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.34 - SP SPECIFIC PLAN OVERLAY ZONE 
 
18.34.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The SP Specific Plan Overlay Zone is intended to facilitate Development within the City in accordance with the General Plan by Permitting greater flexibility and encouraging more creative designs for major Development Projects subject to large-scale community planning; and to promote a more economical and efficient Use of the land while providing a harmonious variety of housing choices and commercial and industrial activities, and preservation of natural and scenic qualities of Open Space. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.34.020 - Adoption. 
The Specific Plan Zone is intended to be Used only when a specific plan is adopted by the City in compliance with Section 65500 of the State planning, zoning and Development Laws. This Zone Shall replace any existing Zone and Shall be governed by the Development standards outlined in the specific plan. Once the specific plan has been adopted and has become effective, the Director of Planning Shall cause all pertinent maps and regulations to be duly amended and thereafter all Development of the affected locations Shall conform to those regulations contained in the text of the specific plan subject to whatever allowance May be made by the Zoning Ordinance for Nonconforming Uses, land or Structures. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.34.030 - Map Designation. 
This Zone Shall be in the form of an Overlay Zone and Shall be established only in conjunction with another Zone and Shall be Designated on the Official Zoning Map with the symbol SP together with the underlying Zone symbol, i.e., SP/I-P. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.34.040 - Colton's Hub City Centre Specific Plan. 
The Development standards for Colton's Hub City Centre specific plan are included in the specific plan with a map showing land Uses within the specific plan area. The plan is included as an addendum to this title. The total area for the portion of the specific plan within the City boundaries is three hundred seventy-three and two tenths acres, with the majority Designated for commercial/business Uses. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-10-14, § 3, 11-21-2014)  
18.34.050 - Roquet Ranch Specific Plan. 
The Plan Components and Implementation, Development Standards, Design Guidelines and Administration for the Roquet Ranch Specific Plan are included in the Specific Plan with map showing Land Uses within the Specific Plan area. The plan is included as an addendum to this title. The total area for the portion of the specific plan within the City boundaries is three hundred thirty-six and two tenths acres, with the majority designated for open space resource and recreation Uses. 
(Ord. No. O-07-18, § 3, 6-5-2018)  
18.34.060 - Reche Canyon Specific Plan. 
The Development standards for the Reche Canyon specific plan are included in the specific plan with a map showing land Uses within the specific plan area. The plan is included as an addendum to this title. The total area for the portion of the specific plan within the City boundaries is one thousand five hundred sixty-two acres, with the majority Designated for residential Uses, at different densities. 
(Ord. 0-07-03 § 2 (Exh. A), 2003: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.34.070 - Additional Standards. 
All the regulations, standards and provisions provided in this title and not specifically outlined or mentioned in the specific plan Development standards Shall be applicable to all Development in the specific plan areas. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.35 - OPEN SPACE-RECREATION 
 
18.35.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
The Open Space-Recreation District is established: 
A.  To reserve sites within the community for open spaces in accordance with the General Plan; 
B.  To protect and preserve unique areas in the City for purposes as groundwater recharge, flood control, wildlife habitat conservation which are of historic, cultural, social, and aesthetic value; 
C.  To protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to minimize possible costs to the City and other public agencies that may result from the improper use of land subject to periodic flooding. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(20)), 10-10-2013)  
18.35.020 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table H. in Section 18.60.060 of this Title. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(20)), 10-10-2013)  
8.35.030 - Development Standards. 
Table 18.35.030-1 sets forth the standards which govern the size, location, height, and other characteristics of structure in the Open Space-Recreational Zone. 
Table 18.35.030-1: Development Standards in the Open Space-Recreation Zone 
Site Size 	None 
Setbacks 	At least equivalent to those required in the zone that adjoins the site at the front, side, or rear or is located across a public street from the site. Where the site adjoins or faces more than one zone, the zone regulations prescribing the greater setback shall govern. Note that where the side or rear property lines of a site adjoins a residential zone, a six-foot solid wall or fence may be required along the side or rear property lines. 
Building Height 	Three stories, not exceeding forty-five feet 
Landscaping 	The full depth of all required setback areas adjoining a street, except where the adjacent zone requires a greater setback, the greater setback shall apply; 
 Any other setback of ten feet or less adjoining a street. Off-street parking lots as prescribed in Chapter 18.36. 
 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(20)), 10-10-2013)  
18.35.040 - Other Requirements. 
The following special requirements apply: 
A.  No use is to be permitted, and no process, equipment, or materials shall be employed which, on the basis of an environmental assessment, are found to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt refuse, water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, glare, electromagnetic interference, unsightliness, or other objectionable feature or to involve a hazard of fire, explosion or release of hazardous materials; 
B.  The outdoor storage of materials and equipment is permitted only within an area surrounded by a security fence or wall eight feet in height with gates capable of being locked. Within storage areas, except for trucks or other vehicles necessary for the operation, no such materials may be stored to a height greater than eight feet. Where the storage area is visible from a public street or from adjoining properties in residential, office, public or institutional use, the storage area is to be screened by an eight-foot sight obscuring wall or fence along the side of the storage area facing the street or use. Storage areas are not to be located in required parking areas, in front setback areas or side setback areas on the street side of corner lots; 
C.  Any process or activity deemed by the Design Review Committee or the Planning Commission to be unsightly may be required to be screened from view by use of a solid wall or fence eight feet in height; 
D.  For purpose of this Section, vehicle parking refers to short-term parking of twenty-four hours or less. Vehicle storage refers to parking in excess of twenty-four hours. Neither type of facility shall be for the purpose of providing required parking for any other use other than a permitted or conditionally permitted onsite use. All such facilities shall conform to the development standards for parking facilities, including paving, striping, landscaping and setbacks; 
E.  Off-street parking and loading facilities are to be provided as set forth in Chapter 18.36; 
F.  Signs may be permitted as set forth in Chapter 18.50; 
G.  All uses must be operated in a manner consistent with the Environmental Performance Standards established in Chapter 18.42. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(20)), 10-10-2013)  
18.35.050 - Development Plan Review. 
Architectural and Site Plan Review is required by Chapter 18.58 for all new, altered or expanded uses including all new permanent structures over five hundred square feet or expansions of existing buildings which exceed five hundred square feet. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(20)), 10-10-2013)  
Chapter 18.35.1 - OPEN SPACE-RESOURCES 
 
18.35.1.010 - Intent and Purposes. 
The Open Space-Resource District is established: 
A.  To protect and preserve unique areas in the City for such purposes as groundwater recharge, flood control, wildlife habitat conservation and hillside protection; 
B.  To protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to minimize possible costs to the City and other public agencies that may result from the improper use of land subject to periodic flooding. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(21)), 10-10-2013)  
18.35.1.020 - Permitted Uses. 
Refer to Table H. in Section 18.60.060 of this Title. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(21)), 10-10-2013)  
18.35.1.030 - Development Standards. 
Table 18.35.1.030-1 sets forth the standards which govern the size, location, height, and other characteristics of structure in the Open Space-Resource District. 
Table 18.35.1.030-1: Development Standards in the Open Space-Resource District 
Site Size 	None 
Setbacks 	At least equivalent to those required in the zone that adjoins the site at the front, side, or rear or is located across a public street from the site. Where the site adjoins or faces more than one zone, the zone regulations prescribing the greater setback shall govern. Note that where the side or rear property lines of a site adjoins a Residential zone, a six-foot solid wall or fence may be required along the side or rear property lines. 
Building Height 	Three stories, not exceeding forty-five feet. 
Landscaping 	The full depth of all required setback areas adjoining a street, except where the adjacent zone requires a greater setback, the greater setback shall apply; 
 Any other setback of ten feet or less adjoining a street. Off-street parking lots as prescribed in Chapter 18.36. 
 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(21)), 10-10-2013)  
18.35.1.040 - Other Requirements. 
The following special requirements apply: 
A.  No use is to be permitted, and no process, equipment, or materials shall be employed which, on the basis of an environmental assessment, are found to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt refuse, water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, glare, electromagnetic interference, unsightliness, or other objectionable feature or to involve a hazard of fire, explosion or release of hazardous materials; 
B.  The outdoor storage of materials and equipment is permitted only within an area surrounded by a security fence or wall eight feet in height with gates capable of being locked. Within storage areas, except for trucks or other vehicles necessary for the operation, no such materials to be stored to a height greater than eight feet. Where the storage area is visible from a public street or from adjoining properties in residential, office, public or institutional use, the storage area is to be screened by an eight foot sight obscuring wall or fence along the side of the storage area facing the street or use. Storage areas are not to be located in required parking areas, in front setback areas or side setback areas on the street side of corner lots; 
C.  Any process or activity deemed by the Design Review Committee or the Planning Commission to be unsightly may be required to be screened from view by use of a solid wall or fence eight feet in height; 
D.  For purpose of this Section, vehicle parking refers to short-term parking of twenty-four hours or less. Vehicle storage refers to parking in excess of twenty-four hours. Neither type of facility shall be for the purpose of providing required parking for any other use other than a permitted or conditionally permitted onsite use. All such facilities shall conform to the development standards for parking facilities, including paving, striping, landscaping and setbacks; 
E.  Off-street parking and loading facilities are to be provided as set forth in Chapter 18.36; 
F.  All uses must be operated in a manner consistent with the Environmental Performance Standards established in Chapter 18.42. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(21)), 10-10-2013)  
18.35.1.060 - Development Plan Review. 
Architectural and Site Plan Review is required by Chapter 18.58 for all new, altered or expanded uses including all new permanent structures over five hundred square feet or expansions of existing buildings which exceed five hundred square feet. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(21)), 10-10-2013)  
Chapter 18.36 - NON-RESIDENTIAL PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Retitled from "Parking and Loading Requirements" by Ord. No. O-12-18, § 29, adopted Dec. 18, 2018. 
 
18.36.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide provisions for adequate Off-Street parking and loading, thereby helping to reduce traffic congestion, promoting more efficient loading operations, allowing more efficient Use of On-Street parking and reducing the Use of Public Streets for loading purposes. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.36.020 - General Parking Provisions. 
A.  When a Structure or Use is altered, modified or enlarged, it must at that time comply with the standards and requirements set forth in this title, with regard to the addition proposed only. 
B.  Parking for the existing Structure or Use need not conform to this chapter, but it Shall not be reduced below that which is described in this title for the specific Use. 
C.  Where calculation of the number of spaces required results in a fractional number, the next higher whole number shall be Used. 
D.  In the case of mixed uses in a nuilding or on a Lot, the total requirements for Off-Street parking Shall be the sum of the requirements for the various Uses computed separately. Off- Street parking for one Use Shall not be considered as providing required parking for any other Use except as specified for joint Use. 
E.  No covered or uncovered tandem parking is Permitted for parking credit. Each credited Parking Space Shall be so designed that a car need not be moved to gain Access to or from any other Parking Space. 
F.  In the case of a Miniwarehouse Use, parallel parking is Permitted upon Conditional Use Permit design Approval. 
G.  Parking Spaces in Commercial and Industrial Zones Shall have dimensions of not less than nine feet in width and twenty feet in depth. Handicapped stalls Shall be provided as recommended by the State Code (two percent of the total required spaces). In the case where a parking stall is adjoined on one or both sides of its length by a Curb, Fence, Wall, partition, column, post or similar Obstruction, that is located less than four feet from an Access aisle measured along the length of the stall or continues to form the end of an Access aisle, it Shall have a minimum width of 11.5 feet. 
H.  In the case where the parking area contains twenty or more spaces, twenty percent of the total required number of spaces May be designed to accommodate Compact Cars, with dimensions not less than 7.5 feet in width and fifteen feet in depth. In Addition, Compact Car spaces provided on a Lot Shall be clearly marked as compact. 
I.  All Off-Street Parking Spaces Shall be provided on the same Lot as the Main Buildings, except as otherwise allowed by this Title. 
J.  All off-street parking spaces shall be independently accessible with a minimum of twenty-five feet of unobstructed space provided for the maneuvering of vehicles to the front of the parking space. No parking stall shall be designed so that a vehicle may back onto a Public Street. 
K.  All Driveway approaches, driveway and parking areas Shall be surfaced or paved with concrete, asphalt concrete or other bitulithic surfacing of at least two and one-half inch thickness and Shall be thereafter maintained in good condition. 
L.  All parking areas Shall be provided with adequate wheel Stops (a concrete Curb not less than six inches high, securely installed and maintained as a safeguard to abutting Property). The barrier Shall be at least three feet from any Property line, but in no case Shall it be less than necessary to meet the intent of this section. A continuous Curb Shall be installed where possible to allow for Landscaping beyond the Curb. 
M.  One-way Driveways shall be twelve feet wide; two-way, twenty feet wide, and shall not be encumbered by any projection to a height under fourteen feet above Grade. Where there is more than one means of access, two twelve-foot driveways may be provided in lieu of one twenty-foot wide Driveway. All driveways shall be separated from nondriveway areas by a continuous Curb. 
N.  Where two driveways are provided, each shall be clearly marked as to the direction of ingress and egress. 
O.  Parking Facilities may be designed to encroach on the front setback area a maximum of seventeen feet in the C-1 Zone; twelve feet in the C-2 zone; and five feet in all other zones. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 7, 2007: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 30, 12-18-2018)  
18.36.021 - Number of Parking Spaces Required. 
1.  Parking on nonresidential zones, except for the C-2/D-O, M-U/D and M-U/N zones, shall meet the minimum parking required for a particular use based on the table below. 
2.  The minimum parking provided shall be use by passenger-size cars or equivalent of customers, employees, and visitors. Parking for fleet vehicles, trucks, and vehicles over 20 feet long shall be provided in addition to the minimum parking required. 
3.  "Square feet" means "gross square feet" and refers to the sum gross square feet of the floor area of a building and its accessory buildings unless otherwise specified. 
4.  Exceptions to the standards and requirements set forth in this title may be approved by the Planning Commission following preparation of a parking study by a licensed traffic engineer and recommendations of the City Engineer and Development Services Director. For applications where the Planning Commission is not the deciding authority, such exceptions may be allowed by the Development Services Director unless elevated to the Planning Commission. 
Land Use 	Minimum number of parking spaces required 
(based upon gross floor area) 
Commercial Land Uses: 
Automobile and Truck Uses 	1 space/600 sf 
Child Care Facilities/Family Day Care—Large 	1 space/staff member, plus 1 space/each 20 children. A circular driveway at least 20 feet in width shall be provided for the safe off-street loading and unloading of children. 
Eating and Drinking Establishments, including fast food and drive-in 	1 space/100 sf; minimum 5 spaces 
Funeral Services 	1/35 sf of assembly room floor area 
General Commercial Uses including Convenience Sales and Services, Personal Services 	1 space/250 sf 
Hotels and Motels 	1 space/room + 2 spaces for managers 
Movie Theaters 	1 space/250 sf, plus 1/100 seats 
Office Uses including medical uses 	1 space/250 sf 
Office Supply Retail handling only bulky merchandise 	1 space /600 sf 
Repair Services 	1 space/250 sf 
Retail Stores 	1 space/250 sf 
Therapeutic Services 	1 space/250 sf 
Industrial Land Uses: 
Manufacturing & industrial Buildings 	1 space/500 sf, or sum of 1/250 sf office space, plus 1/1000 sf warehouse/storage space, plus 1/500 sf remaining space 
Warehouse and storage Buildings 	1 space/1000 sf up to the first 10,000 sf, plus 1 space/2000 sf for area over the first 10,000 sf, plus 1 space/ 250 sf office space 
Miniwarehouses 	1 space/3500 sf 
Storage Yards, Contractor and Lumber Yards 	1 space/500 sf building, plus 1 space/2000 sf storage area 
Institutional/ Assembly Land Uses: 
Bowling Alleys 	3 spaces/alley, plus 50% of regular parking requirements for all other uses associated with alley, such as an arcade or bar. 
Hotels and Motels 	1 space/room + 2 spaces for managers 
Movie Theaters 	1 space/250 sf, plus 1/100 seats 
Places of Assembly 	1 space/each 5 seats in principal assembly room, counting 20 inches of seating space on a bench as one seat. In cases where temporary or movable seats are provided, one space shall be provided for every 40 square feet of area within the assembly room. 
Universities/Colleges 	1 space per employee on the maximum shift; plus 1 space for every 2 students based on enrollment capacity 
Land Use 	Minimum number of parking spaces required (based upon gross floor area) 
Vocational/Trade Schools 	1 space for each employee on the maximum shift; plus 1 space for every 3 students over the age of 16" 
 
  
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 31, 12-18-2018)  
18.36.030 - Design of Parking Facilities. 
A.  Striping and wheel Stops or bumpers Shall be provided for all commercial and industrial Development. 
B.  The minimum Lot dimensions Shall be provided in accordance with the degree of the Parking Spaces they serve, as described in the Following table: 
Degree 	Stall Depth (Feet) 	One-Way Aisle (Feet) 	Two-Way Aisle (Feet) 
30 	17.5 	14 	20 
45 	20 	16 	20 
60 	21 	18 	22 
90 	20 	25 	25 
 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.36.040 - Joint Use Agreements. 
The Planning Commission may, upon Application by the Owner or lessee, authorize the joint Use of Parking Facilities by the Following Uses or activities under the conditions specified herein: 
A.  Up to fifty percent of the Parking Facilities required by this chapter for a Use considered to be primarily a Daytime Use May be provided by a Use considered to be primarily a nighttime Use, up to fifty percent of the Parking Facilities required by this chapter for a Use considered to be primarily a nighttime Use May be provided by a Use considered to be primarily a Daytime Use. 
B.  The Following Uses are typical Daytime Uses; banks, Businesses and professional offices, retail stores, personal service shops, clothing or shoe Repair Service shops, and similar Uses. 
C.  The Following Uses are typical of nighttime and/or Sunday Uses: auditoriums, fraternal Lodges, Churches and theaters. 
D.  Conditions Required for Joint Use Agreements. 
1.  A Building or Use for which Application is being made for authority to utilize the existing Off-Street Parking Facilities provided by another Building or Use, Shall be located within one hundred fifty feet of such Parking Facilities. 
2.  The Applicant Shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours for the Buildings or Uses for which the joint Use of Off-Street Parking Facilities is proposed. 
3.  Parties concerned in the joint Use of Off-Street Parking Facilities Shall evidence agreement for such joint Use by a proper legal instrument Approved by the Director as to form and content. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.36.050 - General Loading Provisions. 
All commercial and industrial Buildings, Hotels, Hospitals and Institutions hereafter erected, constructed, converted, established or enlarged to increase their floor space, Shall be provided with adequate Loading Space, as determined by the Committee. Any Loading Space provided Shall afford adequate ingress and egress for trucks from a Public Street or Alley. In no case Shall any Part of Public Street or Alley be Used for loading. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.36.060 - Bicycle Parking. 
A.  Bicycle Parking and Changing Rooms. 
1.  Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided in nonresidential projects based on the following standards: 
a.  Short-Term Bicycle Parking. If the project is anticipated to generate visitor or customer traffic, provide permanently anchored bicycle racks in accordance with the latest adopted California Green Building Standards Code. 
b.  Long-Term Bicycle Parking shall be provided in accordance with latest adopted California Green Building Standards Code. 
c.  A bicycle parking facility may be an approved covered lockable enclosures, lockable rooms or lockable lockers which must be permanently anchored racks. The facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers or locked room) shall be to the satisfaction of the Director. 
d.  Changing rooms may be provided in accordance with the latest adopted California Green Building Standards Code. 
B.  Motorcycle Parking. 
1.  Motorcycle parking shall be provided in nonresidential projects based on the following standards: 
a.  A minimum of two spaces for developments over twenty-five thousand square feet; 
b.  A minimum of four spaces for developments over fifty thousand square feet; 
c.  The minimum size of motorcycle spaces shall be seven feet in width by seven feet in depth. 
d.  Motorcycle spaces shall not count toward any requirement for automobile parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(22)), 10-10-2013)  
18.36.070 - Off-Site Parking. 
A.  Off-site parking may be permitted for nonresidential projects subject to the approval of a conditional use permit, based on the approval process outlined in Section 18.58.060 of this Code. 
B.  Criteria. In addition to the findings in Section 18.58.060, the following criteria shall apply: 
1.  All off-site parking facilities shall be located within one thousand feet of the property where the use in question is located, unless a binding agreement is provided to provide transportation access from the parking facility to the use in question on a regular basis. 
2.  Public transit service shall be available within one-quarter of a mile of the use in question. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(22)), 10-10-2013)  
Chapter 18.37 - SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION 
 
18.37.010 - Purpose and Intent. 
A.  This chapter is adopted pursuant to the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, hereinafter referred to as "SMARA," California Public Resources Code, Section 2710 et seq., as amended, and Chapter 8, Title 14, Section 3500 et seq. of the California Code of Regulations and adopted pursuant hereto. 
B.  The City Council finds and declares that the extraction of minerals is essential for the continued economic well being of the City and to the needs of society, and that the reclamation of mined lands is necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the environment and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
C.  The Council further finds that the reclamation of mined lands as provided in this chapter will Permit the continued mining of minerals and will provide for the protection and subsequent beneficial Use of the mined and reclaimed land. 
D.  The Council further finds that surface mining takes place in certain diverse areas where the geologic, topographic, climatic, biological and social conditions are significantly different and that reclamation operations and the specifications May therefore vary accordingly. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.020 - Definitions—Construction. 
The provisions, phrases and words of this chapter and those of any standards or procedures adopted pursuant thereto Shall be construed and applied consistently with the provisions and definitions contained in SMARA and the California Code of Regulations (commencing with Chapter 8, Title 14, Section 3500 et seq.), as the same have been enacted or may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.030 - Scope. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter Shall apply to areas within the incorporated areas of the City. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to: 
1.  Excavations or grading conducted for farming or on-site construction or for the purpose of restoring land Following a Flood or natural disaster; 
2.  Prospecting and exploration for minerals of commercial value where less than one thousand cubic Yards of overburden is removed in any one location of one acre or less; 
3.  Any surface mining operation that does not involve either the removal of a total of more than one thousand cubic Yards of minerals, ores, and overburden, or involve more than one acre in any one location; 
4.  Surface mining operations that are required by Federal Law in order to protect a mining claim, if such operations are conducted solely for that purpose; 
5.  Operations involving the extraction of geothermal resources, natural Gas, petroleum and water; 
6.  Such other mining operations that the City determines to be of an infrequent nature, and which involve only Minor surface disturbances and are categorically identified by the State Mining and Geology Board pursuant to Sections 2714(d) and 2758(c) of the California Public Resources Code. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.040 - Permit and Reclamation Plan Requirement. 
A.  Any Person, except as provided in Section 2776 of the Public Resources Code, who proposes to engage in surface mining operations as defined by reference in Section 18.37.020 Shall, prior to the commencement of such operations: (1) obtain a Permit to mine; (2) submit and obtain Approval of a reclamation plan; and (3) obtain Approval regarding financial assurances for reclamation; in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter and SMARA. A Fee as prescribed by Resolution of the City Council Shall be paid to the City at the time of filing. All Applications for a reclamation plan for the surface mining operations Shall be made on forms provided by the Department of Planning and Community Development in accordance with Section 18.37.050 of this chapter, and Section 2772 of the California Public Resources Code. 
B.  A Person who has obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations prior to January 1, 1976, pursuant to Section 2776 of the Public Resources Code, Shall submit to the City, and receive, within a period of one Year, Approval of the reclamation plan for operations to be conducted after January 1, 1976, unless a reclamation plan was Approved by the City prior to January 1, 1976, and the Person submitting that plan has accepted responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with that plan. 
C.  The State geologist Shall be notified of the filing of all Permit Applications by the Director of Planning and Community Development of the City in accordance with Section 2774(e) of the California Public Resources Code. Pursuant to that section, copies of all Permits to mine which are issued Shall be forwarded to the State geologist. 
D.  This chapter Shall be reviewed from time to time and revised as necessary in order to ensure that it is in accordance with the State Police for mined lands reclamation. Any revisions Shall be submitted to the State Mining and Geology Board for review and recertification. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.050 - Permit—Application—Contents. 
An Application for a surface mining and reclamation Permit Shall include the Following: 
A.  Name and address of the Applicant; 
B.  Name(s) and address(es) of the Property Owner(s) or Owners of surface rights; 
C.  Name(s) and address(es) of Owner(s) of mineral rights; 
D.  Name and address of lessee; 
E.  Name and address of Operator; 
F.  Name and address of Person Designated by Operator as his agent for the service of process; 
G.  Assessor's Parcel number(s); 
H.  Legal description of the subject Property; 
I.  Site Development plan drawn at a scale specified by the Director of Planning and Community Development of the City, which includes the Following information: 
1.  Property boundary lines and dimensions, 
2.  Areas proposed for Development, 
3.  Location of proposed Buildings and Structures, 
4.  Parking and Vehicle maneuvering areas, 
5.  Method of vehicular Access, 
6.  Location of any existing or proposed roads, water lines or other pipelines, Easements proposed or existing, and any existing Buildings, Structures, or major areas of Use for the Property being considered, 
7.  Height, type and location of fencing, 
8.  Such additional information as May be deemed necessary to Permit adequate consideration of the proposal; 
J.  A vicinity map showing all proposed Access routes and a statement as to the method proposed for transporting mined Materials from the site; 
K.  A sufficient number of cross-sections of the area to show existing Grades and proposed finished Grades after all surface mining has been completed Shall be provided. Cross-sections Shall be drawn to an engineer's scale that is practical and workable; 
L.  Reclamation plan including the Following information: 
1.  The anticipated quantity and type of minerals for which the surface mining operation is to be conducted, 
2.  The proposed dates for the initiation and termination of such operation, 
3.  The maximum anticipated depth of the surface mining operation, 
4.  The size and legal description of the lands that will be affected by such operation; a map that includes the boundaries and topographic details of such lands; a description of the general geology of the area; a detailed description of the geology of the area in which surface mining is to be conducted; the location of all streams, roads, Railroads, and Utility facilities within, or adjacent to, such lands; the location of all proposed Access roads to be constructed in conducting such operation; and the names and addresses of the Owners of all surface and mineral interests of such lands, 
5.  A description of and plan for the type of surface mining to be employed and a time schedule that will provide for the completion of surface mining on each segment of the mined lands so that reclamation can be initiated at the earliest possible time on those portions of the mined lands that will not be subject to further disturbance by the surface mining operation, 
6.  A description of the proposed Use or potential Uses of the land after reclamation and evidence that all Owners of a possessory interest in the land have been notified of the proposed Use or potential Uses, 
7.  A description of the manner in which reclamation adequate for the proposed Use or potential Uses will be accomplished, including: 
a.  A description of the manner in which contaminants will be controlled and mining waste will be disposed, 
b.  A description of the manner in which rehabilitation of affected stream bed channels and stream banks to a condition minimizing erosion and sedimentation will occur, 
8.  An assessment of the effect of implementation of the reclamation plan on future mining in the area, 
9.  A statement that the Person submitting the plan accepts the responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with the reclamation plan, 
10.  Compliance with the reclamation standards regulations as adopted by the State Mining and Geology Board pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 2773, 
11.  Any other information determined by the Director of Planning and Community Development of the City to be necessary for consideration of the reclamation plan. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.060 - Development standards and conditions. 
Surface mining operations Shall comply with the Following standards: 
A.  Surface mining operations Shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the City's General Plan. 
B.  Surface mining operations Shall comply with the requirements of SMARA and the California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Division 6, Chapter 8, Subchapter 1, Section 3500 et seq., and all other applicable standards and procedures as required by Law. 
C.  Surface mining operations Shall comply with any conditions deemed necessary or convenient by the City Council to effect the purposes of this chapter, including conditions with respect to the Following: 
1.  The environmental objectives set forth in Section 21000 et seq. of the California Public Resources Code; 
2.  Protection of the health, safety and welfare of Persons residing near the site of the mining operation and the general public; 
3.  Reasonable preservation of the values and Uses and opportunity for potential Uses of the adjacent and nearby areas insofar as this is not inconsistent with the provisions of SMARA, state policy, this chapter, or any implementing standards or procedures adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.070 - Review procedure. 
A.  The City Council Shall hear and consider at a Public Hearing: 
1.  Applications for Permits to conduct surface mining operations; 
2.  Reclamation plans for surface mining operations; 
3.  Amendments to Approved reclamation plans involving substantial deviations therefrom; 
4.  Amendments of any other term or condition of a Permit to conduct surface mining operations including the reclamation plan; 
5.  Proceedings for revocation of Permits; and 
6.  The Establishment and fixing of Fees necessary under this chapter. 
B.  Following the filing in proper form of any Application for a Permit, reclamation plan, or proposed amendment thereto, and the payment of the prescribed Fee, the Director of Planning and Community Development of the City Shall fix a time and date not less than thirty Days thereafter, or such later date as May be agreed upon for a Public Hearing thereon. 
C.  Not less than ten Days before the date of such Public Hearing, Notice of the date, time, place of hearing and location of the Property, and the nature of the request Shall be given in the Following manner: 
1.  By publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City; 
2.  By mailing a Notice, postage prepaid, to the Applicant, to each member of the City Council, and to the Owners of all Property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the Property involved, using for this purpose the name and address of such Owners as shown upon the latest County Assessment Roll. 
D.  At the Public Hearing the Applicant or Permittee and any other interested Person Shall be entitled to be heard and present evidence. Any continued hearing May be convened at any Public Place as May appear convenient to the hearing body and those who May wish to attend or be heard. The City Council Shall follow its customary rules of procedure, except as May otherwise be required by the provisions of SMARA or the California Code of Regulations. 
E.  After such Matter has been heard and considered, the City Council Shall: 
1.  Approve subject to conditions or disapprove any Application for any Permit which it has considered; 
2.  Approve subject to conditions or disapprove any reclamation plan which it has considered; 
3.  Approve subject to conditions, or disapprove any proposed amendment to an Approved reclamation plan, or any proposed amendment of other terms and conditions of a Permit or reclamation plan; 
4.  Fix the amount of the performance bond to guarantee reclamation in accordance with the reclamation plan if found necessary under Section 18.37.070; 
5.  Make such other orders as May be appropriate to the disposition of the Matters considered by the City or City staff. 
F.  In making a Decision on a reclamation plan, conditions of a reclamation plan or conditions of a Permit, there May be imposed, in addition to the requirements and conditions provided in SMARA, any and all requirements or conditions as May appear necessary to foster or protect: 
1.  The environmental objectives set forth in Section 21000 et seq. of the California Public Resources Code; 
2.  The health, safety and welfare of Persons residing near the site of the mining operation and the general public; 
3.  Reasonable preservation of values and Uses and opportunity for potential Uses of the adjacent and nearby areas insofar as consistent with the provisions of SMARA and the California Code of Regulations. 
G.  Any Decision required to be made under this chapter and any necessary finding Shall be made within thirty Days after completion of the hearing, or within such longer period agreed upon by the Applicant, or in the case of an Appeal under Section 18.37.170, by the appellant. A Copy of the Decision and any findings Shall be mailed to the Applicant's Permittee, or appellant at his or her address as shown in his or her Applications Permit or Notice of Appeal. Notice of such Decision and any findings Shall be deemed given to a Person when a Copy thereof has been placed in the United States mail, first-class postage prepaid, addressed according to Section 18.37.020(C)(2) of this chapter. 
H.  Pursuant to SMARA Section 2774(c), a reclamation plan, or an amendment to an Approved reclamation plan, Must be forwarded to the state geologist for review forty-five Days prior to Approval. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.080 - Violation—Notice to correct. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 2770(i) of the California Public Resources Code, if the City or State Geologist determines, based upon an annual inspection pursuant to Section 2774 of the California Public Resources Code or otherwise confirmed by an inspection of the mining operation, that a surface mining operation is not in compliance with this chapter, the City or the State Geologist May notify the Operator of that Violation by personal service or certified mail. If the Violation extends beyond thirty Days after the date of the City's or the State Geologist's notification, the City or the State Geologist May issue an order by personal service or certified mail requiring the Operator to comply with this chapter or, if the Operator does not have an Approved reclamation plan, cease all further mining activities. 
B.  An order issued under subsection A of this section Shall not take effect until the Operator has been provided a hearing before the City Council for orders issued by the City, or State Mining and Geology Board for orders issued by the state geologist, concerning the alleged Violation. Any order issued under subsection A of this section Shall specify which aspects of the surface mine's activities or operations are inconsistent with this chapter, or other applicable Law, and Shall specify a time for compliance which the City or state geologist determines is reasonable, taking into account the seriousness of the Violation and any good-faith efforts to comply with applicable requirements, and Shall set a date for the hearing, which Shall not be sooner than thirty Days after the date of the order. 
C.  Any Operator who violates or fails to comply with an order issued under subsection A of this section after the order's effective date, as provided in subsection B of this section, or who fails to submit a report to the State Geologist or City as required by Section 2207 of the California Public Resources Code, Shall be subject to an order by the City or the State Geologist imposing an administrative penalty of not more than five thousand dollars per Day, assessed from the original date of noncompliance with this chapter or Section 2207 of the California Public Resources Code. The penalty May be imposed administratively by the City or by the State Geologist. In determining the amount of the administrative penalty, the City or the State Geologist Shall take into consideration the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the Violation or Violations, any prior history of Violations, the degree of culpability, economic savings, if any, resulting from the Violation, and any other Matters justice May require. Orders setting administrative penalties Shall become effective upon issuance thereof and payment Shall be made to the lead agency or the state geologist within thirty Days, unless the Operator petitions the City Council, State Mining and Geology Board, or the superior Court for review as provided in California Public Resources Code Section 2774.2 to cover the reasonable costs incurred by the state geologist in implementing California Public Resources Code Section 2710 et seq. or Section 2207 of the California Public Resources Code. Any order Shall be served by personal service or by certified mail upon the Operator. Penalties collected by the state geologist Shall be Used for no purpose other than to cover the reasonable costs incurred by the state geologist in implementing this chapter or Section 2207 of the California Public Resources Code. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.090 - Failure to comply with Notice to correct—Permit review of Notice to correct. 
A.  Within thirty Days of the issuance of an order setting administrative penalties under Subdivision (c) of Section 2774.1 of the California Public Resources Code, the Operator May petition the City Council, if the City has issued the order, or the appropriate State Officials for orders issued by the State Geologist, for review of the order. If the Operator does not petition for review within the time limits set forth by this subsection, the order setting administrative penalties Shall not be subject to review by any Court or agency. 
B.  The City Council or State Mining and Geology Board Shall notify the Operator by personal service or certified mail whether it will review the order setting administrative penalties. In reviewing an order pursuant to this section, the record Shall consist of the record before the City or the State Geologist, and any other relevant evidence which, in the judgment of the City Council or State Mining and Geology Board, should be considered to effectuate and implement the policies of this chapter. 
C.  The City Council or State Mining and Geology Board May affirm, modify or set aside, in whole or in Part, by its own order, any order of the lead agency or the state geologist setting administrative penalties pursuant to this section. 
D.  Any order of the City Council or State Mining and Geology Board issued under subsection C of this section Shall become effective upon issuance thereof, unless the Operator petitions the superior Court for review as provided in subsection E of this section. Any order Shall be served by personal service or by certified mail upon the Operator. Payment of any administrative penalty which is specified in an order issued under subsection C of this section Shall be made to the City or the State Geologist within thirty Days of service of the order; however, the payment Shall be held in an interest-bearing impound account pending the Resolution of a petition for review filed pursuant to subsection E of this section. 
E.  Any Operator aggrieved by an order of the City Council or State Mining and Geology Board issued under subsection C of this section May obtain review of the order by filing dicks in the superior Court a petition for writ of mandate within thirty Days Following the issuance of the order. Any Operator aggrieved by an order of a City or State Geologist setting administrative penalties under Subdivision (c) of Public Resources Code, Section 2774.1, for which the City Council or State Mining and Geology Board denies review, May obtain review of the order in the Superior Court by filing in the Court a petition for writ of mandate within thirty Days Following the denial of review. The provisions of Section 1094.5 of the California Code of Civil Procedure Shall govern judicial proceedings pursuant to this subsection, except that in every case the Court Shall exercise its independent judgment. If the Operator does not petition for writ of mandate within the time limits set by this subsection, an order of the State Mining and Geology Board or the City Council Shall not be subject to review by any Court or agency. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.100 - Permit review after Notice to correct—Alternative actions by Council. 
In addition to the actions of the City Council prescribed by Section 18.37.090, after such Matter has been heard and considered, the City Council May take any of the Following actions: 
A.  Revoke the Permit; 
B.  Require the reclamation program to begin immediately or within a prescribed time Following the effective date of revocation of the Permit; 
C.  Allow additional time within which to cure the Violation, if requested by the Permittee and agreed upon by the City; 
D.  Such other order or orders as May be appropriate to correct the Violation or Default. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.110 - Financial assurances to ensure reclamation. 
A.  Financial assurances Must be reviewed by the state geologist at least forty-five Days prior to receiving City Council Approval. The City Council Shall require financial assurances of each surface mining operation within the City limits to ensure compliance with reclamation plans, as follows: 
1.  Financial assurances May take the form of surety bonds, irrevocable letters of credit, trust funds, or other forms of financial assurances specified by the State Mining and Geology Board which the City reasonably determines are adequate to perform reclamation in accordance with the surface mining operation's Approved reclamation plan. 
2.  The financial assurances Shall remain in effect for the duration of the surface mining operation and any additional period until reclamation is completed. 
3.  The amount of financial assurances required of a surface mining operation for any one Year Shall be adjusted annually to account for new lands disturbed by surface mining operations, inflation, and reclamation of lands accomplished in accordance with the Approved reclamation plan. 
4.  The financial assurances Shall be made payable to the City and the State Geologist. However, if a surface mining operation has received Approval of its financial assurances from a public agency other than the City Council, the City Shall deem those financial assurances adequate for purposes of this section, or Shall credit them toward fulfillment of the financial assurances required by this section, if they are made payable to the public agency, the City Council, and the state geologist and otherwise meet the requirements of this section. In any event, if the City Council and one or more public agencies exercise jurisdiction over a surface mining operation, the total amount of financial assurances required by the City Council and the public agencies for any one Year Shall not exceed that amount which is necessary to perform reclamation of lands remaining disturbed. For purposes of this paragraph, a "Public Agency" May include a Federal agency. 
B.  If the City Council or the State Mining and Geology Board, Following a Public Hearing, determines that the Operator is financially incapable of performing reclamation in accordance with its Approved reclamation plan, or has Abandoned its surface mining operation without commencing reclamation, either the City or the state geologist Shall do all of the Following: 
1.  Notify the Operator by personal service or certified mail that the City or the state geologist intends to take appropriate action to forfeit the financial assurances and specify the reasons for so doing. 
2.  Allow the Operator sixty Days to commence or cause the commencement of reclamation in accordance with its approve reclamation plan and require that reclamation be completed within the time limits specified in the Approved reclamation plan or some other time period mutually agreed upon by the lead agency or the state geologist and the Operator. 
3.  Proceed to take appropriate action to require forfeiture of the financial assurances if the Operator does not substantially comply with Section 18.37.120(B)(2) of this chapter. 
4.  Use the proceeds from the forfeited financial assurances to conduct and complete reclamation in accordance with the Approved reclamation plan. In no event Shall the financial assurances be Used for any other purpose. The Operator Shall be responsible for the costs of conducting and completing reclamation, in accordance with the Approved reclamation plan, in excess of the proceeds from the forfeited financial assurances. 
C.  Financial assurances Shall no longer be required of a surface mining operation, and Shall be released, upon Written notification by the City, which Shall be forwarded to the Operator and the state geologist, that reclamation has been completed in accordance with the Approved reclamation plan. 
D.  The City Council Shall have primary responsibility to seek forfeiture of financial assurances and to reclaim mine sites under subsection B of this section. However, in cases where the State Mining and Geology Board is not the lead agency pursuant to Section 2774.4 of the Public Resources Code, the state geologist May act to seek forfeiture of financial assurances and reclaim mine sites pursuant to subsection B of this section only if both of the Following occur: 
1.  The financial incapability of the Operator or the abandonment of the mining operation has come to the attention of the state geologist. 
2.  The City Council has been notified in writing by the state geologist of the financial incapability of the Operator or the abandonment of the mining operation for at least fifteen Days and has not taken appropriate measures to seek forfeiture of the financial assurances and reclaim the mine site; and one of the Following has occurred: 
a.  The City Council has been notified in writing by the state geologist that failure to take appropriate measures to seek forfeiture of the financial assurances or to reclaim the mine site Shall result in actions being taken against the lead agency under Section 2774.4 of the California Public Resources Code. 
b.  The state geologist determines that there is a Violation which amounts to an imminent and substantial endangerment to the public health, safety, or to the environment. 
c.  The City Council notifies the state geologist in writing that its good-faith attempt to seek forfeiture of the financial assurances has not been successful. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.120 - Idle Mines. 
A.  Idle Mines are defined as referenced in California Public Resources Code Section 2727.1. 
B.  The Following requirements pertain to the maintenance of Idle Mines: 
1.  Operator Shall submit and obtain Approval from the City Council of an interim management plan pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 2770(h). 
2.  Operator Shall comply with the financial assurance requirements of California Public Resources Code Section 2770. 
3.  Operator Shall comply with annual reporting requirements pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 2207. 
4.  Operator Shall be subject to City inspections pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 2774. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.130 - Periodic review. 
A.  As a condition of continuing Approval for the Permit or the reclamation plan, or both, a schedule for periodic inspections of the site Shall be established to evaluate continuing compliance with the Permit and the reclamation plan. These inspections, at a minimum, Must be annual, and the inspection findings Shall be documented. Pursuant to Section 2774(b) of the California Public Resources Code, annual inspections for all surface mining operations Shall be conducted by the City within six Months of receipt of a Copy of the surface mining Operators annual report, filed pursuant to Section 2207 of the California Public Resources Code. 
B.  As a further condition for Approval for the Permit or the reclamation plan, or both, a schedule for annual reports of the operation and the site completed by the Applicant or a Representative Shall be established and submitted to both the Department of Planning and Community Development of the City and the State Geologist. 
C.  A reporting Fee May be required as established herein by Sections 18.37.040 and 18.37.070. 
D.  All inspections Shall be conducted utilizing forms Approved by the State Mining and Geology Board. 
E.  The mine Operator Shall be solely responsible for the reasonable cost of inspection undertaken at said surface mining operation so inspected. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.140 - Variances from reclamation plan. 
Variances from an Approved reclamation plan May be allowed upon request of the Operator or Applicant, upon a finding by the City Council that the requested Variance is necessary to achieve the prescribed or higher post-mining Use of the reclaimed land. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.150 - Minor modifications to Approved plans. 
A.  The Director of Planning and Community Development or his or her Designee Shall be authorized to consider proposed Minor amendments to Approved reclamation plans and Shall either approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove such requests. 
B.  In the event the Director of Planning and Community Development or his or her Designee concludes that a proposed amendment constitutes a substantial deviation from the original plan, such amendment Shall thereafter be considered by the City Council. 
C.  Any Decision of the Director of Planning and Community Development or his or her Designee May be subject to Appeal to the City Council. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.160 - Enforcement. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter Shall be enforced by any authorized member of the City or such other Persons as May be Designated by the City Council. 
B.  The City Council May assess fines as necessary, on mining operations in Violation of this chapter and/or SMARA. In accordance with Section 2774.1 of the California Public Resources Code, fines May be imposed on a single mining operation in amounts not to exceed five thousand dollars per Day for Violations thereof. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.170 - Appeal. 
A.  Any Person aggrieved by an Act or determination of the City staff in the exercise of the authority granted in this chapter Shall have the right to Appeal to the City Council. 
B.  Any Person seeking to Appeal any Decision or finding made pursuant to this chapter Shall file a Notice of Appeal in writing with the Department of Planning and Community Development and pay any Fee required for filing a Notice of Appeal within ten calendar Days after Notice of the Decision has been given as required in Section 18.37.070. 
C.  The Decision Shall be deemed final if no Notice of Appeal is filed within the period set forth in subsection B of this section. 
D.  The City Council Shall hear and consider Appeals from Decisions of the Department of Planning and Community Development. 
E.  In case of an Appeal to the City Council, the time, date and place for a Public Hearing thereon Shall be fixed on a date not less than thirty Days after filing of the Notice of Appeal and Notice of such Public Hearing Shall be given in the manner provided in Section 18.37.070(C) of this chapter. 
F.  Hearings on Appeals Shall be conducted, as nearly as possible in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.37.070(D). 
G.  The City Council Shall during a Public Hearing receive and hear evidence presented by the appellant, the Applicant or Permittee, or any other interested Person(s). 
H.  In modifying a Decision from which an Appeal has been taken, the City Council hearing such Appeal May delete or modify any condition imposed by the Decision from which the Appeal has been taken, and May impose new or additional conditions which it May deem germane to the Matters considered in such Appeal or Decision and/or finding thereon. 
I.  Decisions on Appeals Shall be made and Notice of such Decisions Shall be given in accordance with Section 18.37.070(G). 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.180 - Permittee Default—Performance by City. 
A.  If the Permittee fails to perform or conform to any requirement imposed by any order made pursuant to Sections 18.37.080 through 18.37.130 of this chapter within the time fixed in such order, or if no time is fixed in such order, then within a reasonable time, the City Council, pursuant to Section 18.37.180, Shall be authorized to order and otherwise undertake the planning and conduct all or any Part of the work necessary to accomplish the reclamation plan, to perform any conditions in Default, or to otherwise cure any Default. 
B.  The officers, Employees and agents of the City, and any contractor hired by the City, and his Employees, subcontractors and agents, and any engineers, surveyors, or other experts retained by the City, May go on the site of the mining operation and any adjacent Property of the Permittee for the purposes of planning or performing all or any Part of the work mentioned in subsection A of this section, employing the Use of any and all equipment and machines necessary for performing such work. 
C.  Insofar as it is practical to do so, the City Shall Following the previously Approved reclamation plan or conditions in the conduct of such work. 
D.  The City Council is authorized to order retention and deposit into the City's General Fund a portion of the proceeds from the security for its costs and reasonable expenses and Fees, including reasonable Attorneys' Fees, incurred in successfully enforcing the obligation of the security, and for its reasonable expenses incurred in any inspections, Notices or hearings pursuant to Sections 18.37.080 through 18.37.130 of this chapter, and for any expenses incurred in the planning, Surveying, testing and administration in preparation for the letting of any contracts, administration and enforcement of contracts, and otherwise performing any of the work as Designated in this section. 
E.  The City Council May enter into an agreement with the Permittee, or any successor in interest of the Permittee, under which he/she May agree to do the work needed to accomplish the reclamation plan or a specified portion thereof, or to perform any or all of the conditions in Default or such other work needed to cure any Default, in consideration of payment from the remaining proceeds of the security of an amount commensurate with the work completed. 
F.  The City Council May enter into an agreement with any public agency or public entity under which such agency or entity May agree to do the work needed to accomplish the reclamation plan or a specified portion thereof, or to perform all or any of the conditions in Default or such other work needed to cure any Default, in consideration of transfer or payment to such agency or entity of all or any Part of the remaining proceeds from the security. 
G.  If the City Council determines that the work has been completed for the accomplishment of the reclamation plan, or for the performance of conditions in Default or as otherwise needed to cure any Default, or if the City Council determines that there is no reasonable prospect that such work can be accomplished by any means mentioned in this section, or if the City Council determines that by reason of changed circumstances no public purpose would be served by completion of such work, the City Council Shall order any portion of the proceeds from such security not retained by the City under subsection D of this section or not expended under the provisions of this chapter, to be refunded to the Permittee or his surety. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.190 - Agreement for performance under this chapter. 
The City Council May enter into an agreement with any public agency or public entity for the provision of inspection, review and enforcement services as described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.200 - Successors in interest. 
Any reference in this chapter to the Permittee or Applicant Shall also be deemed to include any successor in interest or assignee of the Permittee or Applicant. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
18.37.210 - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies available to the City or to any Representative of the City for noncompliance with a Default in the performance of any reclamation plan, or of any condition of any Permit or reclamation plan under this chapter, Shall not be deemed as a limitation on any other available remedy at Law or in equity which the City or any Representative of the City May otherwise have. 
(Ord. 0-27-92 § 1 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.38 - FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS 
 
18.38.010 - Materials. 
All Fences and Walls in the City, whether constructed or of natural growth Shall be composed of the Following Materials: 
A.  Masonry Walls or similar type Material; 
B.  Evergreen shrubs closely spaced and maintained; 
C.  Ornamental iron, or similar type Material; 
D.  Wooden fencing, if of adequate aesthetic and structural quality and durability; 
E.  Other Materials Approved by the Committee, after giving consideration to appearance, structural quality and durability. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.38.020 - General provisions. 
A.  The height of any Screening Shall be measured at Sidewalk Grade for Street-abutting Property lines, and at the highest Elevation of adjacent finished Grade for interior Property lines. 
B.  Nothing in this section Shall be deemed to set aside or reduce the requirements established for security fencing by Local, state or Federal Law. 
C.  No Fence Shall be Permitted in the public Right-of-Way. 
D.  No Wall or Fence Shall be Permitted where said Wall or Fence will impede the City Electric Department meter reader to physically reach the meter and be able to read from a straight forward position within six inches from the meter face. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.38.030 - Height and location—Residential Zones. 
The height of fences, hedges and walls within the side and rear setback areas in all residential zones shall not exceed six feet. The height within the front setback areas shall not exceed five feet for an ornamental iron fence, hedge or any fence with openings, and three feet for a masonry wall or any fence without openings. No fence, hedge, wall or visual obstruction shall be permitted within a corner cutoff area. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 32, 12-18-2018)  
18.38.040 - Height and location—Nonresidential Zones. 
A.  The height of Fences, Hedges and Walls shall not exceed eight feet in the I-P, M-1, and M-2 zones, and six feet on all other nonresidential zones. 
B.  Parking areas shall be provided with screening from other properties and public right-of-ways with a solid fence, hedge, berm, or wall with a height no less than three feet. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 33, 12-18-2018)  
18.38.050 - Chain link Fence review. 
As provided in Section 18.38.010 E., the placement of chain link fencing in all residential and Nonresidential Zones within the City may be Approved by the Director, after giving consideration to appearance, structural quality and durability. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-03-14, § 5, 3-4-2014; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 34, 12-18-2018)  
18.38.060 - Pool Fences. 
A.  A Fence or Wall or other solid Structure so designed as not to present a ladder effect, not less than five feet in height Shall be maintained on the Lot or Premises upon which is situated a Swimming Pool, portable or aboveground-type pool or other open area of water including reservoirs, stumps and irrigation ditches where the water level is higher than eighteen inches. 
B.  Such Fence or Structure Shall completely surround such pool or area and all Gates or doors opening through such Enclosures Shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices designed to keep such opening securely closed at all times when not in actual Use. 
C.  A wrought iron Fence with a minimum Bar thickness of five-eighths of an inch Shall be required for all public or semipublic pools. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.38.070 - Electric and barbed wire Fences. 
No Fence shall be charged in any way with electricity or contain in whole or part barbed wire or sharp prongs or edges except as provided herein. 
A.  Electric Fences. 
1.  Permit Required. No electric fence shall be installed or used unless a Fence Permit has been applied for and obtained from the Development Services Department. 
2.  Type of Electric Fences Allowed. The construction and use of Electric fences shall be allowed in the City only as provided in this section and subject to the following standards: 
a.  Unless otherwise specified herein, electric fences shall be constructed or installed in conformance with the specifications set forth in the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) Standard No. 60335-2-76. 
b.  Electrification: 
(1)  The energizer for electric fences must be driven by a commercial storage battery not to exceed twelve volts DC. 
(2)  The electric charge produced by the fence contact shall not exceed characteristics set forth in paragraph 22.108 of IEC Standard No. 60335-2-76. 
3.  Conditions for Installation. 
a.  Perimeter Fence or Wall: No electric fence shall be installed or used unless it is completely surrounded by a non-electrical fence or wall that is not less than six feet high with a minimum of three feet between the fences/walls for safety access. 
b.  Location: 
(1)  Electric fences shall be permitted only in the M-1 (Light Industrial) and M-2 (Heavy Industrial) Zones of the Colton Zoning Code and only at locations approved by the Development Services Department. 
(2)  Electric fences shall not be permitted within fifty feet of a property with a residential zone or use, a school site, or a park site 
c.  Height: Electric fences shall be limited to a height of ten feet. 
d.  Warning Signs: Electric Fences shall be clearly identified with warning signs prepared in English and Spanish that read: "Warning-Electric Fence" at intervals of not less than sixty feet. 
e.  "Knox Box": A "Knox Box Electrical Shunt Switch" and a "Knox Box" or other similar approved device shall be installed for emergency access of Police and Fire Departments. 
4.  Indemnification. All applicants issued permits to install or use an electric fence as provided in this Chapter shall agree, as a condition of permit issuance, to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City of Colton and its agents, officers, consultants, independent contractors and employees from any and all claims, actions or proceedings arising out of any personal injury, including death, or property damage caused by the electric fence. 
5.  Emergency Access. In the event that access by the City of Colton Fire Department and/or Police Department personnel to a property where a permitted electric fence has been installed and is operating, is required due to an emergency or urgent circumstances, and the Knox Box or other similar approved device referred to in this Chapter is absent or non-functional, and an owner, manger, employee, custodian or any other person with control over the property is not present to disable the electric fence, the fire or police personnel shall be authorized to disable the electric fence in order to gain access to the property. 
B.  Barbed wire Fences or Fences with sharp prongs May be placed on grazing land or along section lines. 
C.  Barbed wire or sharp prongs May be placed atop a Fence which protects a storage or public Utility Yard. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-09-17, §4, 11-21-2017)  
18.38.080 - Retaining Walls. 
Retaining Walls with a height not exceeding three feet when located within a front yard and eight feet elsewhere may be permitted through review and approval by the Planning Division and proper Permit processing. The review may create conditions as to the location, Materials, design and color of said Walls. The design of proposed retaining Walls with a height exceeding eight feet Shall be made to create a ladder effect of two off-set retaining Walls, with a width not less than one foot between the two Walls, designed for the planting of shrubs and/or vines. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 35, 12-18-2018)  
18.38.090 - Maintenance. 
All Fences Shall be kept in a state of repair so as not to be Hazardous or dangerous and those Used to protect the general public Shall be maintained so as to be sufficient and adequate for that purpose. All Fences Shall be neatly maintained so as not to be unsightly. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.38.100 - Enforcement. 
A.  The Community Development Department is specifically charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any Person erecting or constructing any Wall or Fence within the City Shall obtain a Fence Permit and, where applicable, a Building Permit from the Department prior to said construction or erection. 
C.  All concrete Block Walls over four feet high Shall be built per City Standards or of Approved design to be Approved and submitted by a California State-Registered Engineer or Architect. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 36, 12-18-2018)  
18.38.110 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any Person violating any provisions of this chapter Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not longer than six Months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.39 - TELECOMMUNICATION AND ANTENNA TOWERS 
 
18.39.010 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise indicated in this chapter, the Following definitions Shall apply for all purposes. 
"Co-Located" means locating wireless communications Antennas and related equipment from more than one provider on a single site or Structure. 
"Communication Antenna" means an Antenna, including Antennas in whip, dish or panel type Structures, which are designed to transmit or receive communications as authorized by the Federal Communications Commission, including but not limited to radiation or capture of electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies, wireless telecommunicators signals or other communication signals which transmit or receive radio signals. 
"Communication Equipment" means any Communication Antenna or related equipment designed to transmit or receive communications as authorized by the Federal Communications Commission. 
"Communication Tower" means a tower thirty-five feet in height or greater (including Antenna) which supports communication (transmission or receiving) equipment. The term Communication Tower Shall not include amateur radio Operator's equipment, as licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
"Monopole" means a Structure composed of a single spire Used to support communications equipment. 
"Stealth" means to camouflage the design of Communication Tower or Antenna so that it looks like a Structure or feature that blends with the surrounding environment. 
(Ord. 0-18-05 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 0-20-98 § 1 (part), 1998)  
18.39.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The regulations and requirements set forth herein are adopted for the Following purposes: 
A.  To provide for the location of Communication Towers and Communication Antennas in the City; 
B.  To protect residential areas and land Uses from potential adverse impacts of Communication Towers and Antennas; 
C.  To minimize adverse visual impacts of Communication Towers and Antennas through careful design, siting, landscape Screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
D.  To accommodate the growing need for Communication Towers and Antennas; 
E.  To promote and encourage shared Use/collocation of existing and new Communication Towers as a primary option, rather than construction of additional single-use towers; 
F.  To protect the public health, safety and welfare; and 
G.  To avoid potential damage to adjacent Properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower Structures. 
(Ord. 0-18-05 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 0-20-98 § 1 (part), 1998)  
18.39.030 - Applicability. 
A.  All new Communication Towers and Communication Antennas in the City Shall be subject to these regulations, as well as all other applicable Federal, state and Local Laws, rules and regulations. For purposes of measurement, Communication Tower Setbacks and separation distances, as delineated in subsections C, D and E of Section 18.39.050, Shall be calculated and applied irrespective of municipal and County jurisdictional boundaries. 
B.  All Communication Towers existing on April 30, 1998 Shall be considered Permitted Uses and allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist; provided, however, that anything other than routine maintenance Shall comply with the requirements of Section 18.39.050, other than subsections C, D and E of that section. As Used in this subsection, routine maintenance Shall include, without limitation, structural modifications such as making provisions for additional Antennas or additional providers, as well as New Construction on an existing Communication Tower. 
C.  All governmental towers with public safety systems or equipment Shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
D.  Modifications to all existing communication towers shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter provided such modifications comply with the following: 
1.  The height of the existing communication tower shall not be increased. 
2.  Replacement of existing antennas or addition of new antennas shall not result in an increase of more than four (4) antennas from the existing number of antennas on the communication tower. 
3.  The lease/ground equipment enclosure area shall not be increased. 
4.  All replacement and new antennas and new miscellaneous equipment shall be consistent with the size of existing antennas and design of the existing communication tower. 
5.  All modifications to existing communication towers shall be required to meet all applicable Building Codes and shall be required to obtain a building permit. 
(Ord. 0-18-05 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 0-20-98 § 1 (part), 1998) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 37, 12-18-2018)  
18.39.040 - Permitted Communication Towers and Communication Antennas in zoning Districts of City. 
A.  New Communication Towers and Communication Antennas May locate on existing Utility Structures, including existing Communication Towers, Utility poles, Utility Structures and water tanks, that are at least twenty-five feet in height. When located on such Utility Structures, Communication Towers and Communication Antennas Shall: 
1.  Be integrated into the existing Structure; and 
2.  Not exceed fifty percent of the total height of the Structure, however Communication Towers/Antennas placed on Utility poles Shall not exceed the height of the Utility pole. 
B.  Communication Towers and Communication Antennas processed under Subsection A. Shall be reviewed and Approved by the Director using the architectural and Site Plan review provisions of Section 18.58.030. 
C.  New freestanding Communication Towers and Communication Antennas Shall also be allowed in the M-1 (light industrial) and M-2 (heavy industrial) zoning Districts. Such freestanding Communication Towers and Communication Antennas will not be allowed unless the Applicant demonstrates that: 
1.  Existing towers and Buildings do not afford the Applicant the technological ability to provide service to the service area of the Applicant or service provider; and 
2.  It is not technologically possible to bifurcate the geographical boundaries of the proposed service area in order to avoid the necessity for a freestanding Communication Tower or Communication Antenna. 
D.  New freestanding Communication Towers and Communication Antennas processed under subsection C Shall be reviewed and Approved by the Planning Commission using the architectural and Site Plan review provisions of Section 18.58.030. 
E.  New freestanding Communication Towers and Communication Antennas May be allowed in other nonresidential zoning Districts in the City provided such Communication Towers and Communication Antennas comply with the Following: 
1.  The Communication Tower or Communication Antenna is Stealthed or camouflaged to look like a Structure or feature that blends with the surrounding area. 
2.  The Communication Tower or Communication Antenna is located at least five hundred feet from residentially zoned Property. 
3.  The Applicant demonstrates that: 
a.  Existing towers and Buildings do not afford the Applicant the technological ability to provide service to the service area of the Applicant or service provider; and 
b.  It is not technologically possible to bifurcate the geographical boundaries of the proposed service area in order to avoid the necessity for a freestanding Communication Tower or Communication Antenna. 
F.  Communication Towers and Communication Antennas processed under subsection B Shall be reviewed and Approved by the Planning Commission using the architectural and Site Plan review provisions of Section 18.58.030. 
G.  New freestanding Communication Towers and Communication Antennas located within five hundred feet of residentially zoned Property and in residentially zoned Property May be allowed provided such Communication Towers and Communication Antennas comply with the Following: 
1.  The Communication Tower or Communication Antenna is Stealthed or camouflaged to look like a Structure or feature that blends with the surrounding area and the Lot upon which the Communication Tower or Antenna is located contains a minimum of twenty thousand square feet of land area. 
2.  The Communication Tower or Communication Antenna does not exceed a total height of thirty-five feet. 
3.  The Communication Tower or Communication Antenna is not located in a required front, side or Street side Setback area. 
4.  The Applicant demonstrates that: 
a.  Existing towers and Buildings do not afford the Applicant the technological ability to provide service to the service area of the Applicant or service provider; and 
b.  It is not technologically possible to bifurcate the geographical boundaries of the proposed service area in order to avoid the necessity for a freestanding Communication Tower or Communication Antenna. 
H.  Communication Towers and Communication Antennas processed under subsection G Shall be reviewed and Approved by the Planning Commission using the Conditional Use Permit provisions of Section 18.58.060. 
I.  New freestanding Communication Towers and Communication Antennas May be located on Public Property including City, School District, community college and other Public Property that is zoned for residential Uses provided such Communication Towers and Communication Antennas do not exceed an overall height of eighty-five feet and are Approved by the Planning Commission using the architectural and Site Plan review provisions of Section 18.58.030. When located within three hundred feet of residentially zoned and Used Property, such freestanding Communication Towers and Communication Antennas Shall be Stealth and be Approved by the Planning Commission using the Conditional Use Permit provisions of Section 18.58.060. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 14, 2007: Ord. 0-18-05 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 0-20-98 § 1 (part), 1998) 
(Ord. No. § 6, 3-4-2014)  
18.39.050 - Performance and construction standards for Communication Towers and Communication Antennas. 
A.  Wind Loads. All Communication Towers and Communication Antennas Shall, at a minimum, be designed and constructed so as to withstand a wind speed of seventy mph for those towers and Antennas with heights of fifteen feet or less or one hundred mph for those towers and Antennas with heights in excess of fifteen feet. Existing Communication Towers and Communication Antennas Shall be modified to meet these requirements prior to the issuance of any Permit or other authorization to modify them, including, without limitation, any request to modify the height or include additional Antennas or providers. 
B.  Seismic Design Requirements. Communication Towers and Communication Antennas Shall, at a minimum, be designed to comply with requirements for seismic Zone 4. 
C.  Setbacks. Setbacks for Communication Towers and Communication Antennas Shall be measured from the base of the tower, Antenna or protruding Building Structure at the base of the tower, whichever is closest to the Property line, to the Property line of the Parcel on which it is located. For purposes of measuring Setbacks from residentially zoned Property, distances Shall be measured from the base of the tower, Antenna or protruding Building Structure at the base of the tower, whichever is closest to the Property line, to the Property line of the closest residentially-zoned Property. Communication Towers, Communication Antennas and their Accessory Structures Shall comply with the minimum Setback requirements of the zoning District in which they are located or the Setback requirements established in this chapter, whichever is stricter. 
D.  Separation of Communication Towers From Off-Site Uses. 
1.  The separation distances for Communication Towers Shall be measured from the base of the tower to the closest point of the Off-Site Use Designated in this section. 
E.  Separation Distances Between Communication Towers. 
1.  Separation distances between Communication Towers Shall be applicable to and measured between the proposed tower and those Communication Towers that were not existing and/or had not received land Use and Building Permit Approval from the City prior to April 30, 1998. 
2.  The separation distances Shall be measured by drawing or Following a straight line between the base of the existing Communication Tower and the base of the proposed Communication Tower as shown on a Site Plan for the proposed tower. 
3.  No tower Shall be located within three hundred feet of another tower. 
F.  Fencing. A Wall or a wrought iron Fence covered on all sides with tennis screen Material and not less than eight feet in height from finished Grade Shall be provided around each Communication Tower, except those installed on rooftops or Utility Structures. Access to the Communication Tower Shall be through a locked Gate. 
G.  Screening and Landscaping. Landscaping, Screening and buffering Shall be required around the perimeter of Communication Towers, Communication Antennas and their ancillary Structures to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission. Support Structures Shall be either galvanized steel or painted an unobtrusive color to neutralize and blend with the surroundings. Further, the Use of existing vegetation Shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable, and May be Used to meet the Landscaping requirements. 
H.  Height. 
1.  No freestanding Communication Tower or Communication Antenna Shall exceed eighty-five feet in height from ground level. 
2.  Where installed on top of a Building, no Communication Tower or Communication Antenna Shall extend greater than forty percent over the Building Height. 
3.  An existing Communication Tower May be modified to a taller height, not to exceed twenty feet over the tower's existing height, in order to accommodate the collocation of additional Communication Antenna(s). The height change referred to in this subsection May only occur one time per Communication Tower. The additional height referred to in this subsection Shall not require an additional distance separation, so the Communication Tower's pre-modification height Shall be Used to calculate required distance separations. 
4.  The height of support Structures Must be the minimum necessary to provide the required coverage. 
5.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, no Communication Tower or Communication Antenna Shall exceed any other height restriction imposed by Federal, state or Local Laws, rules, regulations or Approvals, including those imposed by land Use plans or Approvals applicable to the area in which the tower or Antenna will be located. 
I.  Type of Construction. Communication Towers Shall be Monopole construction; provided, however, that guyed construction May be Approved by the Planning Commission upon consideration of the Following factors: 
1.  Compatibility with adjacent Properties; 
2.  Architectural consistency with adjacent Properties; and 
3.  Visual impact on adjacent Properties, including visual Access of adjacent Properties to sunlight. 
J.  Development Criteria. Communication Towers and Communication Antennas Shall be constructed on Lots that comply with the minimum Development criteria of the zoning District in which they are located, including minimum Lot size and Open Space criteria. 
K.  Illumination. Communication Towers and Communication Antennas Shall not be artificially lighted except to assure human safety or as required by the Federal Aviation Administration. In cases where there are residential Uses within a distance of three hundred feet from the height of the tower, Approval for dual lighting Shall be requested and received from the Federal Aviation Administration prior to construction. 
L.  Collocation. 
1.  Communication Towers between forty-five feet and sixty-five feet in height Shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum of one additional Communication Service provider. 
2.  Communication Towers of forty-five feet or less in height Shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum of two additional Communication Service providers. 
3.  Proposed Communication Antennas are encouraged to be collocated onto existing Communication Towers. 
4.  If it is determined that the proposed Communication Tower is situated in a location which will benefit the City's Telecommunication Systems, then the tower Shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate the additional telecommunication Equipment beneficial to the public system at a cost to the City no greater than the actual additional expense of the provider in so engineering and constructing the tower to meet the City's needs. 
M.  Noninterference. No Communication Tower or Communication Antenna Shall interfere with public safety communication. Frequency coordination is required to ensure noninterference with public safety systems and/or public safety entities. 
N.  Variances. Any request to deviate from any of the requirements of this section Shall require major Variance Approval. 
O.  Documentation. Documentation to demonstrate conformance with the requirements of this section Shall be submitted by the Applicant with all requests to construct, locate or modify a Communication Tower or Communication Antenna. 
P.  Signs and Advertising. The Use of any portion of a Communication Tower or Communication Antenna for Signs or other advertising purposes, including, without limitation, a company name, Banners or streamers is prohibited. However, nothing contained in this section Shall preclude the Use and design of a freestanding tower Stealthed to resemble a freestanding Sign. 
Q.  Abandonment. In the event the Use of any Communication Tower has been discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty consecutive calendar Days, the tower Shall be deemed to have been Abandoned. Upon such abandonment, the Owner or Operator of the Communication Tower Shall have an additional one hundred eighty consecutive calendar Days within which to: (1) reactivate the Use of the tower or transfer the tower to another Owner or Operator who Shall make actual Use of the tower; or (2) dismantle and remove the tower. At the earlier of one hundred eighty-one consecutive calendar Days from the date of abandonment without reactivation or completion of dismantling and removal, any Variance Approval and other Approvals for the Communication Tower Shall automatically expire. 
R.  No Creation of Nonconforming Situations. A proposed Communication Tower or Communication Antenna Shall not create any Nonconforming situations to the site, such as a reduction in parking, Landscaping or Loading Zones, or an elimination of Loading Zones. 
S.  Undergrounding of Utilities. All utilities associated with a Communication Tower or Communication Antenna Shall be underground. 
(Ord. 0-18-05 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 0-20-98 § 1 (part), 1998)  
18.39.060 - Submittal requirements. 
In Addition to any other submittal requirements required by Law, Applications for Communication Towers or Communication Antennas Must contain the Following information: 
A.  A master plan of all of the Applicant's existing and proposed Communication Tower and Communication Antenna sites within the City. The master plan Shall be reviewed and Approved by the Community Development Director in accordance with Written criteria established for such review by the Department. 
B.  Verification that the proposed Communication Tower or Communication Antenna complies with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). Such verification May be made by providing a Copy of a valid Federal Communications Commission (FCC) license agreement for staff review. 
C.  Verification of compliance with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
D.  At the time of submittal of a Development plan or Application, information indicating the type of communication Facility, its height above ground level and its cell coverage. 
(Ord. 0-18-05 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 0-20-98 § 1 (part), 1998)  
18.39.070 - Invalid provision or Application. 
If any provisions of this chapter or the Application thereof to any Person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity Shall not affect other provisions or Applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or Application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared severable. 
(Ord. 0-18-05 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 0-20-98 § 1 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 18.40 - BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS 
 
18.40.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of these regulations is to prescribe Screening requirements and other controls to ensure an orderly relationship between neighboring Uses, to enable diverse kinds of Uses to be located near one another compatibly and to improve the general appearance of the City. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.40.020 - Screening of open storage areas. 
All open storage areas including Refuse collection areas and drying Yards Shall be screened from abutting Lots, abutting Streets and other ways, by dense Landscaping or by a lumber or masonry Fence not to exceed any height limits elsewhere specified in this title. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.40.030 - Screening between residential and nonresidential Uses. 
Wherever any Commercial or Industrial Zone abuts a Residential Zone, the abutting commercial or industrial Lot, if occupied, Shall be screened from the Residentially Zoned Lot, along the entire Lot Line, except where a Driveway or maneuvering aisle is shared in common, by dense Landscaping or by a lumber or masonry Fence of a height prescribed during design review. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.40.040 - Control of artificial illumination. 
All artificial illumination of any Off-Street parking with three or more spaces, Off-Street loading, storage, Sales, display, service or processing areas which is readily visible from any residential facilities Shall be nonflashing and Shall be directed away so as to eliminate objectionable Glare. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.41 - HILLSIDE STANDARDS 
 
18.41.010 - Purpose. 
The standards of this division are intended to: 
A.  Preserve the City's scenic resources by encouraging retention and/or protection of the City's natural topographic features and vegetation such as hillside ridgelines, steep slopes, and other hillsides that have aesthetic value to the City of Colton and contribute to the community's sense of identity; 
B.  Acknowledge that as the slope of a development site increases so does the potential for environmental degradation including slope failure, increased erosion, sedimentation and Stormwater run-off; and 
C.  Encourage grading practices that are appropriate in hillside areas such as implementation of land form grading; and 
D.  Encourage structures on hillside parcels to be designed with scale, massing, architectural design and detailing appropriate to maintain hillsides in a natural, open character ensuring that buildings and structures blend with the natural environment through their shape, materials, and colors. 
(Ord. No. O-03-15, § 14, 3-3-2015)  
18.41.020 - Applicability. 
A.  Sloping sites. The standards in this division apply to subdivisions, uses, structures, and to all other development on sites with an average of slope of twenty percent or greater. 
B.  Determination of average slope. Average slope Shall be determined by applying the following formula. 
Average Slope Formula:  S = 100(IxL) / A 
Where: 
S  = Average natural slope in percent. 
I  = Contour interval in feet, at not more than ten foot intervals, resulting in at least five contour lines being shown on the contour map. 
L  = The sum of the length of all the contour lines across the parcel in scale feet. See Figure 1 below. 
A  = The gross area of the building site in square feet. 
Figure 1.
Measurement of Contour Line Length to Determine "L" in Slope Formula 
 
Average Slope Formula:  S = 100(IxL) / A  
18.41.025 - Permit and Application Requirements. 
Development that is subject to this section Shall require an Architectural and Site Plan Approval by the Planning Commission subject to this title. The application Shall include: 
A.  Basic application contents. All information and materials required by Section 18.53.030 (Application Preparation and Filing), and all additional materials required by the application contents handout provided by the Development Services Department for hillside development; and 
B.  Geotechnical report. A preliminary geotechnical report that identifies and proposes mitigation measures for any soils or geological problems that may affect site stability or structural integrity. Depending upon the site characteristics and project design, a final geotechnical report May also be required as part of a subsequent Building Permit application. 
C.  Constraints analysis. For properties that have sensitive environmental resources including endangered plants and animals drainage feature, or a wildlife corridor designated by the City, a qualified professional approved by the Director Shall prepare a site constraints analysis. The report Shall include proposed mitigation measures to effectively protect important identified biological features. 
(Ord. No. O-03-15, § 14, 3-3-2015)  
18.41.030 - Development Standards. 
Hillside developments Shall comply with the following standards. 
Hillside Building Placement Table 4 
Property Setback 	Setback Distance 
Front 	10 ft. 
Side 1 	10 ft., maximum 10 ft. 
Corner Side 	10 ft., maximum 15 ft. 
Ridgeline 2 	50 vertical feet from ridgeline. 
Also see 36.340.050.C, and Figure 3-31. 
 
Notes: 
1. Side setbacks May be reduced to five feet minimum with justification of hardship related to hillside protection or other hillside feature protection, subject to Planning Commission review and approval through Architectural and Site Plan Review. 
2. New structures or additions are prohibited within fifty vertical feet of a ridgeline unless this restriction precludes development of the property. An exception May be granted if the review authority finds the following: 
 a. There are no site development alternatives including clustering that avoid ridgeline development; 
 b. The density has been reduced to the minimum standards consistent with the General Plan density range; 
 c. No new subdivision of parcels is created that will result in ridgeline development; and 
 d. The proposed development will not have significant adverse visual impacts due to modifications in structural design including height, bulk, size, foundation, siting, and landscaping that avoid or minimize the visual impacts of the development. 
A.  Setbacks between structures and toes/tops of slopes. On adjacent lots having a difference in vertical elevation of three feet or more, the required side yard Shall be measured from the nearest toe or top of slope to the structure, whichever is closer. See Figure 2. 
Figure 2.
Side Setback Measurement 
 
B.  Height limitations. The maximum height for structures with a roof pitch of 3:12 or greater Shall be twenty-eight feet. If a roof pitch is less than 3:12, the maximum height Shall be twenty-four feet. 
1.  Siting restrictions/Protection of Ridgelines. Structures Shall not be placed so that they appear silhouetted against the sky when viewed from a public street, except where the review authority determines that the only feasible building site cannot comply with this standard. See Figure 3 below. 
Figure 3.
Silhouetted Structures 
 
2.  Placement below ridgeline. Except as provided by Subsection C.3, structures Shall be located so that a vertical separation of at least fifty feet is provided between the top of the structure and the top of the ridge or knoll to maintain the natural appearance of the ridge. Grading should also be avoided within fifty vertical feet of the top of a ridge or knoll. Placement of structures should also take advantage of existing vegetation for screening, and should include the installation of additional native plant materials to augment existing vegetation, where appropriate. See Figure 4 below. 
Figure 4.
Placement below ridgeline 
 
3.  Height limit above ridgeline. Where the review authority determines that a parcel contains no feasible building site other than where a structure will extend above the ridgeline, proposed structures Shall not exceed a height of sixteen feet above the highest point on the ridgeline or hilltop within one hundred feet of the proposed structure. 
4.  Height of lowest floor level. The vertical distance between the lowest point where the foundation meets grade and the lowest floor line of the structure Shall not exceed six feet. 
5.  Downhill building walls. No single building wall on the downhill side of a house Shall exceed fifteen feet in height above grade. Additional building height on a downhill side May be allowed in fifteen-foot increments, where each increment is stepped-back from the lower wall a minimum of ten feet. See Figure 5 below. 
Figure 5.
Downhill Building Walls 
 
C.  Decks. No portion of the walking surface of a deck with visible underpinnings Shall exceed a height of six feet above grade. Decks should be integrated into the architecture of the house, not appearing as an "add-on" to the primary building mass. 
Building Support structures. Support structures (for example, columns, pilings, etc.) below the lowest floor on the downhill side of a house, should be enclosed unless visible structural members are an integral feature of the architectural design. Support structure wall surfaces Shall not exceed six feet in height. 
Figure 8.
Design Sensitive to Terrain 
 
Note— This diagram is intended to provide an example of building form, and is not intended to show a preferred architectural style. 
D.  Driveways. The ramp to any garage or carport Shall not have a grade steeper than five percent within twenty feet of the garage or carport entry. The finished grade of driveways Shall not exceed an average of fifteen percent. 
E.  Natural State. A minimum of twenty-five percent of the lot area plus the percentage figure of the average slope must be remediated to its Natural State in terms of slope and vegetation, except where fire modification measures are required. 
F.  Grading. Grading plans Shall be prepared in compliance with the Municipal Code, and the General Plan, which prohibits grading on slopes over thirty percent. Grading Shall utilize landform grading techniques provided in Section [18.41.030 G]. See Figure 6: Appropriate Grading. 
Grading in hillside areas should be the minimum necessary to be consistent with the other standards contained within the City's Municipal Code and General Plan Policies. Grading should be limited to that which is necessary for the primary use of each lot. Excessive grading outside of the building footprint and driveway area is discouraged. If necessary, all land form grading practices should be followed by the engineer of record as reviewed and approved by the City Public Works Department. 
Figure 6.
Appropriate Grading 
 
G.  Grading and Drainage Standards 
1.  Grading Plans. Grading plans will be designed and prepared by a registered civil engineer in accordance with compliance with all Colton Municipal Code requirements, other applicable codes, instituting best engineering/planning practices and restrictions determined by detailed studies of the geological, hydrological and soils conditions of the site. 
2.  Geotechnical Studies. In order to address the many potential unknown geological constraints of a hillside, areas such as potential unstable and steep slopes, possibly poorly compacted and partially compacted soils in low lying areas, and faults, geotechnical investigation, by an engineering geologist and a soils engineer—registered by the State of California, Shall be conducted as part of the Architectural and Site Plan Review conducted by the Planning Division and approved by the Planning Commission. 
3.  Natural Features. Significant natural landmarks and other outstanding hillside features Shall be maintained in the Natural State as determined by the City's Development Services Director. 
4.  Landform Grading. All natural slopes greater than five feet in height that require grading, landform grading (contour grading) Shall be used to simulate the appearance of the natural terrain. (See Figure 7 and 8.) 
Figure 7.
Landform Grading 
 
5.  Remedial Grading. Notwithstanding the limitations of this subsection, the Development Services Director May permit remedial grading pursuant to an Administrative Architectural and Site Plan Review. For the purposes of this Section, remedial grading is defined as grading necessary to mitigate an environmental hazard as recommended by a geotechnical report approved by City engineering staff. No such remedial grading will be allowed when it could be avoided by changing the position or location of the proposed development. Remedial grading that would result in substantial landform alteration Shall not be permitted where project alternatives, including but not limited to, deepened foundations, caissons, soldier piles could be utilized to provide equivalent geologic stability. Remedial grading Shall not be used to materially increase the buildable area of a project site. 
6.  Slope Repairs. When the gradient of the natural slope exceeds twenty percent, five-feet horizontal and one-feet vertical (5:1), slope benches and terraces must be used when fill is used to repair even a small portion of a slope. 
7.  Grading on Slopes Greater than twenty-five Percent Grade. Grading on naturally occurring slopes of twenty-five percent grade or more that are greater than twenty-five feet in height Shall not occur unless grading is for access and/or remedial purposes, and specifically approval by the City of Colton Architectural and Site Plan Review after geotechnical studies have been conducted by a soils engineer and an engineering geologist registered by the State of California. A detailed plan for slope stabilization Shall be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of any grading permits. 
8.  Maximum Slope Angle for Manufactured Slopes. No manufactured slope Shall have a slope angle steeper than two-feet horizontal to one-feet vertical (2:1). Shallower slope angles May be required if detailed soils and geological investigations indicate that they are necessary. 
9.  Preserving Existing Significant Riparian Habitats. Major natural drainage channels containing significant perennial vegetation that may constitute wildlife habitat should remain in their Natural State. 
10.  Maintenance. All drainage, open space/landscaped buffer areas, detention ponds and sediment basins must be continuously maintained on a monthly basis either by homeowners association or property owner or existing maintenance assessment district. 
11.  Street layout. Any new streets should follow the natural contours of the terrain to minimize the need for grading. Street width are subject to design review and should be narrow in width preserving hillside and providing adequate safe access subject Design Review process. Cul-de-sacs are prohibited and loop roads are encouraged where necessary to fit the natural topography, all subject to the approval of the City Engineer, Development Services Director and Fire Chief. 
12.  Grading for Roadways. Where placement of roads are near ridges or on slopes is proposed, acceptable roadway placements Shall include a split roadway section to accommodate grade, knob removal to accommodate views from the road, and the rounding of cut slopes to enhance appearance. See Figure 10. 
Figure 10.
Grading for Roadways on Hillsides 
 
Cut and Knob Removal 
  
 
Split Roadway is Preferred 
13.  When the established alignment of a road does not conform to the natural contours of slopes, excessively long stretches of manufactured straight embankments Shall not be permitted. Instead use undulated slope embankments as shown in the Figure 11 below: 
Figure 11.
Undulated Slope Embankments 
 
14.  View protection. New construction should not block views from other properties. 
a.  Where feasible, new structures and tall landscaping should not be placed directly in the view of the primary living areas on a neighboring parcel. 
b.  New structures should be placed on the lower areas of a hillside site. 
c.  Mechanical equipment May be placed on rooftops or below a deck only if the equipment is not visible from off the site, except for unobtrusive solar collectors that are compatible with the roof line and architecturally integrated with the structure. See Figure 12 below. 
Figure 12.
View Protection 
 
15.  Retaining walls. Large retaining walls in a uniform plane Shall be avoided. Retaining walls Shall be divided into terraces with variations in plane and include landscaping to break up the length of walls and to screen them from view. No retaining wall Shall be higher than six feet, and should incorporate a three foot recessed offset feature every thirty feet, or other methods of articulation. Retaining walls more than three feet high that are visible from off the site should be screened with landscaping. See Figure 13. 
Figure 13.
Retaining Wall Design 
 
(Ord. No. O-03-15, § 14, 3-3-2015)  
Chapter 18.42 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
 
18.42.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect Properties in all Residential Zones and the health and safety of Persons from environmental Nuisances and hazards and to provide a pleasing environment in keeping with the nature of the residential character. The Performance Standards set maximum tolerability limits on adverse environmental effects created by any Use or Development of land. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.42.020 - Fire and explosion hazards. 
All activities involving, and all storage of, flammable and explosive Materials Shall be provided with adequate safety devices against hazards of fire and explosion by adequate firefighting and fire-suppression equipment and devices standard in Industry. Burning of waste Material in open fire is prohibited at any point. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.42.030 - Electrical Interference. 
No operation or activity Shall transmit, generate or otherwise cause any electrical, magnetic or electromagnetic radiation disturbance that affects the operation of any Use, equipment or process employed by any Use beyond the boundary of the site. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.42.040 - Noise. 
The maximum sound level radiated by any Use of Facility, when measured at the boundary line of the Property on which the sound is generated, Shall not be obnoxious by reason of its intensity, pitch or dynamic characteristics as determined by the City, and Shall not exceed 65 dBA. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.42.050 - Vibration. 
All activities Shall be operated so as not to generate ground vibration by equipment other than motor Vehicles, trains or by temporary construction or Demolition, which is perceptible without instruments by the average Person at or beyond any Lot Line of the Lot containing the activities. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.42.060 - Smoke. 
No operation or activity is Permitted to have operations which emit excessive Smoke, fumes or dust or which exceed the requirements, or levels, as specified by the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD). 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.42.070 - Odors. 
All activities Shall be operated so as not to emit Matter causing unpleasant odors which are perceptible by the average Person at or beyond any Lot Line of the Lot containing the activities. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.42.080 - Air quality. 
No operation or activity Shall cause the emission of any Smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, Gases or other forms of air Pollution which can cause damage to health, animals, vegetation, or other forms of Property, or which can cause excessive soiling on any other Lot. No emission Shall be Permitted which exceeds the requirements of the SCAQMD or the requirements of any air quality plan adopted by the City. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.42.090 - Light. 
Lighting where provided to illuminate Private Property Shall be so arranged as to reflect away from adjoining Property or any public way and to be arranged so as not to cause a Nuisance either to Highway traffic or to the living environment. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.42.100 - Glare. 
No direct or reflected Glare, whether produced by Floodlight, high temperature processes such as combustion or welding, or other processes, so as to be visible from the boundary line of Property on which the same is produced, Shall be Permitted. Sky-reflected Glare from Buildings or portions thereof Shall be so controlled by such reasonable means as are practical to the end art), 1992)  
18.42.110 - Fissionable or radioactive Materials. 
No operation or activities Shall be Permitted which result at any time in the release or emission of any fissionable or radioactive Materials into the atmosphere, the ground or Sewage systems. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.42.120 - Liquid or solid waste. 
No operation or action Shall Discharge at any point into any Public Street, Public Sewer, private Sewage disposal system, stream, body of water or into the ground, of any Materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in Sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements, except in accord with standards Approved by the California Department of Public Health or such other governmental agency as Shall have jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.42.130 - Heat or cold. 
No operation or activity Shall emit heat or cold which would cause a temperature increase or decrease on any adjacent Property in excess of ten degrees Fahrenheit, whether the change is in the air, on the ground, or in any Structure. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.44 - HOME OCCUPATIONS* 
 
18.44.010 - Purpose and intent. 
These regulations are provided so that certain Incidental and Accessory Uses May be established in Residential Developments under conditions, which will ensure their compatibility with the neighborhood. They are intended to protect the rights of residents to engage in certain Home Occupations that are harmonious with a residential environment. 
(Ord. 0-08-03 § 2 (part), 2003)  
18.44.020 - Application. 
An Application for a Home Occupation Permit Shall be made at the Community Development Department. Information Shall be provided to ensure that the Use complies with the applicable requirements listed in this chapter and Chapter 18.50 of this Code. Additional information May be requested by the Department. The Application for a Home Occupation Shall not be valid unless a current Business License is also obtained from the City. 
(Ord. 0-08-03 § 2 (part), 2003)  
18.44.030 - Criteria. 
A.  The Home Occupation Shall be an Incidental and Accessory Use and Shall not change the principal character of the Dwelling Unit. 
B.  There Shall be no Employees other than members of the residential Family living in the residence. 
C.  There Shall be no Use of Materials or equipment not recognized as being customarily found and Used in Residential Zones. 
D.  The Use Shall not generate Pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that normally found in the Zone in which it is located. 
E.  The Home Occupation Shall not involve the Use of commercial Vehicles for delivery of Materials to or from the Premises for Commercial Purposes. 
F.  There Shall be no outside storage of Materials and/or supplies. 
G.  The Use Shall not involve the placement of Signs, except those Permitted by Chapter 18.50 of this Code. 
H.  Not more than one room in a Dwelling or an Accessory Structure Shall be Used for the Home Occupation. 
I.  In no way Shall the appearance of the Structure be so altered or the conduct of the Home Occupation within the Structure be such that the Structure May reasonably be recognized as serving a nonresidential Use. The architecture, color, Materials, construction and lighting of the exterior of the Structure Shall be reasonably compatible with surrounding residences. 
J.  There Shall be no Use of utilities beyond that normally required for Use of the Property for residential purposes. 
K.  There Shall be no direct Sales of products or merchandise from the home. 
(Ord. 0-08-03 § 2 (part), 2003)  
18.44.040 - Criteria for Home Occupations in residences listed on the City Register of Historic and Scenic Resources. 
Notwithstanding the matrix of Uses Permitted in each Zone contained in Section 18.06.060, a Home Occupation established in a Residential Zone within a residence listed on the City Register of Historic and Scenic Resources Shall be an Incidental and Accessory Use and Shall not change the principal character of the Dwelling Unit. It Shall comply with the Following: 
A.  There Shall be no Employees other than members of the residential Family living in the residence. 
B.  The Use Shall not generate Pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that normally found in the zone in which it is located. 
C.  The Home Occupation Shall not involve the Use of commercial Vehicles for delivery of Materials to or from the Premises for Commercial Purposes. 
D.  There Shall be no outside storage of Materials and/or supplies. 
E.  The Use Shall not involve the placement of Signs, except those Permitted by Chapter 18.50 of this Code. 
F.  In no way Shall the appearance of the Structure be so altered or the conduct of the Home Occupation within the Structure be such that the Structure May reasonably be recognized as serving a nonresidential Use. The architecture, color, Materials, construction and lighting of the exterior of the Structure Shall be reasonably compatible with surrounding residences. 
G.  There Shall be no Use of utilities beyond that normally required for Use of the Property for residential purposes. 
H.  All Permitted accessory retail Sales activities Shall only operate between the hours of nine a.m. and nine p.m. seven Days a week. 
(Ord. 0-08-03 § 2 (part), 2003)  
18.44.050 - Prohibited Uses. 
The Following Uses by the nature of the investment or operation are deemed to have a pronounced and deleterious effect on surrounding residential Uses and, once started, tend to rapidly increase beyond the limits Permitted for Home Occupations. They substantially impair the public health, safety and welfare of Persons residing in a neighborhood and are prohibited in all Residential Zones. Such Uses, include, but are not limited to Following: 
A.  Auto repair; 
B.  Barber and beauty shops; 
C.  Bicycle repair; 
D.  Carpentry work; 
E.  Dance instruction; 
F.  Laundering services; 
G.  Medical and dental offices; 
H.  Painting of Vehicles, trailers and boats; 
I.  Photo developing; 
J.  Photo studios; 
K.  Private Schools with organized classes, except as Permitted by California Health & Safety Code for Day care Uses. 
L.  Radio and television repair; 
M.  Upholstering; 
N.  Welding. 
(Ord. 0-08-03 § 2 (part), 2003)  
18.44.060 - Noncompliance. 
The Community Development Director May revoke any Home Occupation Permit for noncompliance with conditions set in approving the Application in accordance with the requirements of Section 18.58.070 of this Code. Upon submittal of a timely Appeal, the Decision of the Community Development Director Shall be stayed pending Resolution of the Appeal. 
(Ord. 0-08-03 § 2 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 18.45 - WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS) 
 
18.45.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate the placement and operation of Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) through the Conditional Use Permit process to ensure they are operated safely and with minimal impacts on surrounding Properties. A Conditional Use Permit for a WECS is intended to regulate and provide for the installation of WECS which are made feasible by prevailing winds within certain areas of the City. The conditions of the Permit are meant to ensure that a safe and beneficial environment, for both the WECS Development and the adjacent Properties, is provided. 
(Ord. 0-13-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
18.45.020 - Applicability. 
WECS are Permitted in the Following zone classifications only when a Conditional Use Permit is granted pursuant to this chapter: 
A.  M-1 (light industrial); 
B.  M-2 (heavy industrial). 
(Ord. 0-13-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
18.45.030 - Application. 
Every Application for a Conditional Use Permit Shall be made in writing to the Planning Commission on the forms provided by the Community Development Department and Shall be accompanied by the filing Fee established by City Council Resolution. Applications Shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission for conformance with this section. The Application Shall include the Following information: 
A.  Name and address of the Applicant. 
B.  Evidence that the Applicant is the Owner of the Property involved or has Written Permission of the Owner to make such Application. 
C.  A Plot plan and Development plan drawn in sufficient detail to clearly describe the Following: 
1.  Physical dimensions of the Property; 
2.  Location and physical dimensions of existing and proposed Structures; 
3.  Location of electrical lines and facilities; 
4.  Existing topography; 
5.  Setbacks; 
6.  Circulation; 
7.  Ingress and egress; 
8.  Utilization of the Property under the requested Permit. 
D.  Utility interconnection data and a Copy of Written notification to the Utility of the proposed interconnection. 
E.  A photograph or detailed drawing of each model of WECS including the tower and foundation, and one or more detailed perspective drawings showing the site fully developed with all proposed WECS and Accessory Structures. 
F.  Specific information on the type, size, rotor Material, rated power output, performance, safety and Noise characteristics of each model of WECS. 
G.  Specific information on the type, height, Material and safety of each model of tower. 
H.  A site preparation and installation schedule. 
I.  A vicinity map or aerial photograph describing the location, including distances from existing and proposed WECS, of all surrounding land Uses which are within one mile of any Property proposed for WECS installation. 
J.  Drawings that show phase spacings, configurations and grounding practices of any proposed electrical distribution lines. 
K.  If the Application includes any WECS that require the Approval of a height greater than allowed in Section 18.26.090, a Variance Application, pursuant to Section 18.58.040 of the Zoning Ordinance, Shall be filed concurrently. 
L.  An Application including any WECS which is located within two miles of any microwave communications link Shall be accompanied by a Copy of a Written notification to the Operator of the link or evidence that no WECS are located in the microwave path. 
M.  An Application including any WECS which is located within a one hundred-Year Floodplain area, as such Flood hazard areas are shown on the Zoning Map, Shall be accompanied by a detailed report which Shall address the potential for wind erosion, water erosion, sedimentation and Flooding, and such report(s) Shall propose mitigation measures for such impacts to the extent that such impacts are caused by the proposed WECS. 
N.  Such additional information as Shall be reasonably required by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. 0-13-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
18.45.040 - Standard and Development criteria. 
A.  Height Limits. 
1.  No WECS Shall exceed forty feet in height, measured at the top of the blade in the twelve o'clock position. Where unusual conditions warrant, a lower height limit May be imposed as a condition of Approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
B.  Setbacks. 
1.  No Building or Structures Shall be located closer than fifty feet from any Lot Line. 
C.  Safety Setbacks. 
1.  No WECS Shall be located where the center of the tower is within a distance of 1.25 times the total WECS height from any aboveground electrical transmission line of more than twelve kV. 
2.  No WECS Shall be located where the center of the tower is within a distance of 1.25 times the total WECS height from any public Right-of-Way, Railroad or Off-Site Building. The Setback herein specified Shall be measured from the closest boundary of the public Right-of-Way or Railroad right-of way. 
3.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, the Setbacks therein specified May be reduced to less than 1.25 times the total WECS height if the Planning Commission determines that the topography of, or other conditions related to, the adjacent Property or Right-of-Way eliminate or substantially reduce the potential safety hazards. Whenever a Setback reduction is proposed pursuant to this subsection, the Setback reduction Shall be included in all Notices regarding the Conditional Use Permit, and, if granted, the Conditional Use Permit Shall specifically state the required Setback. 
4.  The Setbacks therein specified May also be reduced if the Planning Commission determines that the characteristics of the surrounding Property eliminate or substantially reduce considerations of scenic value. Whenever a Setback reduction is proposed pursuant to this subsection, the Setback reduction Shall be included in all Notices regarding the Conditional Use Permit, and, if granted, the Conditional Use Permit Shall specifically state the required Setback. 
D.  Safety and Security. 
1.  Fencing, or other appropriate measures, Shall be required to prevent unauthorized Access to the WECS. 
2.  Guy wires Shall be distinctly marked. 
3.  Signs in English and Spanish warning of the electrical and other hazards associated with the WECS Shall be posted at the base of each tower and at reasonable intervals on Fences or barriers as determined by the Planning Commission. 
E.  Seismic Safety. All WECS Shall comply with the requirements of the applicable Seismic Zone of the Uniform Building Code or with the seismic design recommendation in an Approved geotechnical report on the Project. 
F.  Fire Protection. Upon recommendation of the City Fire Department, WECS May be required to include fire control and prevention measures including, but not limited to, the Following: 
1.  Fireproof or fire-resistant Building Materials; 
2.  Buffers of fire-retardant Landscaping; 
3.  An automatic fire-extinguishing system; 
4.  Fire breaks. 
G.  Interconnection and Electrical Distribution Facilities. Interconnection and electrical distribution facilities Shall conform to procedures and standards established by the California Public Utilities Commission, the National Electrical Code and any Local requirements established by the Public Utilities Department. 
H.  Unsafe and Inoperable WECS. 
1.  Whenever any existing WECS are modified, or any new WECS are installed, any WECS on the site which are unsafe, Inoperable, or Abandoned or for which the Permit has expired or has been revoked Shall be removed by the Owner or brought into compliance with the provisions of this section. All safety hazards created by the installation and operation of the WECS Shall be eliminated. Whenever the operation of any WECS is eliminated, the site Shall be restored to its condition prior to installation. A bond, in an amount Approved by the Community Development Director or other appropriate form of security, in a form Approved by the City Attorney, May be required to cover the cost of removal and site restoration. 
2.  Every unsafe or Inoperable WECS which have not generated power for one hundred eighty consecutive calendar Days are hereby declared to be a Public Nuisance which Shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, Demolition or removal, upon revocation of the Conditional Use Permit. The appropriate abatement method Shall be determined by the Community Development Director based upon the cost of abatement and the degree to which the WECS will meet the requirements of this section Following abatement. A WECS which has not generated power for one hundred eighty consecutive calendar Days Shall not be considered a Public Nuisance and the Conditional Use Permit Shall not be revoked provided the Owner can demonstrate that modernization, rebuilding or repairs are in progress or planned and that a good faith effort is being made to return the WECS to service at the earliest practical date. If a WECS does not deliver power as a result of a curtailment whereby power is not accepted by the contracted Utility, the period of curtailment Shall be added to the minimum period defined above. 
I.  Interference with Navigational Systems. No WECS Shall be installed which does not comply with Federal Aviation Administration regulations for sitting Structures near an Airport. 
J.  Certification. 
1.  The foundation, tower and compatibility of the tower with the rotor and rotor-related equipment Shall be certified in writing by a structural Engineer registered in California that they conform with good engineering practices and comply with the appropriate provisions of the Uniform Building Code adopted by the City. 
2.  The electrical system Shall be certified in writing by an electrical Engineer, registered in California, that it conforms with good engineering practices and complies with appropriate provisions of the National Electrical Code adopted by the City. 
3.  The rotor overspeed control system Shall be certified in writing by a mechanical Engineer, registered in any state, that it conforms with good engineering practices. 
K.  Noise. A WECS Shall not be operated in Violation of the provisions of Chapter 18.42 (Performance Standards). 
L.  Monitoring. 
1.  Upon reasonable Notice, and subject to the Applicant's safety and security procedures, City officials or their Designated Representatives May enter a Lot on which a Conditional Use Permit has been granted for the purpose of monitoring Noise and other environmental impacts. Twenty-four hours advance Written Notice Shall be deemed reasonable Notice. 
2.  The holder of a Conditional Use Permit May be required to submit periodic monitoring reports containing data on the operations and environmental impacts of the WECS. 
3.  A telephone number Shall be maintained for each WECS Project to facilitate the reporting of Noise irregularities and equipment malfunctions. 
M.  Time-Related Conditions. Where no operating data for the proposed turbines is available, the granting of a Conditional Use Permit May be conditioned upon the installation and operation of one or more WECS for a period not to exceed six Months in order to demonstrate performance characteristics of the WECS. If such a monitoring condition is imposed, the Permit Shall specify the standards that Must be met in order to continue Development. If a standard is not being met at the expiration of the required monitoring period, the Applicant and the City May agree to an extension. The time within which the Permit Must be Used Shall be extended for the period of required monitoring. 
N.  Development Impacts. A one-time or periodic Fee and a requirement to provide public works or services May be imposed as a condition of a Conditional Use Permit where such public works or services are reasonably related to the impacts occasioned by the WECS. 
O.  Signs. No advertising Sign or Logo Shall be placed or painted on any WECS. Unless otherwise Approved by the Planning Commission, the Conditional Use Permit May Permit the placement of no more than one Project identification Sign relating to the Development on the Project site, but no such Sign Shall exceed twenty square feet in surface area or a height of eight feet. 
P.  Color and Finish of WECS. All WECS Shall be either light earth-tone colors (such as off-white, gray, beige or tan) or darker fully-saturated colors (such as dark blue or green, maroon or rust red) or galvanized. All WECS Shall have a matte or galvanized finish unless the Community Development Director determines that such finish adversely affects the performance of the WECS or other good cause is shown to Permit any other finish. 
Q.  Contingent Approval. A WECS May be granted subject to necessary Approvals from the Federal Aviation Administration or other approving authorities. 
R.  General Conditions. The City May impose conditions on the granting of a Conditional Use Permit in order to achieve the purposes of this chapter and the General Plan and to protect the health, safety or general welfare of the community. 
S.  Notification. Upon Approval of a Conditional Use Permit, the City Shall provide Written Notice to the California Public Utilities Commission, the California Energy Commission and the City's Utility Department. 
(Ord. 0-13-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
18.45.050 - Use of Permit. 
A.  Conditional Use Permit—Expiration. Revocation and Appeals. The Conditional Use Permit May be expired, revoked, and Appealed in the manner set forth in Section 18.58.070. 
B.  Replacement. 
1.  The replacement of all individual WECS are subject to the Conditional Use Permit process including the required Public Hearing so that staff can evaluate any possible new conditions. 
2.  WECS replacements not meeting the criteria above require Approval of a subsequent Conditional Use Permit. 
3.  Any WECS on which the cost of Alteration, restoration, repair or rebuilding in a twelve Month period exceeds seventy-five percent of the replacement cost and Shall be subject to subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(Ord. 0-13-99 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 18.46 - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES 
 
18.46.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is intended to limit the number and extent of Nonconforming Uses by regulating their enlargement, their reestablishment after abandonment, and the Alteration or restoration after destruction of the Structures they occupy. In addition, this chapter is intended to limit the number and extent of Nonconforming Structures by prohibiting their being moved, altered or enlarged in a manner that would increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards prescribed in this Code. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.46.020 - Nonconforming Lots of Record. 
If two or more Lots or combinations of Lots and portions of Lots with continuous Frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of amendment of this title, and if all or Part of the Lots do not meet the requirements established for Lot Width and area, the lands involved Shall be considered to be an undivided Parcel for the purposes of this section, and no portion of said Parcel Shall be Used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with Lot Width and area requirements established by this title, nor Shall any division of any Parcel be made which creates a Lot with width or area below the retirements stated herein. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.46.030 - Nonconforming Uses of Land. 
Where lawful Use of land exists which would not be Permitted by the regulations imposed by this title, and where such Use involves no individual Structure with a replacement cost exceeding ten thousand dollars, the Use May be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided: 
A.  No such Nonconforming Use Shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land that was occupied at the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this title. 
B.  No such Nonconforming Use Shall be moved in whole or in Part to any portion of the Lot or Parcel other than that occupied by such Use at the effective date of adoption of the Ordinance codified in this title or amendment by this title. 
C.  If any such Nonconforming Use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than sixty Days, any subsequent Use of such land Shall conform to the regulations specified for the zone in which such land is located. 
D.  No additional Structure not conforming to the requirements of this title Shall be erected with such Nonconforming Use of land. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.46.040 - Nonconforming Structures. 
Where a lawful structure exists that could not be built under the terms of this title by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other retirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
B.  Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this title. 
C.  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulation for the zone in which it is located after it is moved. 
D.  Residential units in residential neighborhoods and mixed-use districts (including units nonconforming due to lot size), in the event of damage or total destruction, may be rebuilt at the density and with the same setbacks that existed prior to such an event. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(24)), 10-10-2013)  
18.46.050 - Nonconforming Uses of Structures. 
If lawful Use involving individual Structures with a replacement cost of ten thousand dollars or more, or of Structure and Premises in combination exists that would not be allowed in the zone under the terms of this title, the lawful Use May be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the Following provisions: 
A.  No existing Structure devoted to a Use not Permitted in the zone in which it is located Shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the Use of the Structure to a Use Permitted in the zone in which it is located. 
B.  Any conforming Use May be extended throughout any Parts of a Building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such Use at the time of adoption of the Ordinance codified in this title, but no such Use Shall be extended to occupy any land outside such Building. 
C.  If no Structural Alterations are made, any Nonconforming Use of a Structure, or Structure and Premises, May be changed to another Nonconforming Use; provided, that the Commission finds that the proposed Use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the zone than the existing Nonconforming Use. In Permitting such change, the Commission May require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this title. 
D.  Any Structure, or Structure and land in combination, in or on which a Nonconforming Use is superseded by a Permitted Use, Shall conform to the regulations for the zone, and the Nonconforming Use May not thereafter be resumed. 
E.  When a Nonconforming Use of a Structure, or Structure and Premises in combination is Discontinued or Abandoned for three consecutive Months, the Structure, or Structure and Premises in combination, Shall not thereafter be Used except in conformity with the regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
F.  Where Nonconforming Use status applies to a Structure and Premises in combination, removal or destruction of the Structure Shall eliminate the Nonconforming status of the land. "Destruction" for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty percent of the replacement cost at time of destruction. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.46.060 - Repairs and Maintenance. 
A.  On any Nonconforming Structure or portion of a Structure containing a Nonconforming Use, work May be done in any period of twelve consecutive Months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing Walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent of the current replacement cost of the Nonconforming Structure, or Nonconforming portion of the Structure as the case May be; provided, that the cubic content existing when it became Nonconforming Shall not be increased. 
B.  If a Nonconforming Structure or portion of Structure containing a Nonconforming Use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it Shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the zone in which it is located. Nothing in this section Shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any Building or Part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.46.065 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities. 
Where off-street parking or loading facilities do not conform to the provisions of this title, or where no such parking or loading facilities have been provided for buildings or uses prior to the effective date of any ordinance which made them nonconforming or which required such facilities where none were provided, such buildings or uses shall not be enlarged, expanded, constructed or reconstructed nor may additional facilities be provided until after the requirements for off-street parking and loading space have been complied with. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(24)), 10-10-2013)  
18.46.070 - Extension Periods for Residential Purposes. 
A.  Definitions. For purposes of this Section 18.46.070, the Following words and phrases are defined as follows: 
"Discontinued or Abandoned" means that the Use for residential purposes of a Nonconforming Residential Structure has been Discontinued or Abandoned for a period of time that exceeds three Months but is less than twenty-four Months. 
"Nonconforming Extension" means an Approval granted by the Design Review Committee or the Community Development Director, as appropriate, to continue the Use for residential purposes of a Nonconforming Residential Structure that has been Discontinued or Abandoned. 
"Nonconforming Residential Structure" means a Structure Used for residential purposes or a Structure and Premises Used in combination for residential purposes located in a zone where such Use for residential purposes would not otherwise be Permitted by the regulations imposed by this title. 
B.  General Rule for Residential Nonconforming Extensions. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this chapter, a Nonconforming Residential Structure, which was otherwise lawful prior to the zoning amendment categorizing it Nonconforming and which has been Discontinued or Abandoned, May be continued to be Used for residential purposes for a period of time as specified in subsection (B) below, subject to the Approval of a Nonconforming Extension. 
C.  Approval Authority. Approval or denial of a Nonconforming Extension Shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (D) below. The Design Review Committee May grant an initial Nonconforming Extension for up to three Years. In addition, the Community Development Director may, upon the Director's own initiative and with the Written concurrence of the Property Owner, administratively grant additional extensions of up to three Years each, subject to the minimum conditions set forth in subsections (E)(1) and (E)(2) below and provided that the continued Use of the Nonconforming Residential Structure satisfies the requirements of subsections (D)(1) through (D)(3) below. 
D.  Required Findings. The Design Review Committee or the Community Development Director, as appropriate under subsection (C) above, Shall make the Following findings before granting an initial Nonconforming Extension: 
1.  The Nonconforming Residential Structure is not being enlarged, increased or extended in such a way as to occupy any Part of the Nonconforming Residential Structure that was not occupied on the effective date that it became Nonconforming. 
2.  The Nonconforming Residential Structure complies with the minimum Dwelling Unit size prescribed in the Colton Municipal Code for the type of residential Structure being extended and continued. 
3.  Extension of the Nonconforming Residential Structure will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, or Materially injurious to Properties or Improvements in the vicinity. 
E.  Nonconforming Extension Conditions. All Nonconforming Extensions Shall be subject to the Following conditions, as well as any other conditions determined by the Design Review Committee or the Community Development Director, as appropriate under subsection (C) above, to be reasonably necessary for the public health, safety and welfare: 
1.  The Property Owner Shall enter into an agreement, acceptable to the Community Development Director and City Attorney, agreeing to the conditions of Approval for the extension of time, agreeing to terminate the Use upon the termination of the authorized time period and Securing such termination and necessary construction or Demolition work with appropriate forms of security. The agreement Shall be recorded as a covenant against the Property to advise subsequent Buyers of these requirements. 
2.  The Applicant Shall not enlarge, increase or extend any Nonconforming Residential Structure in such a way that it occupies any Part of the Nonconforming Residential Structure that was not occupied on the effective date that it became Nonconforming. 
(Ord. 0-10-01 § 1, 2001)  
Chapter 18.47 - DEEMED APPROVED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES 
 
18.47.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to support the City's current requirement for approval of conditional use permits prior to establishing new and/or expanded alcohol sales activities by conferring Deemed Approved Status for all existing, lawfully established non-conforming Alcoholic Beverage sales activities. This chapter provides standards for the continued operation of Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments, and sets forth grounds for the modification, revocation and/or termination of deemed approved permits for establishments violating this chapter. Specific purposes for enacting this chapter are as follows: 
A.  To protect residential, commercial, industrial and civic areas from the harmful effects attributable to the sale of Alcoholic Beverages and minimize the adverse impacts of nonconforming and incompatible uses; 
B.  To provide opportunities for Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments to operate in a mutually beneficial relationship to each other and to other commercial and civic services; 
C.  To provide mechanisms to address problems associated with the public consumption of Alcoholic Beverages such as litter, loitering, graffiti, unruly behavior, violence, vandalism, and escalated noise levels; 
D.  To provide that Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments are not to become the source of undue public nuisances in the community; 
E.  To provide for properly maintained Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments so that the secondary effects of negative impacts generated by these activities on the surrounding environment are mitigated; 
F.  To monitor deemed approved establishments to ensure they do not substantially change in mode or character of operation; and 
G.  To promote a healthy and safe business environment in the City through appropriate and consistent land use regulations and to encourage the establishment of businesses that will benefit both the local economy and residents while not placing an undue strain on City resources or surrounding businesses. 
(Ord. No. O-08-18, § 2, 6-5-2018)  
18.47.020 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the extent permissible under other laws to all legal, nonconforming Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments, as defined in Section 18.47.030, located in the City that sell Alcoholic Beverages for on- or off-site consumption. 
(Ord. No. O-08-18, § 2, 6-5-2018)  
18.47.030 - Definitions. 
The meaning and construction of these words and phrases, as set forth below, shall apply throughout, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. 
A.  "Alcoholic Beverage" means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and any liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, that contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and that is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances, the sale of which requires an ABC license. 
B.  "Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity" means the retail sale of Alcoholic Beverages for on-site or off-site consumption. 
C.  "Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment" means an establishment where an Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity occurs. Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments include but are not limited to the following recognized types of establishments: liquor stores, beer and wine stores, convenience markets, markets, neighborhood specialty food markets, retail sales establishments, wine shops, service stations, taverns, clubs, cocktail lounges, ballrooms, cabarets, dance bars, piano bars, billiard or game parlors, bowling alleys, nightclubs, dance halls, cafes, bars, restaurants with bars, full-service restaurants, fast food establishments, and breweries. For purposes of this chapter, an "Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment" also includes a general retail store, a grocery store and a retail pharmacy that devotes any percentage of its gross floor area to the sale and display of Alcoholic Beverages. 
D.  "California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control" or "ABC" refers to the department of the state empowered to act pursuant to Article 20, Section 22, of the California Constitution and authorized to administer the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. 
E.  "Deemed Approved Activity" means any legal nonconforming Alcoholic Beverage sales commercial activity (as defined below). Such activity shall be considered a Deemed Approved Activity so long as it complies with the deemed approved Performance Standards set forth in this chapter. 
F.  "Deemed Approved Status" means the permitted use of land for a Deemed Approved Activity. Deemed Approved Status replaces legal, nonconforming status for On-Sale and Off-Sale Alcohol Establishments with respect to Alcoholic Beverage sales commercial activity and remains in effect as long as it complies with the deemed approved provisions and Performance Standards of this chapter. 
G.  "Enforcement Officer" means the chief of police or designee. 
H.  "Illegal activity" means an activity, which has been determined to be in noncompliance with local, state or federal laws, the conditions of any applicable permits, or the deemed approved provisions and Performance Standards in this chapter. A Deemed Approved Activity may lose its Deemed Approved Status and if it does not comply with the deemed approved Performance Standards and/or other conditions applicable to its continued operation. In such cases it shall no longer be considered a Deemed Approved Activity. 
I.  "Legal Nonconforming Alcoholic Beverage Sales Commercial Activity" or "Legal Nonconforming Activity" means an On-Sale and/or Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Sales Commercial Activity which was a legal, nonconforming use pursuant to Chapter 18.46, and for which a valid state of California Alcoholic Beverage Control license had been issued and used in the exercise of the rights and privileges conferred by the license at a time immediately prior to January 19, 2010. A "Legal Nonconforming Alcoholic Beverage Sales Commercial Activity" or "Legal Nonconforming Activity" includes all beverage sales activities of existing On-Sale and Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments that are not in conformance with the regulations applicable to new On-Sale and Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments contained in this title. Such an activity shall be considered a Deemed Approved Activity and shall no longer be considered a Legal Nonconforming Activity. 
J.  "Modify" or "Modified" means the expansion or increase in intensity or substantial change of a use, as these terms are used in this chapter. 
K.  "Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment" means an establishment that conducts retail sales of Alcoholic Beverages for consumption off the Premises where sold. 
L.  "On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment" means an establishment that conducts retail sales of Alcoholic Beverages for consumption on the Premises where sold. 
M.  "Performance Standards" means regulations for the business practice activities and land use for locations with Deemed Approved Status, in whole or in part, or those further requirements imposed to achieve the purposes of this chapter. Performance Standards constitute requirements which must be complied with by an On-Sale or Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment in order to retain its Deemed Approved Status. 
N.  "Premises" means the actual space in a building devoted to Alcoholic Beverage sales. 
O.  "Redeveloped" means the demolition of an existing On-Sale or Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment (whether conducting permitted or conditionally permitted activities or Deemed Approved Activities) followed by the immediate reconstruction and operation of a replacement Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment. 
(Ord. No. O-08-18, § 2, 6-5-2018)  
18.47.040 - Deemed approved Alcoholic Beverage sales regulations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any legal nonconforming On-Sale or Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment lawfully operating prior to January 19, 2010 pursuant to an ABC license that authorizes the retail sale of Alcoholic Beverages for on-site or off-site consumption shall thereafter be an establishment with Deemed Approved Status in accordance with Section 18.47.060. Such establishment may continue to lawfully operate provided the operation is conducted in compliance with the Performance Standards contained in Section 18.47.070, has satisfied the applicable training requirement, maintains a valid City business license and paid the annual regulatory fee required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-08-18, § 2, 6-5-2018)  
18.47.050 - Applicability of deemed approved Alcoholic Beverage sales regulations. 
The deemed approved Alcoholic Beverage sales regulations shall apply to all legal nonconforming Alcoholic Beverage sales activities for on-site or off-site consumption existing and operating within the City without an approved conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. O-08-18, § 2, 6-5-2018)  
18.47.060 - Automatic Deemed Approved Status. 
All legal nonconforming Alcoholic Beverage sales activities for on-site or off-site consumption, existing and operating within the City on January 19, 2010 shall automatically become deemed approved activities and shall no longer be considered legal nonconforming activities. Each Deemed Approved Activity shall retain its Deemed Approved Status as long as it complies with the Performance Standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-08-18, § 2, 6-5-2018)  
18.47.070 - Deemed approved Performance Standards. 
The provisions of this section shall be known as the deemed approved Performance Standards. The purpose of these standards is to control dangerous or objectionable environmental effects of Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activities. These standards shall apply to all deemed approved Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activities that hold Deemed Approved Status pursuant to this chapter. An Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity shall retain its Deemed Approved Status only if it conforms to all of the following deemed approved Performance Standards: 
A.  The alcohol establishment shall not cause adverse effects to the health, peace or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area. 
B.  The alcohol establishment shall not jeopardize or endanger the public health or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area. 
C.  The alcohol establishment shall not allow repeated nuisance activities within the Premises or in close proximity of the Premises, including but not limited to disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking in surrounding neighborhoods, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, or lewd conduct. 
D.  The alcohol establishment shall comply with all provisions of local, state or federal laws, regulations or orders, including but not limited to those of the ABC, California Business and Professions Code Sections 24200, 24200.6, and 25612.5, as well as any condition imposed on any permits issued pursuant to applicable laws, regulations or orders. This includes compliance with annual City business license fees. 
E.  The Off-Sale Alcohol Establishment's upkeep and operating characteristics shall be compatible with and not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood. 
F.  A copy of these Performance Standards, any applicable ABC or City operating conditions, and any training requirements shall be posted in at least one prominent place within the interior of the establishment where it will be readily visible and legible to the employees and patrons of the establishment. 
G.  The owners and all employees of the alcohol beverage sales establishment involved in the sale of Alcoholic Beverages shall complete an approved course in "Responsible Beverage Sales" (RBS) within 60 days of hire for employees hired after the passage of this ordinance or within six months of the passage of this ordinance for existing employees. To satisfy this requirement, a certified program must meet the standards of the California Coordinating Council on Responsible Beverage Service (CCC/RBS) or other certifying/licensing body designated by the state of California. 
(Ord. No. O-08-18, § 2, 6-5-2018)  
18.47.080 - Notification to owners. 
The development services department shall notify the owner and/or operator of an alcohol establishment of each Deemed Approved Activity as shown on their City business license, and also, if not the same, any property owner at the address shown on the county assessor's property tax assessment records, of the activity's Deemed Approved Status. The notice shall be sent by first-class mail and certified mail return receipt requested and shall include a copy of the Performance Standards in this chapter with the requirement that they be posted in a conspicuous and unobstructed place visible from the entrance of the establishment for public review. This notice shall also provide that the activity is required to comply with all Performance Standards, and that the activity is required to comply with all other aspects of the deemed approved regulations. Should the notice be returned, then the notice shall be sent via regular mail. Failure of any person to receive notice given pursuant to this chapter shall not affect the Deemed Approved Status of the activity. 
(Ord. No. O-08-18, § 2, 6-5-2018)  
18.47.090 - Grounds for Deemed Approved Status suspension, modification or revocation. 
A.  An Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment's Deemed Approved Status may be suspended for up to one year, Modified or revoked by the planning commission after holding a public hearing for failure to comply with the Performance Standards set forth in Section 18.47.070. 
Notice of such hearing by the planning commission at which it will consider the modification, suspension or revocation of an establishment's Deemed Approved Status shall be in writing and shall state the grounds therefore. Notice shall be mailed by first-class mail and certified mail return receipt requested at least 10 days before the date of the hearing. 
B.  The occurrence of any of the following shall be grounds for termination of the Deemed Approved Status of the Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity after notice and a hearing in front of the planning commission and require an application be submitted for the issuance of a conditional use permit in order to continue the Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity: 
1.  An existing Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity changes its activity so that ABC requires a different type of license. 
2.  An existing Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity is not in compliance with other provisions contained in this Title. 
3.  There is a substantial modification to the mode or character of operation. 
4.  As used herein, the phrase "substantial modification to the mode or character of operation" includes but is not limited to the following: 
a.  The Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity establishment increases the floor or land area or shelf space devoted to the display or sales of any Alcoholic Beverage. 
b.  The Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity establishment extends the hours of operation. 
c.  The Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity Establishment proposes to reinstate alcohol sales after the ABC license has been either revoked or suspended for a period 180 days or greater by ABC. 
d.  The Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity voluntarily discontinues active operation for more than 180 consecutive days or ceases to be licensed by the ABC. 
5.  A "substantial change in the mode of character of operation" shall not include: 
a.  Re-establishment, restoration or repair of an existing Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity on the same Premises after the Premises have been rendered totally or partially inaccessible by a riot, insurrection, toxic accident or act of God, provided that the re-establishment, restoration or repair does not extend the hours of operation of any establishment or add to the capacity, floor or land area or shelf space devoted to Alcoholic Beverages of any establishment that sells any Alcoholic Beverages for off-site consumption. 
b.  Temporary closure for not more than 180 days in cases of vacation or illness or for purposes of repair, renovation, or remodeling if that repair, renovation, or remodeling does not change the nature of the Premises and does not extend the hours of operation of any establishment, or add to the capacity, floor or land area, or shelf space devoted to Alcoholic Beverages of any establishment that sells any Alcoholic Beverages for off-site consumption, provided notice is provided to the City. The planning commission may, upon request of an owner of an Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment made prior to the expiration of 180 days, grant one or more extensions to the period of temporary closure, none of which may exceed 60 days, and together not to exceed 180 days. 
6.  Once it is determined by the City that there has been a discontinuance of active operation for 180 consecutive days or a cessation of ABC licensing, it may be resumed only upon the granting of a conditional use permit as provided in section 18.48.140 of this title. In the event that any active operation is discontinued on a property for a period of 180 consecutive days, such discontinuance shall be presumed to be abandonment of the use by the property owner. At any time after any active operation is discontinued for a period of 180 consecutive days or more, the Development Services Director shall notify the property owner in writing of the determination of presumed abandonment of the active operation. The property owner and/or business owner may appeal the determination to the planning commission, which may overturn the determination only upon making a finding that the evidence supports the property/business owner's position that the nonconforming use was not discontinued for a period of 180 consecutive days or more. The property/business owner shall be notified by the City of the termination of the Deemed Approved Status and shall be informed of the owner's right to appeal the City's decision to the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. O-08-18, § 2, 6-5-2018)  
18.47.100 - Investigative procedures. 
Upon the City's receipt of a complaint from the public, police department, City official or any other interested person that a deemed approved use is in violation of the Performance Standards set forth in this chapter, the following procedure shall be followed: 
A.  An Enforcement Officer shall assess the nature of the complaint and its validity by conducting an on-site observation and inspection of the Premises to assess the activity's compliance with Performance Standards. 
B.  If the Enforcement Officer determines that the Deemed Approved Activity is in violation of the Performance Standards, the Enforcement Officer shall give written notice of the violation to the owner and/or operator of the establishment and seek to remedy the violation under the City's administrative citation procedures contained in Chapter 8.12 of this Code. The first notice of viola on shall be given in accordance with Section 8.12.030(A)(2) of this Code. If, however, the Enforcement Officer, in his or her sole discretion, determines that the violation is not capable of correction, presents a serious threat to public health or safety, or otherwise warrants expedited action, he or she may in lieu of following the administrative citation procedure, refer the matter directly to the planning commission for a hearing at which the Deemed Approved Activity's Deemed Approved Status may be suspended, Modified or revoked. 
C.  Any administrative citation issued under this section shall be issued, processed, and enforced in compliance with all of the provisions of Chapter 8.12 of this Code, unless otherwise expressly provided by this chapter. If, the owner or operator receiving an administrative citation contests the citation and a hearing is held pursuant to Chapter 8.12, the hearing officer may, in addition to exercising all powers designated in Chapter 8.12, make a recommendation to the planning commission to suspend, Modify or revoke the Deemed Approved Activity's Deemed Approved Status if in the judgment of the hearing officer, based upon information then before him or her, such action is necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. Such recommendation may include the suggestion of additional or amended reasonable conditions on the use, including but not limited to the operational standards listed in Section 18.47.070 of this chapter. 
D.  If a hearing is conducted on a potential violation, the planning commission shall determine whether the Deemed Approved Activity is in compliance with the Performance Standards. Based on this determination, the planning commission may suspend, Modify or revoke the Deemed Approved Activity's Deemed Approved Status or impose additional or amended conditions on the use, including but not limited to the operational standards listed in Section 18.47.070, of this chapter, based on information then before it. In reaching a determination as to whether a use has violated the Performance Standards, or as to the appropriateness of suspending, Modifying or revoking a Deemed Approved Activity's Deemed Approved Status, or imposing additional or amended conditions on the use, the planning commission may consider: 
1.  The length of time the Deemed Approved Activity has been out of compliance with the Performance Standards. 
2.  The impact of the violation of the performance standard(s) on the community. 
3.  Any information regarding the owner of the Deemed Approved Activity's Efforts to Remedy the violation of the performance standard(s). 
E.  "Efforts to Remedy" shall include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Timely calls to the police department that are placed by the owner and/or operator of the Deemed Approved Activity, his or her employees, or agents. 
2.  Requesting that those persons engaging in activities causing violations of the performance standard(s) cease those activities, unless the owner of the Deemed Approved Activity, or his or her employees or agents feels that their personal safety would be threatened in making that request. 
3.  Making improvements to the Deemed Approved Activity's property or operations, including but not limited to the installation of lighting sufficient to illuminate the area within the use's property line, the installation of security cameras, clear unobstructed windows, clean sidewalks and graffiti abated within three days. 
F.  If in the judgment of the planning commission, the operations of the owner or operator of the Deemed Approved Activity constitute a nuisance, the owner is unable or unwilling to abate the nuisance and the nuisance is shown to be a threat to the public health and safety of the surrounding neighborhood, the planning commission may suspend, Modify or revoke the activity's Deemed Approved Status. If suspended, any continued operation of the business shall require a conditional use permit approved by the planning commission. All determinations, decisions, and conditions made or imposed regarding the use of a Deemed Approved Activity shall run with the land. 
G.  The decision of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive, unless appealed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.58 of this title. 
(Ord. No. O-08-18, § 2, 6-5-2018)  
18.47.110 - Appeals. 
Any applicant or other person aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission from a suspension, modification or revocation of an establishment's Deemed Approved Status pursuant to this chapter may appeal the decision to the City Council pursuant to Chapter 18.58 of this code. 
(Ord. No. O-08-18, § 2, 6-5-2018)  
18.47.120 - Penalties. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who causes or permits another person to violate any provision of this chapter may be charged with either an infraction or a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Chapter 8.02 of this code. 
B.  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of these regulations shall be and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the City. 
C.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the City from pursuing any and all other legal remedies that may be available, including but not limited to civil actions filed by the City attorney seeking any and all appropriate relief such as civil injunctions and penalties. 
(Ord. No. O-08-18, § 2, 6-5-2018)  
18.47.130 - Annual regulatory fee. 
A.  The intent and purpose of this section is to impose a regulatory fee upon all on and Off-Sale Alcohol Establishments that either hold Deemed Approved Status pursuant to this chapter or obtained a conditional use permit after January 19, 2010. This fee shall provide for the enforcement and regulation of the conditions of approval, operational standards, Performance Standards and other applicable regulations set forth in this title or the conditional use permit issued. 
B.  The annual alcohol sales regulatory fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover the total cost of both administration, inspection and enforcement of the conditions of approval, Performance Standards and other applicable regulations set forth under this chapter upon all Off-Sale Alcohol Establishments that either hold Deemed Approved Status pursuant to this chapter or obtained a conditional use permit, including, for example, notifying establishments of Deemed Approved Status, administering the program, establishment inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, conducting hearings and prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the total program. All fees shall be used to fund the program. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. O-08-18, § 2, 6-5-2018)  
Chapter 18.48 - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
 
18.48.020 - Amusement Arcade. 
A.  1.  An "Amusement Arcade," hereafter called Arcade, Shall be defined as: 
a.  A Business operating five or more coin-operated machines within an Enclosed Building, which includes, but is not limited to, video games, pinball machines, and other similar electronic and mechanical games of skill and chance; 
b.  Any Business operating less than five such game machines, unless such operation is Incidental to an established Business which generated more than fifty percent of its total gross revenues from Business operations other than game machines. 
2.  Businesses operating less than five machines and excluded by subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section Shall require no special Permit or Approval by the Planning Department. 
3.  Hours Permitted. It is unlawful to keep open to the public or to conduct the activity or practices defined in this section on any Day of the week between the hours of twelve midnight and ten a.m. 
B.  Arcades Shall be Permitted in all Commercial and Industrial Zones except the Neighborhood Commercial Zone (C-1). Said Arcades Shall be subject to the Following conditions: 
1.  All Amusement Arcades Shall be entirely within an Enclosed Building. 
2.  The minimum distance between an Amusement Arcade and a School Shall be one thousand feet. 
3.  On Days when the public Schools are in full operation, Amusement Arcade Operators Shall not Permit Persons under the age of eighteen Years to enter or remain in areas within the Business Establishment Designated for Amusement Arcades prior to two-thirty p.m. on such School Days. 
4.  No Amusement Arcade in which coin-operated game machines constitute the source of more than fifty percent of the total gross revenues of the Business enterprise with which it is situated, or in which such game machines are the sole or primary Business occupation, Shall be open between ten p.m. of any one Day and six a.m. of the Following Day, except for Friday and Saturday of each week, when the hours of operation May continue until twelve-thirty a.m. of the next succeeding Day. Amusement Arcades operated Incidental to a bona fide food serving Establishment Shall be operated only during the hours which food is actually being served, and Amusement Arcades operated Incidental to any other primary Business Shall be operated only during the hours the primary Business is carried on. 
5.  Adult supervision Shall be provided at all times within areas Designated for Amusement Arcades. 
6.  For any Amusement Arcade within shopping center, all partitioning Walls Shall consist of soundproof Materials to abate Noise transmission to neighboring Businesses. 
7.  Male and female restrooms Shall be provided on site. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.48.030 - Automobile Service Stations. 
Automobile Service stations Shall meet the Following conditions: 
A.  A Conditional Use Permit Shall be required for all new service stations and the redevelopment of existing service stations. 
B.  Site Area. Each new service station site Shall be located on a Lot having an area of not less than twenty thousand square feet. This requirement and other Property Development standards Shall not apply to the redevelopment of existing service stations. 
C.  Site Dimensions. The minimum Lot Width and depth dimensions Shall be one hundred twenty feet. 
D.  Setbacks. There Shall be a minimum Setback for any Building of twenty feet from any Property line, except where the Lot Line of the Property involved abuts a public Alley and a five-foot masonry Wall is erected, or a Building is constructed adjacent to such Alley. Gasoline pumps, or other facilities for providing Vehicles with fuel, and pump islands on which they are placed Shall be set back fifteen feet from any Property line. 
E.  Access. Each developed site Shall have not more than two accessways to any one Street, with a minimum of five feet of full height Curb from adjoining residential Property lines, and a width not exceeding thirty-five feet. 
F.  Hours of Operation. Service stations which abut residentially zoned Property Shall close between twelve and six a.m.; and all Business activities such as lubrications and mechanical work except for services and Emergency repairs Shall be confined to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
G.  Utilities. Utility service to all Structures Shall be installed underground. 
H.  Existing Nonconforming Service Stations. Service stations in existence prior to the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this title which become damaged or partially destroyed, or which Shall be added to or structurally altered to any extent, May not be occupied or Used except in conformity with the provisions herein. 
I.  Walls. A three-foot-high solid masonry Wall or equivalent landscape feature Shall be constructed along all interior Property lines. The Wall Shall be increased in height to not less than five feet nor more than six feet when the site is adjacent to a School, Church, Park, Club, Hospital, or Residential Zone or Use. The Commission May require additional Walls, as determined necessary for proper Development of the site. 
J.  Restrooms. Male and female restrooms Shall be provided on site. All restroom entrances Shall be screened from view of adjacent Properties and Streets rights-of-way by some form of decorative Wall or similar device. 
K.  Architectural Treatment. It is the policy to require a higher than typical quality of architectural treatment for service stations. Applicants are encouraged to submit designs which are in keeping with the overall character and quality of the neighborhood and community. The architectural treatment of each station will be reviewed carefully and Approved only when the appearance of the station is considered suitable to the City. Customer pump areas Shall be roofed. Ridges and Eaves may, under some conditions, be at different levels. 
L.  Equipment Rentals. The outside storage of Rental trailers and similar equipment May be Permitted, provided they are completely screened from public view and the Use is specifically authorized through a Conditional Use Permit. Additional Lot Area over the minimum, in the amount of two hundred square feet per Rental unit, Shall be provided. 
M.  Lighting. All lighting elements on the exterior and interior of the Structure Shall be shielded from horizontal view, except for Sign lights or those especially designed for illumination of the Parking Lots. 
N.  Closed, Vacant and Inoperative Service Stations. All service stations which May have been closed, Vacant or inoperative for a period of ninety Days Shall be abated by rehabilitation, Demolition or repair of all Structures which Shall include, but not be limited to, all Buildings, pump islands, all underground storage tanks, pumps, mechanical equipment, wells, cesspools, septic tanks, foundations, all paving and any other Materials originally placed in connection therewith on or at any depth beneath the surface of the Real Property. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.48.035 - Boarding, Lodging, or Rooming Houses. 
The Following regulations Shall apply to all Boarding, Lodging, or Rooming Houses in the City: 
1.  All Boarding, Lodging, or Rooming Houses Shall meet the requirements of Title 18, this section and require the Approval of a Conditional Use Permit issued in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.58.060, and a City Business License prior to establishing the boarding, lodging or roaming house Use. 
2.  Boarding, Lodging, or Rooming Houses Shall comply with the parking requirements of Chapter 18.36 of the Colton Municipal Code, and as set forth in Chapter 18.10, 18.12, 18.14, and 18.16 of the Colton Municipal Code. 
3.  No more than one Federal, state or youth authority parolee Shall be allowed to live in a Boarding, Lodging, or Rooming House. 
4.  The Application submitted for Approval of a boarding, lodging or roaming house Shall identify whether any boarders are currently Federal, state or youth authority parolees. Owners and/or Operators of Approved Boarding, Lodging or Rooming Houses Shall update the information required by this section anytime a Person that is Federal, state or youth authority parolee is provided accommodation in the Approved Boarding, Lodging or Rooming House. 
5.  All boarding, lodging and roaming houses Shall require boarders to Sign a "Crime Free Lease Addendum" to their lease or Rental Agreement. A sample crime free Lease addendum Shall be provided by the City as an Attachment to the planning Permit Application. The "Crime Free Lease Addendum" Shall provide that any criminal Violations perpetrated by boarders Shall be grounds for termination of the Written or oral lease, sublease or agreement. 
6.  Boarding, Lodging, or Rooming Houses Shall be in compliance with all requirements of this section and this title prior to the issuance of Conditional Use Permit authorizing the Use and at all times after issuance of a planning Permit. Violation of any Local, state or Federal Laws by individual boarders while on the Premises Shall be grounds for revocation of the Permit, including, but not limited to Violations of California Penal Code, Section 3003.5. 
7.  No Boarding, Lodging, or Rooming House Shall be maintained as a Nuisance. 
8.  Violations of any of the provisions in this section Shall be grounds for revocation of the Conditional Use Permit authorizing the Boarding, Lodging, or Rooming House Use. The revocation procedures pertaining to revocations of Conditional Use Permits Shall be followed. 
9.  Boarding, Lodging, or Rooming Houses existing prior to the effective date of the Ordinance creating this section Shall be required to comply with the requirements of this section within six Months of the effective date. 
10.  The Owner/Operator of any Boarding, Lodging, or Rooming House Shall notify, in writing, all boarders and Occupants of the identity of any: (1) Federal, state or youth authority parolee; or (2) Person who is required to register pursuant to Penal Code Section 290, who is residing at such Boarding, Lodging, or Rooming House. 
(Ord. No. O-01-10, § 13, 3-2-2010)  
18.48.040 - Condominiums, Community Apartments and Stock Cooperatives. 
Condominiums, community Apartments and stock cooperatives require Conditional Use Permit Approval and Shall meet the requirements of this section: 
A.  Copies of the conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&R's) that will apply to the proposed Development Shall be submitted and include the Following provisions: 
1.  Insure payment of any invoice by the City for electrical, water and/or sewer service charges, Garbage, trash or Rubbish charges, in such manner that either the Board of Governors, Condominium Owners or management-agent Shall guarantee payment to the City; 
2.  Guarantee Access and entry to the Development, all Buildings and Structures for any authorized Fire Official, Building Official, or any other official charged with carrying out the Laws of the City, state or Federal government; 
3.  Insure that each residential unit in the Development Shall be Used as a residence for a Single Family and for no other purpose; 
4.  Insure that no Sign of any kind May be displayed advertising any service, Business, or other commercial Project or venture, in any residential Condominium or community Apartment; 
5.  That the names of the officers and members of the Board of Governors Shall be filed annually with the City Clerk during the Month of July; 
6.  A request pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 21107.5 that traffic regulations May be enforced by the City on the private Streets located therein. 
B.  The Off-Street parking requirements for residential Condominiums and community Apartments Shall be as required for any residential Project. 
C.  Interior private Streets May be Permitted, but Shall have a minimum width of pavement between standard concrete Curb as follows: 
1.  Forty feet where parking is Permitted on both sides; 
2.  Twenty-eight feet where parking is Permitted on one side only; 
3  Twenty feet where parking is prohibited on both sides; 
4.  Where a private drive serves only garages, and the Driveway is posted to prohibit all other parking, the Driveway May be constructed to the standard twenty-foot Alley specifications. All private Streets Shall be irrevocably offered for dedication and May be refused or withheld by the City. 
D.  Condominiums, community Apartments and stock cooperatives Shall have a minimum of eight units. 
E.  No existing Building Shall be Approved for conversion to a Condominium Project unless it meets the standards set forth in Title 16 of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.48.050 - Fortunetelling.* 
The practice of Fortunetelling and Occult Arts May be Permitted in the C-2 General Commercial Zone only, subject to a Conditional Use Permit and the Following conditions: 
A.  Every Person who engages in and is licensed for the practice of Fortunetelling Shall obtain a current Business License for said Establishment, and submit for a background investigation, to include fingerprinting, by the Colton Police Department, to determine whether the Applicant has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, or has been convicted of any felony offense, with an investigation filing Fee of five hundred dollars, plus the Fees for fingerprinting processing. 
B.  Hours Permitted. It is unlawful to keep open to the public or to conduct the activity or practices defined in this section on any Day of the week between the hours of twelve midnight and ten a.m. 
C.  Inspection. The City's Police Chief, Fire Chief and Building Official and their authorized Representatives, Shall have the right to enter the Fortunetelling Establishment from time to time during regular Business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with applicable Building, fire or electrical regulations and the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
* As to Fortunetelling generally, see Ch. 9.28.  
18.48.060 - Manufactured Housing and Mobilehomes. 
A.  A single manufactured housing unit may be approved through an Architectural and Site Plan Review application, subject to the following: 
1.  The proposed unit is found to be keeping with the overall character and quality of the neighborhood and community. 
2.  The subject property is zoned V-L, R-1, or M-U/N. 
3.  No more than one manufactured housing unit allowed on any property. 
4.  The proposed unit shall be occupied only as a single-family dwelling. 
5.  The proposed unit shall be subject to all provisions of these chapters applicable to residential structures. 
6.  The proposed unit shall be attached to a permanent concrete base foundation system in compliance with all applicable Building regulations. 
7.  The proposed unit shall be converted with an exterior material customarily used on conventional dwellings and approved by the Committee. The exterior covering material shall extend to the ground. 
8.  The proposed unit shall have a roof with a pitch of not less than two-inch vertical rise for each twelve inches of horizontal run and consisting of shingles or other material customarily used for conventional dwellings and approved by the Building Official. 
9.  The proposed unit shall have eaves no less than twelve inches deep and provided a porch at its main entry. 
B.  Mobilehome parks may be permitted in the R-2 and R-3/R-4 zones with conditional use permit approval. A conditional use permit shall not be required for the installation of a mobilehome within a space previously approved within an established mobilehome park. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 38, 12-18-2018)  
18.48.061 - Mobile Nonresidential Units. 
For Nonresidential Uses. Mobile units may be temporarily used on property with a permitted nonresidential use. The following conditions must be satisfied before an approval can be granted: 
1.  The proposed use for the mobile unit shall be accessory to a use permitted in the zone in which it is to be located. 
2.  All requirements of this chapter for development in the zone in which the mobile unit is to be located shall be satisfied. 
3.  The mobile unit shall be compatible in appearance with the surrounding Structures and Improvements. 
4.  Approval shall be limited to a one-Year period, with a possible one-Year extension, at the discretion of the Director. 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 39, 12-18-2018)  
18.48.070 - Metal Buildings. 
All metal Buildings designed for commercial or industrial purposes Shall be located in an established Industrial Zone. The Following Design Guidelines Must be considered before an Approval can be granted. 
A.  Environment. All metal Buildings Shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding Buildings as to shape, exterior Materials and details, size, shape and location of windows and doors, distance between Buildings and orientation to Streets. 
B.  Building Form. 
1.  Single uninterrupted Wall planes Shall be softened with the Use of staggering vertical Walls, roof overhangs, pilasters and deep reveals at construction joints. 
2.  Large rectangular forms Shall be softened with curved corners. 
3.  Contrasting colors, patterns, textures and finishes Shall be Used to add variety and interest to the metal Structures. 
4.  Other Materials such as masonry, brick, concrete or wood can be combined attractively to define scale. 
C.  Windows and Doors. Recessed openings Shall be Used to provide contrast by varying patterns of shades sunlight and depth. 
D.  Roofs. 
1.  A variety of roof shapes and forms Shall be utilized to add character and diversity. 
2.  Appearance of roofs Shall be improved with the Use of steeper roof Slopes and integrated fascias, darker colors, concealed fasteners, and other treatments. 
3.  Mechanical equipment Shall be screened with Parapet Walls, mechanical recesses, or other means. 
E.  Landscaping. 
1.  Landscaping Shall consist of a balanced mix of trees, shrubs and groundcover to provide comfort and shade for parking and open areas. 
2.  Landscaping at Public Streets Shall be provided with a fifteen-foot wide strip and allow for mounding shrubbery and groundcover that soften and enhance the view of the site. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.48.080 - Public utilities and services. 
The provisions of this title Shall not be construed as to limit or interfere with the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of any Use coming under the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission, which Uses are related to public Utility purposes, of water and Gas pipes, mains and conduits, electric light and power transmission and distribution lines, telegraph and telephone lines, sewers and sewer mains and Incidental appurtenances. The location of said lines, mains and conduits is subject to Planning Commission review and Approval. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.48.090 - Satellite Dish Antennas. 
A.  Findings. The City Council finds that the installation of Satellite Dish Antennas, unless controlled, affects the aesthetic and safety values of the City. Therefore, the installation of these Antennas and equipment is regulated to result in design and locations which are safe and which are least visible from the public Right-of-Way in the vicinity and do not burden adjacent Property Owners with adverse visual impacts. 
B.  Intent and Purpose. The intent and purpose of this section is to regulate the installation of Satellite Dish Antennas through the design review Building processes to protect the environment, the character of the existing neighborhoods or of the community as a whole, and the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. 
C.  Permitted Uses. 
1.  Satellite Dish Antennas Shall be Permitted Uses in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zones and require planning review and a Building Permit before installation in the case where the Antenna is ground-mounted and the entire apparatus does not exceed fifteen feet from the ground, when the Antenna is to be located in the side or Rear Yard and conforms to the side or Rear Yard residential Setbacks for Accessory buildings, when the Antenna is not visible from the public Right-of-Way, and when the Antenna is provided with a Screening cover. 
2.  Satellite Dish Antennas located in any Commercial, Industrial, Public Facility, or any Multiple-Family Zone or that are proposed in an R-1, R-2 or R-3 Zone located in the Front Yard, a Corner Lot, or roof-mounted, will be required to receive Approval from the Director of Community Development. The Director May issue a denial if the proposed location infringes on an adjacent Property Owner or does not meet certain conditions to maintain aesthetics in the area. Such Application Shall be filed with the Community Development Department and Shall include a map showing location of the proposed Antenna, height and width of Antenna, Setback distances and description of the type of mount to be Used, and landscape plans showing location of existing trees, other natural features and proposed Landscaping features, including Fence, Wall or other Screening, and an Application Fee set by City Council Resolution. 
D.  General Provisions. 
1.  Only one satellite dish will be allowed for a Single-Family residential Lot or Apartment Project. 
2.  The support Structures for Satellite Dish Antennas in all zones, except R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zones where Antenna is to be located in a side or Rear Yard, Shall be screened from view from adjacent Properties and public Right-of-Way, by Use of Walls, Fences and/or Landscaping. Such Screening will be required to be flush with the base of the dish so as not to interfere with the Antenna's normal reception. 
3.  No advertising or text Shall be Permitted on a Satellite Dish Antenna. 
4.  All Satellite Dish Antennas, including the construction and installation thereof, Shall conform to the Uniform Building Code and Electrical Code regulations and requirements. 
5.  When Attached to a main Structure, the Satellite Dish Antenna Shall not exceed the maximum Building Height in the respective zone. 
6.  The Satellite Dish Antenna Shall not encroach into any required Setback, nor Shall it be in any required Open Space, private recreation area or required Parking Space. 
7.  Outdoor wires necessary for the operation of the Antenna Shall be placed underground or Attached flush against a Building surface. 
8.  Satellite Dish Antennas Shall be limited to current manufacturer's colors which are generally black, silver, off-white and white. 
9.  Satellite Dish Antennas outside of Residential Zones May be located on rooftops with Approval of the Director of Community Development only if ground-mounting is inappropriate or inaccessible. If allowed, roof-mounted Antennas Shall be screened with such Screening designed as an integral Part of the Building, to have the same color as the Building. 
10.  The Community Development Director May issue a Permit for those sites incapable of receiving signals from an Antenna if installed pursuant to these regulations. The Applicant Shall submit documentation that such installation is necessary for the reception of usable satellite signals. 
11.  Any Person not satisfied with a determination by the Director Shall have the right to Appeal to the Planning Commission. Such Appeal Shall be made in writing and delivered to the Office of the Director within seven calendar Days, after the mailing of the Notice of the Director's Decision. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.48.100 - Residential, Community or Group Care Facilities. 
A.  Findings and Purpose. The City Council finds that Residential, Community or Group Care Facilities provide a cost-effective, humane and noninstitutional environment for elderly Persons, Persons suffering from chronic illnesses, Persons suffering from mental or physical impairments, and Persons recovering from drug/or alcohol addiction. The City Council also finds that the public health, safety and welfare of all Residents of the City is best served when such facilities are licensed by the California Department of Social Services, the California Department of Alcohol and Drug Programs, or other appropriate agency or Department of the State of California or the County of San Bernardino, to ensure compliance with applicable regulations and standards designed to promote and maintain successful programs, but that in fact not all such facilities are so licensed. 
The City Council further finds that it is in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare to preserve and protect the integrity of residential neighborhoods, in accordance with the goals and policies of the General Plan. Thus, the purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable accommodations for the needs of Persons with disabilities seeking a humane and noninstitutional environment, while at the same time ensuring necessary safeguards to protect the integrity of residential neighborhoods. 
B.  Use Regulations. In any zoning District where residential Uses are Permitted, a residential or group care Facility or a congregate residence May be Permitted. All Residential, Community or Group Care Facilities and congregate residences Shall be subject to all zoning, Subdivision, housing and Building regulations and codes applicable to that District, in addition to any Building or housing regulations and codes expressly applicable to Residential, Community or Group Care Facilities or congregate residence, particularly Building and fire safety requirements. 
C.  Residential, Community or Group Care Facilities—Six or Fewer Residents—Regulations. 
1.  Licensed. Residential, Community or Group Care Facilities consisting of six or fewer Residents, not including any provider or provider's Family or staff, Shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter provided the Facility is licensed by the appropriate state or County agency or Department. 
2.  Unlicensed. Residential, Community or Group Care Facilities for six or fewer Residents which are not required to be licensed by a state or County agency or Department Shall be allowed in all residential Districts, subject to the Approval of a Conditional Use Permit issued in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.58.060, and in accordance with the findings specified in Subsection F of this section. 
D.  Residential, Community or Group Care Facilities—Licensed and Unlicensed—Regulations. Licensed Residential, Community or Group Care Facilities for seven or more Residents and Residential, Community or Group Care Facilities which are not required to be licensed by a state or County agency or Department Shall be allowed in all Residential Zones of the City, subject to the Approval of a Conditional Use Permit issued pursuant to Section 18.58.060, and in accordance with the findings specified in Subsection F of this section. All such facilities Must comply with the Following requirements: 
1.  Applicable requirements of the Uniform Building, Housing and Fire Codes; 
2.  Parking Spaces Must be maintained in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 18.36; and 
3.  No Sign which calls attention to the fact that the Property is a residential or group care Facility May be posted. 
E.  Reserved. 
F.  Findings. In keeping with the intent of this section to provide reasonable accommodations for the needs of Persons with disabilities to obtain housing, while at the same time fulfilling its obligation to protect the integrity and residential character of the City's neighborhoods, the City Council finds that the Following findings Must be made by the Planning Commission and City Council in determining whether to recommend Approval or denial of a Conditional Use Permit request or determining whether to approve or deny a Conditional Use Permit request. 
1.  Based upon individualized inquiry and evidence, that the proposed Tenancy will not constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals and will not result in substantial physical damage to the Property of others. 
2.  The proposed Use of Property complies with all applicable zoning Development standards applicable to other Properties in the same zone. 
(Ord. 0-15-99 § 3, 1999) 
(Ord. No. O-01-10, §§ 14, 15, 3-2-2010)  
18.48.110 - Temporary outdoor displays and Sales. 
A.  No Person, Business or organization Shall conduct, operate, maintain, organize or advertise a temporary outdoor display or Sale without first obtaining a temporary outdoor displays and Sales Permit as provided by this section. Temporary outdoor displays and Sales Permit Applications Shall be reviewed by the City Manager or his or her Designee and issued prior to the commencement of the temporary outdoor display or Sale. 
B.  Applications for a temporary outdoor display and Sales Permit Shall be made on forms prescribed by the City and Shall include a Site Plan indicating the proposed location of the display area. Such Applications Shall be filed not less ten Working Days prior to the outdoor temporary display or Sale and Shall be filed with the City Manager or his or her Designee. 
C.  The City Manager Shall issue the Permit, conditioned upon the Applicant's Written agreement to comply with any and all terms of this section, including but not limited to the Following conditions: 
1.  Outdoor Sales Shall only be Permitted as an extension of an existing Business and Shall be conducted entirely on the site on which the Business is located. 
2.  The display area Shall not occupy more than ten percent of the number of required Parking Spaces for the Applicant's Business. 
3.  The display Shall not encroach upon required Driveways or public rights-of-way, impede Emergency Vehicle Access or prevent Access to any other Business. 
4.  Sales area Shall not Block required Building exits and Shall maintain at least four-feet wide aisles. 
5.  No Part of the display area Shall be located within one hundred feet of an adjoining Residential Zoned Property. 
6.  No more than four temporary outdoor displays and Sales Shall be Permitted in one calendar Year, per Business unit, limited to seven Days per display and Sale, that Shall not exceed twenty-eight Days accumulated total. 
7.  All Sign usage Shall be subject to Chapter 18.50 of this title. 
8.  A Permit Fee established by Resolution of the City Council Shall be paid for each outdoor display and Sales Permit. 
9.  Temporary Structures such as, but not limited to tents or Building, Shall be subject to Approval of the Fire Chief or his or her Designee. 
D.  The City Manager or his or her Designee May also condition the issuance of the Permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner of the outdoor temporary display or Sale and any requirements necessary to protect the safety of Persons and Property, and maintain traffic control. If the City Manager or his or her Designee denies the Permit, he or she Shall set forth the reasons for the denial. The City Manager's or his or her Designee's Decision Shall be final unless Appealed. 
E.  The Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Community Development Director or their Designees May conduct, at any time, on-site inspections of temporary outdoor displays and Sales Permitted pursuant to this section for compliance with the imposed requirements. In addition to any and all regulations or conditions that May be imposed pursuant to this Code, Applicants Must also comply with all Fire Code regulations and requirements as set forth in this Code, including payment for inspection costs by the Fire Chief or Designee. The Chief of Police or the Fire Chief, or his or her Designee, reserve the right to: 
1.  Require immediate correction of hazards, dangerous conditions or deficiencies that have been deemed to place the public health or safety at risk for harm or injury; and 
2.  Revoke the temporary outdoor display and Sales Permit immediately if substantial Violation or noncompliance with the previously-submitted plans is deemed to place the public health or safety at risk for harm or injury. 
F.  A temporary outdoor display and Sales Permit May be revoked if the City Manager or his or her Designee or Community Development Director finds that one or more of the Following conditions exists: 
1.  The temporary outdoor display and Sales Permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner. 
2.  The Applicant fails, neglects or refuses to fulfill any of the conditions imposed upon the granting of the Permit. 
3.  The Applicant violates or attempts to violate any Law of the state, or the provisions of this section, or any other Law, Ordinance or policy of the City. 
4.  Failure to comply with Notice to correct hazards, dangerous conditions or other deficiencies that are deemed to place the public health or safety at risk for harm or injury. 
All revocations Shall be in writing and Shall set forth the basis for the revocation. The Permit Shall be reinstated as soon as the conditions constituting the revocation have abated. When any Permit is revoked pursuant to this section, the Permit Shall be reinstated as soon as the conditions constituting the revocation have abated. 
G.  Any Applicant May Appeal the final Decision of the City Manager or his or her Designee or the revocation of a Permit granted pursuant to this section to the City Council within two Days thereafter. Appeals Shall be filed with the City Clerk, either by personal service, fax, or first class mail (postage prepaid). Any such Appeal Shall set forth the reasons for the Appeal and Shall be accompanied by an Appeal filing Fee. The Appeal filing Fee Shall be established by the City Council by Resolution. Failure of any Person to receive Written Notice Shall not invalidate same. The City Council Shall act upon the Appeal at the next regularly scheduled Council Meeting held more than five Working Days and less than ten Working Days after the filing of the Appeal. If no such meeting is scheduled, or if a regularly scheduled meeting is not held within such times, the Mayor May call a special City Council meeting to consider and act upon such Appeal within ten Working Days after the filing of such Appeal. The Decision of the City Council regarding such an Appeal Shall be final. 
H.  Any Person who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this section, or of any conditions Attached hereunder, or who falsifies any information on any Application hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth by state Law and is subject to administrative penalties and fines as set forth in Title 8 of this Code. Any temporary outdoor display or Sale otherwise in accordance with this section Shall be a Public Nuisance which May be enjoined or abated as allowed by Law. The City retains any and all civic remedies, including the right of civil injunction for the prevention of the Violations and for the recovery of money damages therefor. 
(Ord. 0-19-02 § 1, 2003)  
18.48.120 - Parking Vehicles for Certain Purposes Prohibited. 
A.  The City Council of the City of Colton hereby finds and determines as follows: 
1.  The purpose of this section is to regulate the circumstances under which Persons May park their Vehicles in a manner that is not Permitted by Title 18 of this Code. This section is not intended to restrict any form of advertising that Vehicle Owners May place on or upon their Vehicles. The City Council finds that the regulations imposed by this section are intended to promote public safety and traffic flow by reducing visual distractions that are likely to cause traffic accidents. Moreover, the restrictions are intended to improve the visual appearance and discourage blighting of Properties in the City by eliminating unlicensed Vehicles Sales on unimproved Lots and Lots have not been developed with paving, drainage Improvements, and other Improvements and amenities that are normally required of Approved Vehicle dealerships. 
2.  The parking of Vehicles on Property that is not zoned for such Use causes adverse impacts to the Residents and Businesses in the City, including but not limited to, the leaking of gasoline and other motor fuels and oils into the ground and groundwater on unimproved Properties and Properties that have not been developed with sufficient infrastructure to handle such Use of Property and promoting unfair competition in the Sale of Vehicles. The regulations will directly advance the City's interests in public safety, efficient traffic flow, aesthetics and economic fairness by prohibiting Vehicle Sales on Properties that are not zoned for such activities and Properties that developed the appropriate infrastructure and amenities to safely accommodate such Sales. 
3.  These regulations are reasonably tailored to serve the City's substantial interests in public safety, efficient traffic flow, aesthetics and economic fairness because they do not restrict the ability of any Persons to advertise that their Vehicle is for Sale in Lots that are appropriately zoned nor do they restrict the ability of Persons to have Signs in or on their Vehicles advertising the Vehicle's availability or other commercial interests. These regulations are merely designed to restrict parking of Vehicles for the purpose of Sale on Lots that are not zoned for such activities and are ill-equipped to handle such intensity of Use, regardless of whether the Vehicle contains advertising or not. 
B.  No Person Shall park any Vehicle upon any Private Property for the principle purpose of displaying such Vehicle thereon for Sale, hire, lease, or Rental unless the Property is duly zoned and Permitted by the City to allow that type of Business at that location and no Person Shall allow the parking of any Vehicle upon any Private Property for the principal purpose of displaying such Vehicle thereon for Sale, hire, lease or Rental without having first obtained the necessary Permits and Approval from the City. 
C.  This section Shall not prohibit a Person from parking a Vehicle on Property on which such Person resides, for purposes of Sale, hire, lease or Rental, provided such Vehicle is registered to such Person and is otherwise Permitted by Title 18 of this Code. 
D.  For the purposes of this section, the term "Vehicle" Shall include both "Motor Vehicle" and "Vehicle" as defined in California Vehicle Code Sections 415 and 670. 
E.  Nothing in this section Shall be construed to prohibit the placement of any Sign, advertising or Notice on or upon any Vehicle. 
(Ord. 0-19-03 § 2, 2003)  
18.48.130 - Marijuana Uses. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to regulate personal, medical, and commercial marijuana uses. Nothing in this Section shall preempt or make inapplicable any provision of state or federal law. No marijuana use will be permitted except as expressly stated under this Code. 
B.  Definitions. For purposes of this Title, the following definitions shall apply: 
Terms defined in Chapter 18.48.132 and 18.48.134 shall have the same meanings in this Chapter. 
"Commercial marijuana activity" includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, distribution, delivery or sale of marijuana and marijuana products. 
"Commercial marijuana cultivation use" means the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, distribution, delivery or wholesale sale of marijuana and marijuana products, including but not limited to medical, commercial and recreational marijuana and marijuana products. 
"Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana. 
"Cultivation area" is the portion of the site where marijuana is cultivated. 
"Delivery" means the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently licensed under California law, that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of marijuana or marijuana products. 
"Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of marijuana and marijuana products between entities for commercial use purposes. 
"Establishment of a Commercial Marijuana Cultivation Use" shall mean and include any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any commercial marijuana cultivation use as a new use; 
2.  The conversion of an existing use, whether or not a commercial marijuana cultivation use, to any commercial marijuana cultivation use; 
3.  The addition or expansion of any commercial marijuana cultivation use to any other existing commercial marijuana cultivation use, or to another existing noncommercial marijuana cultivation use, with or without expansion of the floor area; 
4.  The relocation of any commercial marijuana cultivation use; and/or 
5.  The conversion of a commercial marijuana cultivation use authorized under a state license to a different commercial marijuana cultivation use authorized under a different state license, including but not limited to the conversion from medical marijuana cultivation to recreational marijuana cultivation (or vice versa) and the conversion to a State Type 5 large cultivation license. 
"Indoor" in relation to commercial marijuana cultivation uses, refers to industrial uses within industrial zones, where all commercial marijuana cultivation uses are required to take place within fully enclosed structure with solid walls and solid roof. 
"Licensee" means the holder of any state issued license related to marijuana activities, including but not limited to licenses issued under Division 10 of the Business & Professions Code. 
"Manufacture" means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product. 
"Manufacture area" is the area of the site where marijuana is manufactured and also includes areas for drying, curing, grading, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, preparing for transportation and delivery, or otherwise preparing for sale or distribution, include areas for loading products for distribution. 
"Marijuana" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include: 
1.  Industrial hemp, as defined in Section 11018.5 of the California Health & Safety Code; or 
2.  The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. 
"Marijuana accessories" means any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana or marijuana products into the human body. 
"Marijuana products" means marijuana that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
"Outdoor" in relation to commercial marijuana cultivation uses, refers to activities no within fully enclosed structures with solid walls and solid roof. 
"Person" includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
"Private residence" means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling. 
"Regulatory permit" means any permit required by the City to engage in a marijuana cultivation business or activity, including but not limited to the Commercial Marijuana Operator Permit required by Colton Municipal Code section 18.48.134. 
"Sale" includes any transaction whereby, for any consideration, title to marijuana is transferred from one person to another, and includes the delivery of marijuana or marijuana products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of marijuana or marijuana products by a licensee to the licensee from whom such marijuana or marijuana product was purchased. 
"Secured area" is all cultivation areas, manufacture areas and storage areas, and includes areas where marijuana or marijuana products are loaded onto vehicles or other conveyances for delivery or transportation. 
"State license" means any license required by the State of California for the operation of any business or activity related to commercial marijuana cultivation use, including but not limited to licenses issued under Division 10 of the Business & Professions Code. 
"Storage area" is any area where marijuana or marijuana products are stored. 
"Testing facility" means a facility, entity or site, that offers or performs tests of medical and non-medical marijuana or medical or non-medical marijuana products. 
Any term defined in this Section also means the very term as defined in the California Business & Professions Code or the California Health & Safety Code, unless otherwise specified. 
C.  Personal Use. 
1.  For purposes of this subsection, personal recreational use, possession, purchase, transport, or dissemination of marijuana shall be considered unlawful in all areas of the City to the extent it is unlawful under California law. 
2.  Outdoor Cultivation. A person may not plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process marijuana plants outdoors in any zoning district of the City. No use permit, building permit, variance, or any other permit or entitlement, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for any such use or activity. 
3.  Indoor Cultivation. 
a.  A person may not plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process marijuana plants inside a private residence, or inside an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence, or inside any other enclosed structure within any zoning district of the City, unless the person is issued a residential indoor marijuana cultivation permit pursuant to 18.48.132. No use permit, building permit, variance, or any other permit or entitlement, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for any such use or activity. 
b.  To the extent a complete prohibition on indoor cultivation is not permitted under California law, a person may not plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process marijuana plants inside a private residence, or inside an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence, unless the person is issued a residential indoor marijuana cultivation permit pursuant to 18.48.132. A person may not plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process marijuana plants inside any enclosed structure within any zoning district of the City which is not either a private residence or an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence. 
D.  Medical Use. 
1.  Cultivation of medical marijuana pursuant to Section 11362.77 of the California Health & Safety Code is subject to the cultivation requirements laid out in subsection 2 of this Section. 
2.  The establishment or operation of any medical marijuana collective, cooperative, dispensary, delivery service, operator, establishment, or provider shall be considered a prohibited use in all zoning districts of the City. No use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for the establishment of any collective, cooperative, dispensary, delivery service, operator, establishment, or provider in any zoning district, and no person shall otherwise establish such businesses or operations in any zoning district. 
E.  Commercial Use. 
1.  The establishment or operation of any business of commercial marijuana activity is prohibited other than those consistent with an active conditional use permit approval for the site location, a fully executed development agreement, a CMOP and a business license issued for the operator, as stated in subsection (2) below, no use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for the establishment or operation of any such business or operation. Such prohibited businesses or operations may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  The transportation, delivery, storage, distribution, or sale of marijuana, marijuana products, or marijuana accessories; 
b.  The cultivation of marijuana; 
c.  The manufacturing or testing or marijuana, marijuana products, or marijuana accessories; or 
d.  Any other business licensed by the state or other government entity under Division 10 of the California Business & Professions Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 
2.  The review of a conditional use permit (CUP) for commercial marijuana cultivation and marijuana testing facilities shall be subject to the following: 
a.  In addition to any other findings in this Chapter for the approval of a conditional use permit, a conditional use permit application for commercial marijuana cultivation and marijuana testing facilities shall be disapproved for any of the following applicable reasons: 
1.  The site, building, structure, equipment and/or location to be used by the use for which the permit is required, does not, or cannot, be corrected to comply with the requirements set forth in this Chapter and the applicable zoning, land use, development, health, fire, building and safety laws of the City and State, including those necessary to not cause fumes or odors to travel outside the building, or beyond the portion of building occupied by the cultivation operator into other parts of the building. 
2.  The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit required by this Chapter or in any report or record required to be filed in connection with the application. 
3.  The applicant is under 21 years of age. 
4.  The required permit application fee has not been paid. 
5.  The applicant failed to submit a complete application after being notified by the Development Services Director that the application was incomplete. 
6.  The applicant or the applicant's marijuana testing facility or commercial marijuana cultivation use is in violation of, or is not in full compliance with, provisions of this Chapter related to the establishment and maintenance of a marijuana testing facility or commercial marijuana cultivation use. 
7.  That on or after the date that the use for which a permit is required by this Chapter commences, there will be no responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during operating hours. 
8.  Within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application for permit under this Chapter, the applicant, manager, partner, agent, director, officer, stockholder, or employee has been convicted of possession with the intent to sell, manufacture, transportation, or cultivation of a controlled substance. 
10.  The applicant, manager, partner, agent, director, officer, or stockholder has had any type of commercial marijuana use permit or regulatory permit suspended or revoked by any City, county, or state within two years immediately preceding the date of the application, because of failure to comply with regulations, standards or conditions of the regulatory agency. 
11.  The granting of the permit would violate a statute, ordinance, or court order. 
12.  The applicant is overdue in payment to the City of any taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed in relation to an existing or former commercial marijuana use. 
13.  The application does not include an adequate plan for utility services or the applicant fails to submit sufficient proof that the applicant has obtained a source of irrigation water with sufficient capacity to meet the irrigation needs of the use. 
14.  A commercial marijuana cultivation planning permit application shall be denied if the use is for medical marijuana, in whole or in part, and the related cooperative or collective is not properly organized in strict compliance pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996, the Medical Marijuana Program Act, the 2008 Attorney General Guidelines, Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act (AB 243, AB 266, and SB 643), and any other applicable law, rules and regulations. 
15.  The applicant has not received approval of a Commercial Marijuana Operators Permit ("CMOP") from the City. 
16.  The applicant is unable to obtain a state license for the commercial marijuana use within the time set forth by this Chapter. 
17.  The applicant does not have a development agreement approved by the City Council, which may address and require operational standards, including fees, community benefits, and community enhancement efforts by the business. 
b.  In addition to development standards applicable to a particular property, the following requirements shall apply for any conditional use permit application for commercial marijuana cultivation: 
1.  Minimum Parcel Size. No indoor commercial marijuana cultivation use shall take place on any parcel that is less than one acre. 
2.  Minimum Cultivation Area Size. The cultivation area shall be at least ten thousand one square feet. 
3.  Maximum Cultivation Area Size. No indoor cultivation area shall be larger than twenty-two thousand square feet. 
4.  No commercial marijuana cultivation use shall be established or located within a six hundred-foot radius of a school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades 1 through 12, day care center, youth center or park that is in existence at the time the license is issued. 
5.  The proposed location of the marijuana cultivation facility is located in the marijuana cultivation overlay zone as depicted on the Official Zoning Map. 
c.  In addition to standard submittal requirements for conditional use permit applications, applications for CUPs for commercial marijuana cultivation and marijuana testing facilities shall also include the following: 
1.  Detail Proposed Floor Plan. In addition to the standard existing and proposed site plans and floor plans required for applications, a detail floor plan of the premises shall be provided specifying the full lay out of the premises and indicating how the premises will be built out. The floor plan shall identify, if applicable, the secured areas, including the cultivation areas, the testing areas, and the storage areas, and shall be drawn to scale showing the square footage of each area. 
2.  Utilities. The site plan shall include a plan for all utility services. The plan for utility services shall indicate the source of water for irrigation, and shall include either a will-serve letter from an agency or entity for irrigation or shall detail an agricultural well or other private water source with capacity to meet the use's irrigation needs. 
3.  Security Site Plan. A security plan for the site shall be submitted. The security plan shall be separate from the site plan and shall be maintained as confidential. The security plan for the site shall include: 
a.  Secured area. The security plan shall indicate each secured area and shall detail the manners in which access to the secured area is restricted. The plan shall show each entrance point to a secured area and shall indicate whether the entrance shall remain locked with restricted access or whether the entrance will be staffed by security personnel. If entrances are to remain locked during any business hours, then the plan shall indicate how restricted access will be granted. 
b.  Security cameras. The security plan shall denote the location of all security cameras on site. The areas to be covered by the security cameras shall include, but are not limited to, all secured areas, public areas, storage areas, employee areas, all doors and windows, parking lots, transportation access areas, all entrances and exits, and any other areas as determined to be necessary by the Development Services Director. 
c.  Security alarm. The secured areas shall be alarmed with an audible interior and exterior alarm system that is operated and monitored by a recognized security company, deemed acceptable by the Development Services Director or designee. The plan shall indicate the locations of the alarms and how the alarms are triggered. 
d.  Distribution. The security plan shall indicate the points of egress from any secured area to the public right-of-way. The plan shall include a description of the transportation routes for all marijuana and marijuana products from the secured area and throughout City streets, right-of-way, or across other private property. The description shall include the mode and method of transportation, identification of transportation frequency, and identification of the end point where the transportation leaves the City. 
4.  Proof of Building Conditioning. Floor plans and other information shall be provided as necessary to show the building, or portion of the building to be occupied by the operator, has been or will be conditioned to support cultivation operations and not cause fumes or odors to travel outside the building, or beyond the portion of building occupied by the cultivation operator into other parts of the building, and conform to Building Code requirements including, but not limited to, flooring, drainage, electrical, lighting systems, mechanical systems and ventilation, and wall finishes. 
d.  All commercial marijuana cultivation and marijuana testing facility uses shall comply with the following requirements, and the following applicable requirements of this Section shall be deemed conditions of CUP. Failure to comply with every applicable requirement contained in this Section shall be grounds for revocation of any permit issued in compliance with this Chapter. 
1.  Underlying Zone Standards. The establishment of a commercial marijuana cultivation use and a marijuana testify facility use shall comply with all applicable City zoning site development standards of the zone, or area in which the commercial marijuana cultivation use or marijuana testing facility is located, the building and construction codes, maximum occupancy loads, fire codes, and health and safety regulations in effect in the City. Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed, and provided in compliance with the fire and building regulations and standards adopted by the City. A commercial marijuana cultivation use and a marijuana testing facility use shall comply with the applicable City permit and inspection procedures. 
2.  No Public Access. Sites containing a marijuana cultivation use or a marijuana testing facility use shall not have any public areas, facilities, or access. No site shall have any public "tasting rooms," retail stores, gift stores, shops, cafes, dispensaries, clinics, physicians' offices, or other public uses. 
3.  No Consumption. Marijuana or marijuana products shall not be consumed on any site containing a marijuana cultivation or marijuana testing facility use. 
4.  Secured Area. The main entrance to the secured area shall be manned by at least one security guard at all times during operating hours. Any other entrance shall be secured in a manner that only enables entry of authorized persons. For purposes of this requirement, the "main entrance" may be the entrance to the employee parking area provided that the parking area is secure and there is no separate main entrance to the secured area. Each cultivation area, manufacture area, and storage area shall be within the secured area. No marijuana or marijuana products may be transported within the site except within a secured area. There shall be no public access within any secured areas. No person under 21 years of age shall be allowed to enter a secured area. Secured areas shall be fully secure, with every entrance, window, skylight, or other opening lockable and kept locked when not in active use by employees of the commercial marijuana cultivation or marijuana testing facility use. 
5.  Visibility. Marijuana and marijuana products shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring properties. 
6.  Cleanliness. All exterior areas of any commercial marijuana cultivation or marijuana testing facility site, including building, landscaping, and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner free of trash, weeds, and debris. 
7.  Entrances. All entrances to a secured area shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under 21 years of age are precluded from entering the secured area. The notice shall consist of letters no less than one inch in height and shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the Development Services Director. No person under the age of twenty-one years shall be allowed within the premises at any time. It shall be unlawful for any employee, owner, operator, employer, manager, or permittee of a commercial marijuana cultivation or marijuana testing facility use to allow any person below the age of twenty-one years upon the premises or within the confines of any commercial marijuana cultivation or marijuana testing facility use. 
8.  Parking. Parking shall, at all times, be provided and maintained in compliance with a parking plan approved by the Development Services Director. Parking for all employees and workers shall be self-contained on the site. Employee parking on adjacent roads and sites shall not be allowed. Parking may be within the secured area. 
9.  Site Uses. Even if permitted in an underlying zone, any site containing a marijuana cultivation or marijuana testing facility use shall not have any residence on the site with the exception of a residence occupied by a caretaker associated with the marijuana cultivation or marijuana testing facility use, subject to approval of a conditional use permit, and no retail or other industrial business may locate on the site. Where agricultural uses are permitted, other agricultural uses and uses that are accessory to agricultural uses may take place on the site. 
10.  Lighting. All parking areas and secured area entries shall be illuminated from dusk to dawn with a lighting system that provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of not less than one foot candle of light and a minimum horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light on all parking surfaces and walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the commercial marijuana cultivation use for the personal safety of employees and to reduce the incidence of criminal conduct. Lighting shall, at all times, be maintained in compliance with the lighting plan approved by the Development Services Director. Lighting shall be contained to the site and shall not pollute onto any adjoining properties. 
11.  Noise. The premises within which the commercial marijuana cultivation or a marijuana testing facility use is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside the premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or right-of-way. 
12.  Fumes and Odors. The use shall not cause any fumes or odors to travel outside the building or beyond the portion of building occupied by the cultivation operator into other parts of the building. 
13.  Onsite Management. Every commercial marijuana cultivation or marijuana testing facility use shall have a manager on duty on the premises during all times the use is operating. Each manager's name shall be provided to the City Manager or his or her designee. The City Manager of his or her designee may establish procedures for performing background checks on managers. No site shall permit a manager on duty who has been convicted of a drug-related felony within the last ten years. 
14.  Green Waste. All green waste generated from marijuana cultivation use or a marijuana testing facility use shall be removed on a daily basis. No green waste will be allowed to remain on site after work hours. Disposal of green waste shall not be allowed in any City trash can, bin or other City facility (i.e., corporation yard or satellite yards), or in any park refuse container unless other arrangements have been authorized by City. 
15.  For any commercial marijuana cultivation or marijuana testing facility planning permit granted or approved in compliance with this Chapter, the City reserves the right and jurisdiction to review and modify the commercial marijuana cultivation or marijuana testing facility planning permit—including the conditions of approval—based on changed circumstances. Changed circumstances include, but are not limited to, modification of the use, change in scope, emphasis, size, or nature of the use, and expansion, alteration, or change of use or a change in federal or state law or policy relating to marijuana. The reservation of the right to review a commercial marijuana cultivation or marijuana testing facility planning permit granted or approved under this Chapter is in addition to, not in lieu of, the right of the City to review and revoke or modify any permit granted or approved in compliance with this Chapter for any violations of the conditions imposed on the permit. 
16.  An applicant or permittee shall permit the City Manager or designee, Development Services Director or designee, Police Chief or designee, Fire Chief or designee, or any other authorized City or County agency staff to inspect the premises of a commercial marijuana cultivation use or marijuana testing facility use for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to the permitted uses, at any time it is occupied or opened for use. A person who operates a marijuana testing facility or a commercial marijuana cultivation use or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this Section if he or she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for use. Inspections shall be conducted in a reasonable manner. 
e.  Suspension or Revocation of Permits. A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of a permit granted under this Chapter, or be subject to other appropriate remedial action, including the imposition of additional conditions, for any of the following causes of action arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager of a commercial marijuana cultivation use or a marijuana testing facility use: 
1.  The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the City. 
2.  The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager failed to disclose the conviction of an act for which disapproval of a permit would have been required in compliance with this Chapter. 
3.  The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager refused to allow an inspection of the premises of the commercial marijuana use as authorized by this Chapter. 
4.  The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager does not have a necessary state license for the operation of the use or the state license of the permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager is suspended, revoked, or is otherwise inapplicable to the commercial marijuana use on the site. 
5.  The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager operated the commercial marijuana use in violation of a Federal, State, or local law, including but not limited to laws and regulations related to building, fire, health, or zoning statutes, codes, ordinances, or regulations, applicable in the City, based on the investigation by the City or other agency responsible for the enforcement of the applicable rules or laws. 
6.  The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager failed to abide by any action previously imposed by an appropriate officer of the City or other agency responsible for the enforcement of this Chapter and other County and State codes and laws. 
f.  After any final disapproval or revocation of a permit under this Chapter, the applicant may seek prompt judicial review of the decision in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, in compliance with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq., and in compliance with the expedited judicial review set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
g.  Violations and Penalties. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial marijuana cultivation or marijuana testing facility use without a valid permit(s) issued by the City in compliance with this Chapter. 
2.  Violation of any of the provisions of Subsection A, above, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued, or allowed by that person. Despite the foregoing, the City Attorney may elect to prosecute any provision of this Chapter as an infraction. 
3.  No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. Every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this section, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the District Attorney. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section is declared a public nuisance and may be abated as provided in Chapter 8.12 of this Municipal Code and/or under state law. 
h.  Regulations Nonexclusive. The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to be exclusive and compliance with this Chapter shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of uses as adopted by the Council, including but not limited to Chapters 18.48.130, 18.48.132 and 18.48.134. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 3, 1-19-16; Ord. No. O-22-16, § 2, 12-20-16; Ord. No. O-02-17, § 3, 4-4-2017; Ord. No. O-11-17, § 3(Exh. B), 12-5-2017)  
18.48.132 - Residential Indoor Marijuana Cultivation (RIMC) Permit. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe the requirements and process for the Residential Indoor Marijuana Cultivation (RIMC) Permit. The RIMC Permit is intended to serve as an instrument of the City's reasonable regulation of residential indoor marijuana cultivation as provided by California Health and Safety Code, Section 11362.2(b)(1). 
2.  Definitions. 
A.  "Cultivation" means the marijuana cultivation process including, but not limited to, planting, harvesting, drying, processing, or maintenance activities. 
B.  "Cultivation area" includes the area where marijuana plants are cultivated, cultivation-related materials and supplies are stored, and any marijuana processed from the cultivation in excess of twenty-eight and one-half grams. 
C.  "Child care" means a facility, center, or home requiring a license that is issued by the State of California which provides for the care, health, safety, supervision, or guidance of a child's social, emotional, and educational growth on a regular basis, in a place other than the child's own home, or any facility meeting the definition of California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.76. 
D.  "Directly engage" in cultivation means to handle the marijuana plants in the cultivation process. 
E.  "Group Home" means any community care facility regulated and licensed by a Federal and/or State agency. Unlicensed community care facilities or those community care facilities the regulation of which is not otherwise preempted by State or Federal law shall not constitute group homes. 
F.  "Indirectly engage" in cultivation means to assist, even if not handling marijuana plants, in the cultivation process. 
G.  "Personal Use" means to possess, use, or give away to persons twenty-one years of age or older without any compensation whatsoever. 
H.  "Residence" means a private residence such as a house, apartment unit, mobile home, or similar dwelling. 
I.  "Residential unit" means residence and accessory structures to that particular residence. 
3.  Applicability. 
A.  No person shall directly or indirectly engage in residential indoor marijuana cultivation until obtaining and maintaining a valid RIMC permit. 
B.  A RIMC Permit authorizes: 
1.  Only one person, 
2.  To directly or indirectly engage in residential indoor marijuana cultivation for personal use, 
3.  At only one residence, and 
4.  Within only the authorized cultivation area at the residence. 
C.  A RIMC Permit does not authorize: 
1.  Construction or improvements of any structure, 
2.  A property-at-large for marijuana cultivation, 
3.  Cultivation for commercial purposes by the permit holder or any others, including activity licensed by the State of California under Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, or 
4.  The following people to directly or in directly engage in residential indoor marijuana cultivation: 
a.  The permit holder's family members, unless a separate RIMC permit is obtained specific to that particular person, 
b.  Cohabitants, unless a separate RIMC permit is obtained specific to the particular person, 
c.  Guests, 
d.  Future residents, or 
e.  Any other person other than the permit holder. 
D.  A person may not hold more than one RIMC Permit at a time. Multiple permit holders may be authorized to engage in residential indoor marijuana cultivation at the same residence, but a residence must include no more than one cultivation area, and no residence may cultivate more than six plants in total, regardless of how many permit holders are present. 
4.  Review and Appellate Authority. 
A.  Applications for a RIMC Permit will be processed and reviewed by the Development Services Director, who shall approve or deny an application based on the requirements provided in subsection 6. 
B.  A decision by the Development Services Director may be appealed to the City Manager by the applicant within 15 days after receipt of the final decision. 
5.  Application and Notice. 
A.  The Development Services Department may adopt the forms and submittal materials required for a complete application. This shall include copies of building permits or other evidence that the indoor space to be used for marijuana cultivation has been or shall be conditioned to support cultivation operations with appropriate building permits to conform to Building Code requirements including, but not limited to, flooring, drainage, electrical, lighting systems, mechanical systems and ventilation, and wall finishes. 
B.  The City Council may, by resolution, require an application fee. 
C.  Within thirty days of receipt, with fee, by the Development Services Department of an application for the new or modified RIMC permit (or a resubmittal), the City will provide written notification to the applicant of a determination that the application is complete, or provide a list of additional information required for a complete application. 
D.  During the thirty day review period, the applicant shall allow for, and obtain, inspections conducted, at the City's discretion, by appropriate departments of the property and the proposed cultivation area (without plants) to verify application information and review for code compliance. 
E.  Within thirty days of a determination that an application is complete, the Development Services Director shall approve or deny an application based on conformance with requirements of this section. 
6.  Requirements for Approval. The Development Services Director shall approve an application for an RIMC Permit if the following requirements are made: 
A.  Applicant. The applicant must: 
1.  Be twenty-one years of age or older. 
2.  Have no open code violations with the City. 
3.  Have no past due payments due to the City. 
4.  If the applicant is not the owner of the property, provide a signed, notarized affidavit from the property owner that acknowledges and grants permission for cultivation to occur on the property. 
B.  Residential Unit. 
1.  The residential unit, which includes the residence and any accessory structure to that particular residence, shall be permitted or otherwise deemed lawfully established and maintained as a habitable structure. 
2.  The residence must be the primary dwelling of the applicant. 
3.  The residential unit shall not include more than one cultivation area 
4.  The residential unit must not be currently approved or used for any of the following activities: 
a.  Child care, 
b.  Group Home, or 
c.  Any facility that does not allow cultivation of marijuana by law or policy. 
5.  No open code violations with the City related to the residential unit, and 
6.  No past due payments due to the City related to the residential unit. 
C.  Cultivation Area. 
1.  Location and Use. 
a.  One single cultivation area per residential unit is allowed. A residential unit may not have multiple cultivation areas. 
b.  The cultivation area shall be located indoors within a permitted or otherwise lawful fully enclosed structure, which may include the residence or accessory structure to that particular residence. 
c.  The indoor space to be used for marijuana cultivation shall be conditioned to support cultivation operations with appropriate building permits to conform to Building Code requirements including, but not limited to, flooring, drainage, electrical, lighting systems, mechanical systems and ventilation, and wall finishes. 
d.  Cultivation areas within garages shall not be allowed unless minimum vehicle parking space clearances are not obstructed. 
e.  All plumbing, electrical, and other utilities must be properly permitted by the City or appropriate regulatory agency. 
f.  The cultivation area shall be used exclusively for residential indoor marijuana. 
g.  The cultivation area shall not be used or prepared in a manner to cultivate more than six marijuana plants. 
h.  The following chemicals shall not be used or stored in the cultivation area: 
(i)  Explosive gases, including, but not limited to: Butane, Propane, Xylene, Styrene, Gasoline, Kerosene, Oxygen (O2), or Hydrogen (H2). 
(ii)  Dangerous poisons, toxins, or carcinogens, including, but not limited to: Methanol, Iso-propul Alcohol, Methylene Chloride, Acetone, Benzene, Toluene, or Tri-chloro-ethylene. 
2.  Access and Security. 
a.  Access to the cultivation area shall be restricted by lockable doors. Any windows, skylight, ventilation, or other opening must be lockable. 
b.  Access to the cultivation area shall be restricted to permit holders authorized for the cultivation area. 
c.  The cultivation area shall not be visible from anywhere outside the residence. Any windows, skylight, ventilation, or other opening must be sufficiently covered or opaque as to obscure visibility of the cultivation area from any adjacent property. 
d.  The cultivation area shall not produce odors, sounds, or other emissions that are detectible from adjacent properties and may indicate marijuana cultivation. 
3.  Required Inspection. Prior to the issuance of any RIMC, the applicant shall obtain clearances from the various city departments based on inspections conducted at the City's discretion, with prior written consent of the applicant, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Building Official, or designee, and 
b.  Fire Marshal, or designee, and 
c.  Code Compliance Officer, Police Chief or designee. 
7.  Expiration and Renewal. 
A.  A RIMC Permit expires, if not renewed, one year from the date of approval and/or renewal. 
B.  A RIMC Permit may be renewed, if prior to the expiration, the permit holder: 
1.  Completes forms and submittal materials for renewal as required by the Development Services Department, and 
2.  Pays a renewal fee as approved, by resolution, by City Council. 
3.  Provides a signed, notarized affidavit from the property owner that acknowledges and grants permission for cultivation to continue to occur on the property if the applicant is not the owner of the property. 
8.  Revocation. 
A.  Any time the Development Services Director determines that there is a violation of these requirements or otherwise a failure by a RIMC permittee to comply with applicable governing regulations, he/she shall notify in writing both the applicant and the property owner of the need to correct the violation. 
B.  If the violation is not abated within seventy-two hours of the written notification, the Development Services Director may revoke a RIMC Permit at any time thereafter for failure to comply with applicable governing regulations upon providing five business days advance written notice to the permit holder and property owner. 
C.  If a RIMC Permit is revoked, the permit holder's marijuana crop may be impounded. The permit holder may not apply for another RIMC Permit until the permit holder pays a fine as set forth in section 8.D. 
D.  The City Council may by ordinance adopt a fine schedule for violations that may escalate with successive violations. 
E.  A revocation of a RIMC Permit may be appealed to the City Manager by the permit holder within five business days of the written notice of revocation. 
9.  Subsequent Applications. 
A.  Application for a Different Residential Unit. 
1.  If a permit holder applies for a RIMC Permit for a residential unit other than specified on the existing permit, the existing RIMC Permit shall be suspended upon application for the new permit. 
2.  If the new subsequent application is approved, the existing RIMC Permit will be revoked. 
3.  If the new subsequent application is withdrawn or otherwise not approved, the suspension of existing RIMC Permit shall be terminated and the RIMC reinstated. 
4.  If the applicant appeals a denial of the new subsequent application, the existing RIMC Permit remains suspended until a final decision is reached. 
B.  Application for a Different or Modified Cultivation Area in the Same Residence. If a permit holder applies for a different or modified cultivation area other than specified on the existing permit, the existing permit shall terminate upon approval of the application. Only one cultivation area may exist in a residence at one time, and if another application is approved, the existing RIMC Permit shall terminate. 
C.  Application for Same Cultivation Area in Same Residence. If another individual applies for a RIMC Permit for the same cultivation area, no permit will be issued if the existing permit has been terminated or suspended. An additional RIMC Permit for the same cultivation area shall only be issued if all Permits related to that cultivation area remain in good standing with the City. 
10.  No Sale or Transfer. An RIMC Permit may not be sold or transferred. 
(Ord. No. O-02-17, § 4, 4-4-2017)  
18.48.134 - Commercial Marijuana Operator Permit. 
1.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this subchapter is to prescribe the requirements and process for the Commercial Marijuana Operator Permit (CMOP). Medical and commercial marijuana cultivation, manufacturing, distribution, testing, or transportation facilities shall only be permitted in accordance with the criteria and procedures set forth in this Code, upon application and approval of a CMOP permit pertaining to the operation of the facility. Prior to obtaining a CMOP permit under this Chapter, all applicants must obtain and maintain all relevant land use entitlements, including an approved and executed development agreement, a conditional use permit (CUP), as further enumerated in the Development Code. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to permit or allow marijuana cultivation as a use in any particular zone. 
2.  Commercial Marijuana Cultivation Facilities. Commercial marijuana cultivation facilities permitted under this Chapter include facilities where marijuana is planted, grown, and harvested. Commercial marijuana cultivation permits may allow, as an ancillary use to marijuana cultivation, for marijuana to be dried, cured, graded, trimmed, or transported, or all or any combination of those activities, provided that the activities occur on the same site where the marijuana was planted, grown, and harvested. Permits shall not allow for any on-site sale or consumption of marijuana or marijuana products and shall not authorize the operation of any dispensaries, shops, cafes, tasting rooms, or similar activities. All commercial marijuana cultivation facilities shall comply with zoning and development standards established by the City for such facilities. Failure to comply with any provision of this Code may result in revocation of a CMOP permit. No commercial marijuana cultivation facility shall be permitted under this Chapter unless the facility holds all necessary and valid land use entitlements and is in compliance with all State laws pertaining to cultivating marijuana. 
3.  Scope of Permitted Marijuana Cultivation Facilities. CMOP permits shall only be issued for cultivation involving of at least ten thousand one square feet of growing space. No commercial marijuana cultivation activities may take place outside of the identified land area that is subject to the CMOP permit. 
4.  Commercial Marijuana Operator Permit Required. 
A.  Prior to initiating operations and as a continuing requisite to operating a commercial marijuana cultivation facility, the legal representative of the persons wishing to operate a commercial marijuana cultivation facility shall, after obtaining a CMOP, enter into a development agreement pertaining to the development and use of the site as a commercial marijuana cultivation facility, obtain all necessary land use entitlements, including a conditional use permit (CUP) as stated in CMC 18.48.130, as further numerated in the Development Code. The legal representative shall obtain a CMOP permit from the City Manager or his or her designee, under the terms and conditions set forth in this Chapter. The legal representative shall file an application with the City Manager or designee upon a form provided by the City and shall pay an application fee as established by resolution adopted by the City council as amended from time to time. Throughout the period in which a CMOP permit remains active, a commercial marijuana cultivation facility shall remain in full compliance with the provisions of this Code, including the further requirements enumerated in the Zoning Code. An application for a CMOP permit shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
1.  The address of the location of the commercial marijuana cultivation facility. 
2.  A site plan and floor plan of the commercial marijuana cultivation facility denoting all the use of areas of the commercial marijuana cultivation facility, including but not limited to storage, cultivation, and exterior lighting. If a site plan is submitted for a land use entitlement, a single site plan may be utilized. 
3.  An on-site security program for operations shall be prepared, implemented, and maintained at all times throughout the operation of any facility. The security operations plan shall remain confidential. The applicant shall submit the plan to the Chief of Police and the Development Services Director at the time of application and annually thereafter, which shall include: 
a.  The security site plan required by section 18.48.130(E).2.c.3 of the Zoning Code, and any updates thereto. 
b.  A description of how security data from security cameras will be collected and maintained. All security cameras on-site shall operate in an on-going manner with at least two hundred forty concurrent hours of digitally recorded documentation in a format approved by the Development Services Director or designee. The cameras shall be in use twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week. 
c.  A plan for implementation of security alarming and monitoring. All security alarms shall be operated and monitored by a recognized security company, deemed acceptable by the Development Services Director or designee. Any change in the security company shall be subject to the approval of the Development Services Director or designee. All current contact information regarding the security company shall be provided to the Development Services Director or designee and the chief of police. 
d.  A plan for restricting entrance to all secured areas and securely storing all marijuana and marijuana products. 
e.  A description of security personnel to be utilized on site. All security personnel shall be licensed security guards, licensed by the California Department of Consumer Affairs. At least one licensed security guard shall be present at the commercial marijuana cultivation facility during all hours of operation. If any security guard is to be armed, then the security guard shall possess at all times a valid security guard card and firearms permit issued by the California Department of Consumer Affairs. 
f.  The applicant shall prepare and implement a procedure for performing background checks on all employees and workers, including any subcontractors or independent contractors working on site. All subcontractors and independent contractors shall be identified, along with the duties to be performed. No person who has been convicted of a drug-related felony within the past ten years shall be allowed within a secured area at any time. 
g.  A description of the transportation and delivery of all marijuana and marijuana products from the secured area and through City streets. The description shall include the mode and method of transportation, identification of any subcontractors performing transportation services, identification of transportation frequency, identification of the end point where the transportation leaves the City. The plan shall indicate how the marijuana products will be secured during transportation. 
h.  The Development Services Director and Police Chief shall be given advanced notice of any operational changes affecting the security plan. The annual update shall indicate any measures taken in response to any security incidents or public safety concerns. 
4.  The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the commercial marijuana cultivation facility is to be operated. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied with a notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the property that a commercial marijuana cultivation facility will be operated on his or her property. 
5.  Authorization for the City Manager or designee to seek verification of the information contained within the application. 
6.  A statement in writing by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
7.  All state licenses for the commercial marijuana cultivation use, including copies of the application materials submitted an application for the state license. If issuance of a state license is contingent upon first obtaining the City's approval, then the application shall include a detailed description of the state licenses to be obtained. If the CMOP permit application is submitted before the state establishes requirements for marijuana-related licenses, then the CMOP permit application shall be supplemented with a copy of any state license application and state license thereafter submitted. The CMOP permit application may only be granted conditional upon obtaining the identified state licenses. The applicant must be the holder of the state license. 
8.  Any such additional and further information as is deemed necessary by the City Manager or designee to administer this section. 
5.  Background Check. All applicants for a CMOP permit for a commercial marijuana cultivation facility, including any management personnel who are responsible for the day-to-day operations and activities of the commercial marijuana cultivation facility shall be required to submit to a fingerprint-based criminal history records check conducted by the City Manager or his or her designee. 
6.  Commercial Marijuana Operators Permit Selection Process. 
A.  Commercial Marijuana Cultivation. 
1.  Initial Maximum Amount of Commercial Marijuana Cultivation CMOPs. Upon the effective date of this provision, the City Council may issue a maximum of up to two CMOPs for commercial marijuana cultivation. The permits shall be issued in accordance with the application and permit approval process contained in this Chapters 18.48.130, 18.48.134 and resolutions adopted pursuant to this Chapter. The commercial marijuana cultivation businesses must obtain a CMOP from the City before commencing operations, must be in compliance with all applicable state and federal laws pertaining to its operation, including obtaining all necessary licenses from the state, and shall comply with all applicable operational and zoning requirements set forth in the Colton Municipal Code. Nothing in this Chapter creates a mandate that the City Council must issue two or more CMOPs if the City Council determines that there are no qualified applicants, the proposed locations for commercial marijuana cultivation businesses are incompatible with neighboring land uses, or if the City Council determines that the issuance of the CMOPs would have a negative effect on the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens or businesses of Colton, or for any other reason allowed by law. 
2.  City Council Review and Increased Maximum Number of CMOPs to be Issued. Twelve months after the first set of CMOPs have been issued, the City Manager or his or her designee shall deliver a report to the City Council during a regular meeting which examines the positive and negative impacts that the commercial marijuana cultivation businesses have had on the community during the preceding twelve months. The report shall include, among other things, an analysis of how the commercial marijuana cultivation businesses have complied with state and local regulations, any positive or negative community and law enforcement impacts, and any revenue generated. If after hearing the report the City Council makes a determination that there are no significant consequences of allowing these commercial marijuana cultivation businesses to operate in the City, the City Council at its sole discretion may vote to expand the number of authorized MCOPs to be issued up to a maximum of three commercial cultivation businesses. If the City Council takes no action, or finds that the impacts are unacceptable, then the maximum number and type of commercial marijuana cultivation businesses authorized shall continue to be limited to two, as provided is subdivision (1) above. 
B.  All Other Marijuana Businesses. Until further action by the City Council to amend this Chapter has been taken, commercial marijuana businesses other than commercial marijuana cultivation businesses and marijuana testing facilities are not permitted to operate within the City. 
7.  Application for MCOP: Renewal Applications; and Effect of Revocation or Suspension of State License. 
A.  Initial Application Procedure. 
1.  The City Council shall adopt by resolution the procedures which will govern the application process, and the manner in which the decision will ultimately be made regarding the issuance of any CMOP(s). The resolution shall authorize the City Manager or his or her designee to prepare the necessary forms, adopt any necessary rules, regulations and processes, solicit applications, conduct initial evaluations of the applicants, and to ultimately provide a final recommendation to the City Council of the top three (3) applicants for consideration. 
2.  At the time of filing, each applicant shall pay an application fee established by resolution of the City Council, to cover all costs incurred by the City in the application process. 
3.  After the initial review the City Manager or his designee will make a recommendation to the City Council, and the City Council shall make a final determination in accordance with the selection procedure set forth in the Resolution adopted by the City Council. 
4.  The City's Reservation of Rights: The City reserves the right to reject any or all applications. The City may also modify, postpone, or cancel any request for applications, or the entire program under this Chapter, at any time without liability, obligation, or commitment to any party, firm, or organization. Persons submitting applications assume the risk that all or any part of the program, or any particular category of permit potentially authorized under this Chapter, may be cancelled at any time prior to permit issuance. The City further reserves the right to request and obtain additional information from any candidate submitting an application. In addition to any other justification provided a failure to comply with other requirements in this Chapter, an application risks being rejected for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Proposal received after designated time and date. 
(2)  Proposal not containing the required elements, exhibits, nor organized in the required format. 
(3)  Proposal considered not fully responsive to this request for permit application. 
(4)  Proposal contains excess or extraneous material not called for in the request for permit application. 
B.  Expiration of CMOP. A CMOP issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire twelve (12) months after the date of its issuance. CMOP(s) may be renewed as provided in subsection D below. 
C.  Revocation of Permits. CMOP(s) may be revoked for any violation of any law and/or any rule, regulation and/or standard adopted pursuant to this Chapter. 
D.  Renewal Applications. 
1.  An application for renewal of a CMOP shall be filed at least sixty calendar days prior to the expiration date of the current permit. 
2.  The renewal application shall contain all the information required for new applications. 
3.  The applicant shall pay a fee in an amount to be set by the City Council to cover the costs of processing the renewal permit application, together with any costs incurred by the City to administer the program created under this Chapter. 
4.  An application for renewal of a CMOP shall be rejected if any of the following exists: 
a.  The application is filed less than sixty days before its expiration. 
b.  The CMOP is suspended or revoked at the time of the application. 
c.  The commercial marijuana cultivation business has not been in regular and continuous operation in the four months prior to the renewal application. 
d.  The commercial marijuana cultivation business has failed to conform to the requirements of this Chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter. 
e.  The permittee fails or is unable to renew its State of California license. 
f.  If the City or state has determined, based on substantial evidence, that the permittee or applicant is in violation of the requirements of this Chapter, of the City's Municipal Code, or of the state rules and regulations, and the City or state has determined that the violation is grounds for termination or revocation of the CMOP. 
5.  The City Manager or his designee is authorized to make all decisions concerning the issuance of a renewal permit. In making the decision, the City Manager or his designee is authorized to impose additional conditions to a renewal permit, if it is determined to be necessary to ensure compliance with state or local laws and regulations or to preserve the public health, safety or welfare. Appeals from the decision of the City Manager or his designee shall be handled pursuant to Section 18.48.200 entitled "Appeals." 
6.  If a renewal application is rejected, a person may file a new application pursuant to this Chapter no sooner than one year from the date of the rejection. 
E.  Effect of State License Suspension, Revocation, or Termination. Suspension of a license issued by the State of California, or by any of its departments or divisions, shall immediately suspend the ability of a commercial marijuana cultivation business to operate within the City, until the State of California, or its respective department or division, reinstates or reissues the State license. Should the State of California, or any of its departments or divisions, revoke or terminate the license of a medical cannabis business, such revocation or termination shall also revoke or terminate the ability of a commercial marijuana cultivation business to operate within the City of Colton. 
8.  Permittee Selection Process. 
A.  Selection and Review of Finalists. 
1.  The City Council shall adopt by resolution a procedure by which the top three applicants applying for a CMOP will be presented to the City Council for a final determination at a public hearing. 
2.  The top three finalists shall be invited to attend the City Council meeting, where they will be expected to make a public presentation introducing their team and providing an overview of their proposal. In order to provide adequate time, presentations may be divided over more than one meeting over multiple days as determined to be necessary. 
3.  At least ten days prior to the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be sent to all property owners located within three hundred feet of the proposed business locations of each of the finalists to be considered by the City Council. 
4.  The City Council shall rank the final three candidates and shall select two or more candidates to be issued a CMOP. The City Council's decision as to the selection of the candidate(s) to receive the permit(s) shall be final. 
5.  Official issuance of a CMOP, however, is conditioned upon the prevailing candidate(s) obtaining all required land use approvals and a fully approved and executed development agreement. Following the Council's selection, the prevailing candidate(s) shall apply to the City's planning department to obtain any required land use approvals or entitlements for the permittee's location, if any. Land use approvals shall include compliance with all applicable provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). After the applicant has been approved for a CMOP, the City Manager or his or her designee shall formally issue a CMOP once the City Manager or his or her designee and Chief of Police have both affirmed that all of the required land use approvals and a fully approved and executed development agreement have been obtained. 
If the selected permittee(s) is/are unable to fulfill all the requirements of obtaining the CMOP(s), the City Council, in its sole discretion, may award the permit to the next highest ranked finalist, or may begin the application process again to allow for selection of a new set of finalists. 
6.  Issuance of a CMOP does not create a land use entitlement. A commercial marijuana cultivation business permit shall only be for a term of twelve months, and shall expire at the end of the twelve-month period unless it is renewed as provided herein. Furthermore, no permittee may begin operations, notwithstanding the issuance of a permit, unless all of the state and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to the requirements of this Chapter and of the permit, have been complied with. 
7.  Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, the City Council reserves the right to reject any or all applications if it determines it would be in the best interest of the City, taking into account any health, safety and welfare impacts on the community. Applicants shall have no right to a CMOP until a permit is actually issued, and then only for the duration of the permit's term. Each applicant assumes the risk that, at any time prior to the issuance of a permit, the City Council may terminate or delay the program created under this Chapter. 
8.  If an application is denied, a new application may not be filed for one (1) year from the date of the denial. 
9.  A person or entity granted a CMOP shall be required to pay the permit fee established by resolution of the City Council, to cover the costs of administering the CMOP program created in this Chapter. 
B.  Prohibition on Transfer of CMOP(s). 
1.  No person may transfer ownership or control of a commercial marijuana cultivation business or transfer any CMOP issued under this Chapter. CMOP(s) are not a property right, and permittees have no economic interest in any permit issued to them. Permittees have no right to sell or transfer a CMOP to another party, or to have the City Council consider whether they should authorize the transfer of a CMOP to another party. Any attempt to transfer ownership of a commercial marijuana cultivation business or of a CMOP shall render the CMOP void. 
2.  Any attempt to transfer a CMOP or a commercial marijuana cultivation business shall result in the CMOP being declared immediately revoked and/or it is void and no longer of any effect. 
3.  In any situation where a permit has been lost as a result of an attempted transfer of the CMOP or of the commercial marijuana cultivation business, or as a result of the abandonment or revocation of the permit, any new permit shall be issued using the standard process for the issuance of permits in the first instance. No preference shall be given to any person proposed as new owner or assignee by the former permit holder. In such case, prior to accepting any new applications, the City shall post the availability of the CMOP at issue on the City's website. The City Manager or his/her designee may take other actions to help ensure the broadest pool of applicants for the new permit. 
9.  Grounds for Denial. The City Manager or designee shall reject an application upon making any of the following findings: 
A.  The applicant made one or more false or misleading statements or omissions on the application or during the application process; 
B.  The applicant is not the legal representative of the commercial marijuana cultivation facility; 
C.  The commercial marijuana cultivation facility is not permitted in the proposed area, is not an authorized use in the proposed area, or has not obtained a conditional use permit or other entitlement for the use; 
D.  The applicant, or any person who is managing or is otherwise responsible for the activities of the commercial marijuana cultivation facility has been convicted of a felony, or convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or the illegal use, possession, transportation, distribution or similar activities related to controlled substances, as defined in the Federal Controlled Substances Act, with the exception of medical marijuana related offenses for which the conviction occurred after the passage of the Compassionate Use Act of 1996; 
E.  The applicant is not a party to a development agreement with the City concerning the terms of the development and use of the commercial marijuana cultivation facility. 
F.  If a license is required by state law, the applicant does not hold a state license for the proposed commercial marijuana cultivation or, if issued conditionally, does not obtain a state license as required. 
G.  The applicant's application failed to meet the requirements of this Chapter or of any other legal requirement that is a prerequisite to issuance of an application. 
10.  Limitations on City's Liability. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the City shall not assume any liability whatsoever, with respect to approving any CMOP permit pursuant to this Chapter or the operation of any commercial marijuana cultivation facility approved pursuant to this Chapter. As a condition of approval a CMOP permit as provided in this Chapter, the applicant or its legal representative shall: 
A.  Execute an agreement indemnifying the City from any claims, damages, etc., associated with the operation of the commercial marijuana facility; 
B.  Maintain insurance in the amounts and of the types that are acceptable to the City Manager or designee; 
C.  Name the City as an additionally insured on all City required insurance policies; 
D.  Agree to defend, at its sole expense, any action against the City, its agents, officers, and employees related to the approval of a CMOP permit; and 
E.  Agree to reimburse the City for any court costs and attorney fees that the City may be required to pay as a result of any legal challenge related to the City's approval of a CMOP permit. The City may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such action, but such participation shall not relieve the operator of its obligation hereunder. 
11.  Additional Terms and Conditions. Based on the information set forth in the application, the City Manager Director or designee may impose reasonable terms and conditions on the proposed operations of the commercial marijuana cultivation facility in addition to those specified in this Chapter. 
12.  Compliance with State and Local Law. 
A.  All commercial marijuana cultivation facilities shall comply fully with all of the applicable restrictions and mandates set forth in state law. Any documents, reports, filing, financial statements, applications, or other records that are required to be maintained or prepared under any state law regulating commercial marijuana cultivation, testing, manufacture, transportation, distribution, or other activities authorized by the permit shall be maintained by the applicant and made available to the City. At all times that a permit is required by state law for commercial marijuana cultivation, the CMOP permit holder shall be the named holder of all relevant state licenses. 
B.  All commercial marijuana cultivation facilities shall comply fully with all laws of the City of Colton. Retails sales of marijuana products are strictly prohibited. Facilities shall not supply, sell, or deliver marijuana products to dispensaries, shops, or other retail locations within the City of Colton. Facilities shall not supply, sell, or deliver any marijuana products to any industrial, cultivation, manufacturing, processing, or other facilities within the City unless the other facility is permitted under this Chapter, and both facilities' permits allow for the supply, sale, or delivery. 
13.  Sales Taxes. All commercial marijuana cultivation facilities must pay any applicable sales tax pursuant to federal, state, and local law. 
14.  Point of Sale System. All commercial marijuana cultivation facilities shall have an electronic point of sale system that produces historical transactional data for review by the City Manager Director or designee for auditing purposes. 
15.  Records. All commercial marijuana cultivation facilities shall perform an inventory on the first business day of each month and shall record the total quantity of each form of marijuana on the premises. These records shall be maintained for two years from the date created and shall be made available to the City Manager or designee upon request. 
16.  Community Relations. Each commercial marijuana cultivation facility shall provide the City Manager or designee with the name, phone number, facsimile number, and email address of an on-site community relations or staff person or other representative to whom the City can provide notice if there are operating problems associated with the commercial marijuana facility or refer members of the public who may have any concerns or complaints regarding the operation of the commercial marijuana facility. 
17.  Inspections and Enforcement. 
A.  Recordings made by security cameras at any commercial marijuana cultivation facility shall be made immediately available to the Police Chief or City Manager or designee upon verbal request; no search warrant or subpoena shall be needed to view the recorded materials. 
B.  The City Manager or designee shall have the right to enter all commercial marijuana cultivation facilities from time to time unannounced for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with this Chapter. 
C.  Operation of the commercial marijuana cultivation facility in non-compliance with any conditions of approval or the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a violation of the municipal code and shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of this code. Operation of the commercial marijuana cultivation facility in non-compliance with any conditions of approval or the provisions of this Chapter may result in revocation of a CMOP permit pursuant to Section 170(D). 
D.  The City Manager may summarily suspend or revoke a CMOP permit if any of the following, singularly or in combination, occur: 
1.  The City Manager determines that the commercial marijuana cultivation facility has failed to comply with this Chapter or any condition of approval or a circumstance or situation has been created that would have permitted the Development Services Director or designee to deny the permit under the terms of this Chapter; 
2.  Operations cease for more than ninety calendar days, including during change of ownership proceedings; 
3.  Ownership is changed without securing a CMOP permit; 
4.  The commercial marijuana cultivation facility fails to maintain two hundred forty continuous hours of security recordings; 
5.  The commercial marijuana cultivation facility fails to allow inspection of the security recordings, the activity logs, or the premises by authorized City officials; 
6.  The commercial marijuana cultivation facility has engaged in the supply, sale, delivery, or distribution of marijuana products to individuals or retail establishments in the City of Colton or has otherwise violated an ordinance or law established by the City of Colton; or 
7.  The commercial marijuana cultivation facility has failed to remit or pay any tax, fee, or other consideration owed to the City. 
18.  Appeals. Any decision regarding the denial, suspension or revocation of a CMOP permit may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to the provisions set forth in Section 18.48. Said appeal shall be made by a notice of appeal from the person appealing within fifteen days from the date of the decision. The City Council may, in its sole discretion, delegate consideration of the appeal to one or more hearing officers. 
19.  Cessation of Operations. 
A.  In the event a qualified commercial marijuana cultivation facility that receives a CMOP permit ceases to operate for any reason, the City Manager or designee shall consider the next qualified applicant on the waiting list placed in order of application and provide an opportunity for new applicants to be considered for a permit. This section shall apply to any portion of a facility where operations cease. 
B.  The legal representative of the facility may apply to the City Manager or designee for a waiver to allow the cessation of operations for a defined period. A waiver may only be issued upon the applicant's showing of good cause that operations should be ceased for a limited period of time, not to exceed six months, and that operations are likely to resume within the waiver period. Any waiver issued under this section shall be conditioned upon the facility's continued payment of all taxes, fees, and other charges due the City. 
20.  Permits Not Transferable. CMOP permits issued pursuant to this Chapter are not transferable. Applicants who are successors to an existing permit shall have priority over all other permit applications. Nothing herein shall prohibit the City from requiring new or additional terms or conditions related to an application for a successor permit. 
21.  Violations. 
A.  Any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance. 
B.  Each Violation a Separate Offense. Each and every violation of this Chapter shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures authorized by this Code. Additionally, as a nuisance per se, any violation of this Chapter shall be subject to injunctive relief, any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter being deemed null and void, disgorgement and payment to the City of any monies unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement, costs of investigation, attorney fees, and any other relief or remedy available at law or in equity. The City may also pursue any and all remedies and actions available and applicable under state and local laws for any violations committed by the commercial marijuana cultivation business or persons related to, or associated with, the commercial marijuana activity. Additionally, when there is determined to be an imminent threat to public health, safety or welfare, the city manager, his/her designee, or the chief of police, may take immediate action to temporarily suspend a CMOP issued by the City, pending a hearing before the City Council. 
C.  The City may issue an administrative citation, and/or assess an administrative fine of up to one thousand dollars for each violation of this Chapter. 
D.  The City shall be entitled to civil penalties of not less than ten thousand dollars for each willful, wanton, or reckless violation of a CMOP permit or this Chapter. 
E.  A separate offense occurs for each day any violation of this Chapter is continued and/or maintained. A separate offense occurs for each marijuana plant that is cultivated without a permit. 
22.  Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facilities. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to both commercial and medical marijuana cultivation facilities. To the extent that only medical, not commercial, marijuana facilities are authorized under State law, then in addition to the requirements of this Chapter: 
A.  All medical marijuana facilities shall comply fully with all of the applicable restrictions and mandates set forth in state law, including without limitation the Compassionate Use Act of 1996, the Medical Marijuana Program Act, the 2008 Attorney General Guidelines, and the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act (AB 243, AB 266, and SB 643). 
B.  If the CMOP is intended for medical marijuana cultivation purposes, the application for a CMOP permit shall include an estimate of the size of the group of primary caregivers and/or qualified patients who will be served by the medical marijuana facility. A cultivation permit application shall be denied if the medical marijuana facility's related cooperative or collective is not properly organized in strict compliance pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996, the Medical Marijuana Program Act, the 2008 Attorney General Guidelines, Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act (AB 243, AB 266, and SB 643), and any other applicable law, rules and regulations. 
23.  Conformance with State Law. No CMOP permit shall be issued unless the cultivation of commercial and/or medical marijuana is legal under the laws of the State of California and the permit holder is in compliance with such laws. 
(Ord. No. O-11-17, § 4(Exh. C), 12-5-2017)  
18.48.140 - Alcoholic Beverage Sales. 
Sales of Alcoholic Beverages Shall be Permitted by Conditional Use Permit, subject to the Following conditions: 
A.  Alcoholic Beverage Sales Shall not be Permitted within five hundred feet of any Religious or Educational Institution, Day care center or public Park. This distance Shall be measured from the main entrance of the Business conducting alcohol beverage Sales and the closest public entrance to the Religious or Educational Institution, Day care center or public Park. 
B.  The separation requirement in subsection A Shall not apply when the Business conducting alcohol beverage Sales and the Church, School or Park both are located within a Commercial or Industrial Zone or land Use classification. 
(Ord. No. O-08-09, § 11, 1-19-2010)  
18.48.150 - Accessory Dwelling Units. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable regulations for the development of accessory dwelling units (aka "second dwelling units") in certain areas and on lots developed or proposed to be developed with single-family residential dwellings. Such accessory dwelling units contribute needed housing to the community's housing stock and promote housing opportunities for the persons wishing to reside in the city of Colton. In addition, the regulations in this ordinance are intended to promote the goals and policies of the city's general plan and comply with requirements codified in the state planning and zoning law related to accessory dwelling in residential areas, including California Government Code Section 65852.2. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  "Accessory dwelling unit" means a residential dwelling unit that is detached from, attached to, or located within the living area of an existing primary dwelling unit, and that provides independent living facilities for one or more persons. An accessory dwelling unit also includes an efficiency unit, as defined in California Health and Safety Code section 17958.1, and a manufactured home, as defined in section 18007. 
2.  "Living area" is defined as the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit, including basements and attics, but not including a garage or any accessory structure. 
3.  "Public transit" means a fixed-route bus line or rail line with passenger stops located no more than one-half-mile from accessory/second unit. 
4.  "Architecturally and historically significant district" means any of the City's six historic districts 
C.  Effect of Conforming Accessory/Second Dwelling Unit. An accessory or second dwelling unit that conforms to this chapter shall: 
1.  Be deemed an accessory use or an accessory building and not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located; 
2.  Be deemed a residential use that is consistent with the general plan and the zoning designations for the lot; 
3.  Not be considered in the application of any ordinance, policy, or program to limit residential growth; and 
4.  Not be considered a new residential use for the purposes of calculating connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, including water and sewer service. 
D.  Locations Permitted. 
1.  Except as provided in subparagraph (2), accessory/second dwelling units may be permitted in the following zones: V-L, R-1, R-2, R-3/4, M-U/D, and M-U/N. 
2.  Accessory/second dwelling units that meet the requirements of Section F.2. may be located in any single-family residential zone (V-L, R-1, R-2). 
E.  Permit Procedures. 
1.  Permits. 
i.  Except as provided in subparagraph (2), approved applications for an accessory/second dwelling unit will result in an accessory dwelling unit permit. The applicant shall also obtain a building permit as required by the building code and record a deed restriction as provided in Section G. 
ii.  Exception. Accessory/second dwelling units that meet the requirements of Section F.2. shall obtain a building permit as required by the building code and record a deed restriction as provided in Section G. 
2.  Application Processing. 
i.  Applications for an accessory dwelling unit permit must be submitted to the Development Services Director on a form and with information and materials, as adopted by the Director. 
The Director may collect a fee for processing the application, provided such fee is approved by resolution or ordinance of the City Council. 
3.  Review. 
i.  The Director will review and approve complete applications for an accessory dwelling unit permit that comply with the requirements of Sections F (Development Standards) and G (Deed Restrictions). For example, and without limiting the previous sentence, the Director may deny the application if, where onsite parking is required, the size, configuration or existing site improvements will not accommodate the required onsite parking. The accessory dwelling unit permit application shall be considered ministerially without any discretionary review or a hearing. 
ii.  The Director will approve or disapprove of an application for an accessory dwelling unit permit within one hundred twenty days after receiving the complete application. 
iii.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the construction of an accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to any applicable fees adopted pursuant to the requirements of California Government Code, Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 66000) and Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 66012). 
F.  Development Standards. 
1.  Except as provided in subparagraph (2), accessory dwelling units must meet the following standards: 
i.  Development on the Lot. 
1.  A detached single-family dwelling must exist on the lot or will be constructed in conjunction with the accessory dwelling unit. 
2.  The accessory dwelling unit must be: 
a.  Detached from the existing primary dwelling, but located on the same lot as the existing dwelling; 
b.  Attached to the existing dwelling; or 
c.  Located within the living area of the existing dwelling. 
3.  Only one accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed per lot. 
4.  The accessory dwelling unit is not intended for sale separate from the primary residence. 
ii.  Occupancy. 
1.  The property owner must occupy either the primary dwelling or accessory dwelling unit. 
2.  The accessory dwelling unit may be rented. 
iii.  Building and Construction. 
1.  An accessory dwelling unit shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
2.  An accessory dwelling unit is required to have fire sprinklers, only if the primary residence is also required to have fire sprinklers. 
3.  An accessory dwelling unit must receive the approval by the County Department of Public Health/Division of Environmental Health Services where an existing private sewage disposal system is being used. 
4.  An accessory unit shall meet the requirements of the building code, as adopted and amended by Chapter 15 of the Municipal Code, that apply to detached dwellings, as appropriate. 
5.  Separate water and sewer connections shall be installed directly between any detached accessory dwelling unit and the utility. The connection shall be subject to a connection fee or capacity charge, or both, proportionate to the burden of the proposed unit, based on either its size or the number of its plumbing fixtures, upon the water or sewer system. 
6.  No passageway shall be required in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit. "Passageway" is defined as a pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from to street to one entrance of the accessory dwelling unit. 
iv.  Parking. 
1.  Except as provided in subparagraph (2): 
a.  Accessory dwelling units must meet the following parking standards: 
i.  For accessory dwelling units with no separate bedrooms, one off-street parking space shall be provided per unit. 
ii.  For accessory dwelling units with at least one separate bedroom, one off-street parking space shall be provided per bedroom. 
b.  If parking is required: 
i.  The required parking spaces may be located on setback areas approved by the Director or tandem parking on an existing driveway, unless specific findings are made under subparagraph (ii). 
ii.  Parking arrangements in subparagraph (i) may be prohibited if the Director makes specific findings that such parking arrangements are not feasible based upon specific site or regional topographical or fire or life safety conditions, or that such arrangements are not permitted anywhere in the jurisdiction. 
iii.  When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit, the replacement spaces may be located in any configuration on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, as covered spaces, uncovered spaces, tandem spaces, or by the use of mechanical automobile parking lifts. 
2.  Parking standards shall not be imposed on an accessory dwelling unit in any of the following circumstances: 
a.  The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile of public transit, as defined in Section B (Definitions). 
b.  The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district, as defined in Section B (Definitions). 
c.  The accessory dwelling unit is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure. 
d.  When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit. 
e.  When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit. 
v.  Height. The accessory dwelling unit must meet the height standards of the applicable zoning district. 
vi.  Setbacks. 
1.  Except as provided in subparagraphs (2) and (3), an accessory dwelling unit must meet the setback standards of the applicable zoning district. 
2.  No setback shall be required for a legally established existing garage that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit. 
3.  A minimum setback of five feet shall be required from the side and rear lot lines for an accessory dwelling unit constructed above a legally established existing garage. 
vii.  Unit Size. 
1.  The increased floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed fifty percent of the existing living area, with a maximum increase in floor area of one thousand two hundred square feet. 
2.  The total area of floorspace for a detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed one thousand two hundred square feet. 
3.  The accessory dwelling unit shall contain no less than the one hundred fifty square feet area minimum required for an efficiency dwelling unit as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health & Safety Code. 
viii.  Lot Coverage. The accessory dwelling unit must meet the lot coverage standards of the applicable zoning district. 
ix.  Landscape. The accessory dwelling unit must meet the landscaping standards of the applicable zoning district. 
x.  Architecture Review—Historic Districts and Historic Landmarks. The design of the accessory dwelling unit shall relate to the design of the primary residence by use of the similar exterior wall materials, window types, door and window trims, roofing materials and roof pitch. If the site is a designated Historic Landmark or located within a designated Historic District, and visible from the exterior of the primary residence, the accessory dwelling unit shall be reviewed for historic appropriateness by the Preservation Officer in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring, and Reconstructing Historic Buildings (per CFR 68.3, as amended from time to time), or other standards as may be adopted by City Council resolution. 
xi.  Other Development Standards. The accessory dwelling unit shall be developed to conform to all standards (i.e., lot coverage, height, setbacks, etc.) applicable by the base zoning in which the unit is located, except as modified by this section. 
2.  An accessory dwelling unit is exempt from the requirements of subparagraph (1) if the unit meets all the requirements of subparagraph (2)(i): 
i.  The accessory dwelling unit: 
1.  Is one accessory dwelling unit per single-family lot located within a single-family residential zone (V-L, R-1, R-2); 
2.  Is contained within the existing space of a single-family residence or accessory structure; 
3.  Has independent exterior access from the existing residence; and 
4.  The side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety. 
ii.  If subparagraphs requirements of subparagraph (2)(i) are met, then the applicant: 
1.  Is required to install fire sprinklers in the accessory dwelling unit if the primary residence is also required to have fire sprinklers; 
2.  Is not required to install a new or separate water and sewer utility connection directly between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility, or to be charged a related connection fee or capacity charge. 
3.  Shall record a deed restriction as provided in Section G and obtain a building permit as required by the building code as adopted and amended by Chapter 15 of the Municipal Code. 
G.  Deed Restriction. 
1.  Prior to issuance of a building permit for an accessory dwelling unit, a deed restriction shall be recorded against the title of the property in the County Recorder's office and a copy filed with the City Development Services Department. Said deed restriction shall run with the land, and shall bind all future owners, heirs, successors, or assigns. The form of the deed restriction shall be provided by the City and shall provide that: 
i.  The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately from the primary residence. 
ii.  The unit is restricted to the approved size and attributes of this section. 
iii.  The deed restrictions run with the land and may be enforced against future purchasers. 
iv.  The deed restrictions may be removed if the owner eliminates the accessory dwelling unit as evidenced by the removal of kitchen facilities. 
v.  The deed restrictions shall be enforced by the Development Services Director or his or her designee for the benefit of the City of Colton. Failure of the property owner to comply with the deed restrictions may result in legal action against the property owner and the City shall be authorized obtain any remedy available to it at law or equity, including but not limited to obtaining an injunction enjoining use of the accessory dwelling unit in violation of the recorded restrictions or abatement of the illegal unit. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(23)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-03-15, § 15, 3-3-2015; Ord. No. O-04-17, § 2, 7-18-2017)  
18.48.160 - Emergency Shelters. 
Emergency Shelters shall be subject to the following provisions. 
1.  Maximum Beds. The maximum number of beds/persons is twenty-five; 
2.  Parking. Parking shall meet the requirements of Chapter 18.36 of this Code; 
3.  Waiting/Intake Area. The shelter may have a waiting and intake area no larger than one hundred square feet combined; 
4.  Distance Requirements. The distance between emergency shelters shall be a minimum of three hundred feet; 
5.  Management Plan. A written management plan including provisions for the following: 
a.  Color, security surveillance system with recording capability; 
b.  On-site manager and security guard(s); 
c.  Adequate external lighting shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and meet the requirements of Section 15.10 of this Code; 
d.  Staff training; 
e.  Neighborhood outreach; 
f.  Screening of residents to ensure compatibility with services provided at the facility; 
g.  Training, counseling, and treatment outreach programs for residents. 
6.  Length of Stay. Length of stay shall not exceed six months within any twelve-month period for any individual resident. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(24)), 10-10-2013; Ord. No. O-06-14, § 5, 5-22-2014)  
18.48.170 - Density Bonus. 
A.  Purpose: The purpose of this Chapter is to provide incentives for the production of housing for very low-income, lower-income, moderate-income, special needs, and senior households in the City of Colton and to establish procedures for carrying out the legislative requirements and complying with California Government Code § 65915, et seq. In enacting this Chapter, it is the intent of the City to facilitate the development of affordable housing by positively impacting the economic feasibility of providing lower-income housing and implementing the goals, objectives, and policies of the City's Housing Element. 
B.  Applicability: This Chapter shall apply to all zoning districts, including mixed use zoning districts, where residential developments of five or more dwelling units are proposed and where the applicant seeks and agrees to provide low, very low, senior or moderate income housing units in the threshold amounts specified in state density bonus law such that the resulting density is beyond that which is permitted by the applicable zoning. This chapter and state density bonus law shall apply only to the residential component of a mixed use project and shall not operate to increase the allowable density of the nonresidential component of any proposed project. 
C.  Eligibility: The City shall grant one density bonus, with concessions or incentives, as specified in Section 18.59.040 (Density Bonuses and Incentives and Concessions Allowed), when the applicant for the residential development seeks and agrees to construct a residential development that satisfies the eligibility requirements pursuant to California Government Code §65915, et seq. 
D.  General Requirements: The following general requirements apply to the application and determination of all incentives and bonuses: 
1.  Rounding. All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
2.  Relation to General Plan, Zoning. The granting of a density bonus, or a concession or incentive, shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a General Plan Amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. 
3.  Density Bonus Excluded in Calculation. The density bonus shall not be included when calculating the total number of housing units that qualifies the housing development for a density bonus. 
4.  Waived or Reduced Development Standards. The City shall not apply any development standard that would have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a housing development meeting the requirements of Section 18.59.020 (Eligibility) at the densities or with the incentives or concessions permitted by this Chapter. 
a.  An applicant may submit to the City a proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards, when standards would have the effect of physically precluding the proposed development, and may request a meeting with the City. Nothing in this subsection, however, shall be interpreted to require the City to waive or reduce development standards if: 
i.  The waiver or reduction would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of California Government Code § 65589.5 upon health and safety or the physical environment and for which the City determines there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact. 
ii.  This would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources or City of Colton's list of historic landmark properties. 
iii.  The waiver or reduction would be contrary to state or federal law. 
5.  Multiple Zoning Districts. If the site of a development proposal is located in two or more zoning districts, the number of dwelling units permitted in the development is the sum of the dwelling units permitted in each of the zoning districts based on the site acreage within each zoning district. The permitted number of dwelling units may be distributed within the development without regard to the zone boundaries. 
6.  Land Donation. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the authority of the City to require a developer to donate land as a condition of development. 
7.  Affordability Agreement or Covenant Required. 
a.  Prior to the award of a density bonus and any related incentives or concessions, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with the City to ensure the continued affordability of all target units. 
b.  For all target units, the agreement shall specify the household income classification, number, location, size, and construction scheduling and shall require target units in a project and phases of a project to be constructed concurrently with the construction of non-target units. The agreement shall include such other provisions as necessary to establish compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
8.  Reports. The applicant shall submit financial or other reports along with the application for the project to establish compliance with this Chapter. 
E.  Density Bonuses and Incentives and Concessions Allowed: 
1.  Density Bonus. A housing development that satisfies the eligibility requirements shall be entitled to density bonus pursuant to California Government Code § 65915, et seq. 
2.  Number of Incentives or Concessions. In addition to the density bonus described in this Section, an applicant may request specific incentives or concessions. The applicant shall receive the number of incentives or concessions pursuant to California Government Code § 65915, et seq. The City shall grant the concession or incentive requested by the applicant unless it makes a written finding of either of the following: 
a.  The concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 50052.5, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in subdivision (c). 
b.  The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of California Government Code § 65589.5, upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and/or City designated historic landmark, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households. 
c.  The concession or incentive would be contrary to state or federal law. 
3.  Available Incentives and Concessions. 
a.  A reduction in the site development standards or a modification of this Title's requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with § 18901) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, including but not limited to a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in the ratio of vehicle parking spaces that would otherwise be required and that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. 
b.  Approval of Mixed-Use zoning in conjunction with the housing development if the nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and the nonresidential land uses are compatible with the housing development and existing or planned development in the area in which the housing development will be located. 
c.  Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the City that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. 
d.  Priority processing of a housing development that qualifies for a density bonus based on income-restricted units. 
4.  Additional Density Bonus and Incentives and Concessions for Donation of Land to the City. 
a.  The provisions of pursuant to California Government Code § 65915, et seq. shall govern. 
b.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the authority of the City to require a developer to donate land as a condition of development. 
5.  Additional Density Bonus or Incentives and Concessions for Development of Child-Care Facility. 
a.  Housing developments meeting the requirements of Section 18.59.020 (Eligibility) and including a child-care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the housing development shall receive additional density bonus of incentives pursuant to pursuant to California Government Code § 65915, et seq. 
b.  Notwithstanding any other requirements of this Section, the City shall not be required to provide a density bonus or incentive or concession for a child-care facility if it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child-care facilities. 
F.  Condominium Conversion Incentives for Low-Income Housing Development. 
1.  An applicant for approval to convert apartments to a condominium project may submit to the City a preliminary proposal pursuant to this subsection prior to the submittal of any formal requests for subdivision map approvals. The City shall, within ninety days of receipt of a written proposal, notify the applicant in writing of the manner in which it will comply with this subsection. 
2.  The City shall grant one density bonus, with concessions or incentives, as specified in Section 18.59.040 (Density Bonuses and Incentives and Concessions Allowed), when the applicant for the residential development seeks and agrees to construct a residential development, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus awarded pursuant to this Chapter, that satisfies the eligibility requirements pursuant to California Government Code § 65915.5, et seq. 
3.  For purposes of this subsection, "other incentives of equivalent financial value" shall not be construed to require the City to provide cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation but may include the reduction or waiver of requirements which the City might otherwise apply as conditions of conversion approval. 
4.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require the City to approve a proposal to convert apartments to condominiums. 
5.  An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentives under this subsection if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other incentive was previously provided. 
G.  Location of Density Bonus Units: The location of density bonus units within the housing development may be at the discretion of the developer. However, the target units shall be dispersed throughout the housing development and when feasible shall contain, on average, the same number of bedrooms as the non-target units in the development, and shall be compatible with the design or use of the remaining units in terms of appearance, materials, and quality finish. 
H.  Continued Availability: 
1.  If a housing development provides lower- or very low-income target units to qualify for a density bonus, the target units must remain restricted to lower- or very low-income households for the minimum period required by California Government Code § 65915, et seq. 
2.  In the case of a common interest housing development providing moderate-income target units to qualify for a density bonus, the initial occupant of the target unit must be a person or family of moderate income. Upon resale, the seller shall ensure that the target unit is sold for not more than affordable housing costs, as prescribed in State law and any applicable affordability agreement/covenant recorded against the target unit. 
3.  Where there is a direct financial contribution to a housing development pursuant to Government Code § 65916, the City shall assure continued availability for the minimum period required by California Government Code § 65916. 
I.  Process for Approval or Denial: 
1.  Process for Approval. The density bonus and incentive(s) and concession(s) request shall be considered in conjunction with any necessary development entitlements for the project. The designated approving authority for density bonuses, incentives, and concessions shall be the Planning Commission. In approving the density bonus and any related incentives or concessions, the City and the applicant shall enter into a density bonus agreement. 
2.  Approval of Density Bonus Required. The City shall grant the density bonus requested by the applicant provided it is consistent with the requirements of this Chapter and State law. 
3.  Approval of Incentives or Concessions Required Unless Findings Made. The City shall grant the incentive(s) and concession(s) requested by the applicant unless the City makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of any of the following: 
a.  The incentive or concession is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs or affordable rent for the target units. 
b.  The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of California Government Code § 65589.5, upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and/or City designated historic landmark, and for which the City determines there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households. 
c.  The concession or incentive would be contrary to state or federal law. 
J.  Fees: Payment of the planning fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council to reimburse the City for staff time spent reviewing and processing the state density bonus law application submitted pursuant to this Title. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, § 2(Exh. A(23)), 10-10-2013)  
18.48.180 - Reasonable Accommodations. 
A.  Purpose. It is the policy of the City of Colton to comply with the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act to provide reasonable accommodation in the application of its zoning or building laws, policies or procedures for persons with disabilities seeking fair access to housing. The purpose of this section is to establish the process for making a request for reasonable accommodation. For purposes of this section, the term "disabled" or "disability" shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act. 
B.  Application. 
1.  Any person who requests reasonable accommodation, because of a disability, in the application of a zoning or building law, policy or procedure, which may act as a barrier to fair housing opportunities, may do so by filing a completed application with the Director of Development Services ("Director"). The Director shall promulgate application forms for this purpose. 
2.  If the project for which the request is being made also requires some other approval, permit or entitlement, the applicant shall file the request together with the application for such approval, permit or entitlement. 
C.  Required information. The applicant shall provide the following information: 
1.  Applicant's name, address, and telephone number; 
2.  Address of the property for which the request is being made; 
3.  The current actual use of the property; 
4.  A description of the accommodation requested including reference to the Code provision, policy or procedure from which modification is being requested; 
5.  The basis for the claim that the applicant is considered disabled under the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 or the California Fair Employment Housing Act; and 
6.  A detailed explanation of why the accommodation is reasonable and why the accommodation is necessary to afford the applicant an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a specific dwelling in the City. 
D.  Notice of request for accommodation. Written notice of a request for reasonable accommodation shall be given as follows: 
1.  In the event that there is no approval sought other than the request for reasonable accommodation, the notice shall be mailed to the owners of record of all properties which are immediately adjacent to the property which is the subject of the request. 
2.  In the event that the request is being made in conjunction with some other approval, permit or entitlement, the notice shall be transmitted along with the notice of the other proceeding. 
E.  Procedure. 
1.  The Director shall review each application for reasonable accommodation and, within five days of receipt thereof, determine whether the application is complete. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the Director shall promptly give the applicant written notice of the additional information necessary to complete the application. 
2.  Within thirty days of receipt of an application that has been determined to be complete, the Director shall complete a review of the application and, pursuant to the standards provided in this section, either approve, approve subject to conditions or deny the request. However, in the event that the applicant also seeks an approval, permit or other entitlement that is reviewed by the planning commission, then the planning commission shall review the application for reasonable accommodation. 
3.  The Director shall give the applicant written notice of the Director's decision. Notice of the Director's decision shall also be given in the same manner as provided in Section 4. above. 
4.  Within ten days of the date the notice is mailed, any person may appeal the Director's decision in the manner provided in Sections 18.58.030(F)(2) and 18.58.030(F)(3) of this Code. 
5.  If no appeal is received within ten days, the decision shall become final. 
F.  Grounds for accommodation. In making a determination about the reasonableness of a requested accommodation, the following factors shall be considered: 
1.  Whether the accommodation is reasonable considering the nature of the applicant's disability, the surrounding land uses, and the rule, standard, policy, or practice from which relief is sought; 
2.  Whether the accommodation is necessary to afford the applicant equal opportunity to enjoy and use a specific dwelling in the City; 
3.  Whether the accommodation will have only incidental economic or monetary benefits to the applicant, and whether the primary purpose of the accommodation is to assist with real estate speculation or excess profit taking; 
4.  Whether the accommodation will create a substantial adverse impact on surrounding land uses, or a public nuisance, that cannot be reasonably mitigated; 
5.  Whether the accommodation is reasonably feasible considering the physical attributes of the property and structures; 
6.  Whether there are alternative accommodations which may provide an equivalent level of benefit to the applicant, while minimizing adverse impacts on surrounding land uses and lessening the financial and/or administrative burden on the City; 
7.  Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City; and 
8.  Whether the requested accommodation would constitute a fundamental alteration of the zoning or building laws, policies or procedures of the City. 
G.  Expiration of grants of reasonable accommodation. Any modification granted for an individual with a disability shall be a personal accommodation for the individual applicant and shall not run with the land, unless the Director determines that it would be impractical to require the property to be returned to its previous condition once the disabled person no longer occupies the property. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or any other applicable permit for such modification, the permittee shall execute a notarized statement that permits the City to inspect the affected property at least annually to verify compliance with this section and with any applicable conditions of approval. Prior to any transfer of interest in the property, the permittee shall notify the transferee of the existence of the accommodation, the personal status of the accommodation and the requirements that the tranferee must apply for a new accommodation as necessary. Except as otherwise provided by the Director, as set forth herein, once such transfer takes effect the accommodation shall have no further validity. 
Fee. 
Fees pursuant to adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. O-06-14, §§ 6, 7, 5-22-2014)  
18.48.190 - Single Family Compact Lots Subdivision.[5] 
A.  Intent and Purpose. 
1.  Provide a subdivision option for infill neighborhoods to create a high quality indoor and outdoor living environment for all residents. 
2.  Provide fee-simple home ownership opportunities for a greater number of people, at a wide range of income levels. 
3.  Design and configure housing to be compatible with existing neighborhoods context, especially sensitive areas such as downtown, and historical districts. 
B.  Architectural and Site Plan Review. All proposed compact lot subdivision projects site plan and tentative subdivision maps are permitted through an Architectural and Site Plan Review with approval by the Planning Commission. 
C.  Permitted Zones. Compact lots project is permitted in the R-2, R-3/R4, M-U/D and M-U/N zones. 
D.  Development Standards. 
Development Standard 	Requirement 
Minimum project lot size 	0.5 Acres or 22,000 square foot lot 
Density Permitted 	Underlying Zone 
Minimum Compact lot size 	1950 square feet 
Minimum lot width 	30 feet 
Minimum lot depth 	60 feet 
Private or public rear alley/driveway access 	Required—20 feet (rear access only—front loaded parking from the street is not permitted) 
Maximum Block Width 	300 feet 
Parking 	2 car-enclosed garage (20'x20' clear interior dimension)/Carport may be considered upon Architectural and Site Plan Review. 
Front Setback 	14 feet 1 3 
Side Setback 	5 feet 2 
Street Side Setback 	8 feet 
Rear Setback 	3 feet 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	75% 
Maximum Building Height 	Underlying Zone 
 
1. Covered Porch May encroach into the required setback by 4 feet. 
2. Side setbacks May be reduced to zero feet (on one side) provided setbacks between properties total to eight feet or six feet between side by side lots with minimum eight feet on opposite sides. 
3. Front yard setback May be reduced to ten feet when fronting a minimum twenty-feet landscaped buffer/greenbelt. 
E.  Guest Parking Spaces. Lots with no street frontage require one open guest space for every two dwelling units. Minimum dimension of ten feet in width and eighteen feet in depth. 
Open Space/Green Belts Design. Each project will have its design challenges related to the site configuration and surrounding infill environment. The subdivision design will be reviewed on a case by case bases for inclusion of green belts and active and passive open space designs. The different types of green belts and open space May include but are not limited to three or more of the following design open space/green belt types: 
Green Belt Front Door Access Ways 
 
Small Parks and enhanced sidewalks 
 
F.  Architecture Styles of Compact Homes. 
1.  The City of Colton's heritage is rich with a variety of early American architecture styles. While it is the City of Colton's objective is to "Encourage the assemblage of Compact lots to create more cohesive development sites" (General Plan Land Use Policy LU-1.5), new homes should reflect an architectural style that is presently part of the City's historical resources inventory (this is not an exhaustive list, but meant to be a guideline to follow): 
Bungalow 	Beaux Arts 
Craftsman 	Colonial Revival 
Prairie box 	Neoclassical 
New England Saltbox 	Queen Anne 
Spanish Colonial 	Spanish Revival 
Tudor 	
 
2.  Interior Lot or Project Perimeter Fencing: Preferred materials include decorative concrete block wall or vinyl fencing. If wood is going to be used as fence material or on the exterior of buildings, the Home Owners Association (HOA) Shall include a maintenance program to address regular maintenance schedule on all fences or exterior wood materials used for the development project. Wood fencing is not permitted material for project perimeter fencing. 
G.  Compact Lot Infill Subdivision Design Options. 
1.  Builders and designers should consider all possible subdivision configurations that take advantage of the site topography in providing sufficient open space/green belts, and consider how characteristics of the street and adjacent structures affect the overall form and orientation of the proposed development. When designing your compact lot subdivision, the following design criteria should be considered: 
a)  Configure or design homes to front public streets, primary entryway, circulation walkways, and open spaces, rather than driveways. 
b)  For homes not adjacent to the public street, provide pedestrian circulation in the form of private walkways or clearly delineated paths of travel from the sidewalk to their entryway. 
c)  Maximize green space while minimizing the total amount of driveway space. 
d)  Take advantage of existing topography and natural features to maintain appropriate grade levels consistent with surrounding structures. 
e)  Homes fronting a public street should have the primary entrance and main windows facing the street. 
f)  Pedestrian environment along the edge of the development should feature pleasant landscaping and trees. 
g)  Enhanced paving should mark the pedestrian and vehicular entries of complexes to provide a sense of arrival. 
h)  Design floor plan layouts in relation to lot shape, width, and depth to maximize usable outdoor spaces including space to store trash collection containers. 
i)  Provide space for entry, front landing, and transitional landscaping (lush, drought resistant landscaping) between the public sidewalk and private entryway. 
j)  Provide direct paths of travel for pedestrian destinations within the development. 
k)  Vary building placement to increase variation in facades and more articulated building edges. 
l)  While the homes are designed to be placed to provide adequate access to the garages for cars and with adequate side yards, the interior spaces are arranged so that windows and balconies do not directly face each other. This creates a better sense of privacy for homes that are closely spaced. 
2.  Compact Lot Infill Subdivision Design Options. 
Where rear driveways are used 
 
Where rear T-driveways are used 
 
Where alternative T-driveway are used to separate rear units from the street and sidewalk 
 
3.  Compact Lot Infill Subdivision Design Options (Continued). 
Where L-driveways are used 
 
Where alternative L-driveways are used 
 
Where side access driveways are used 
 
H.  Maintenance of Compact Lots Subdivision. 
1.  A Homeowners Association with a Maintenance Agreement as part of the Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs) Shall be required, composed of all property owners, to maintain all common areas such as trees, landscaping, trash, parking, community driveway, walkways, monthly service for private fire hydrant (if required), etc. Each owner and future property owners Shall automatically become members of the association and Shall be subject to a proportionate share of the maintenance. 
2.  Each property owner Shall be responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of two car parking garage in compact lot subdivision. Garages must be usable and available for the parking of vehicles at all times and such language must be included in recorded Covenant and Agreement(s) related to maintenance and reciprocal private easements pertaining to said projects. 
3.  Recorded Covenant and Agreement(s) will be required for all reciprocal private easements. 
(Ord. No. O-03-15, § 15, 3-3-2015) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-03-15, § 15, adopted Mar. 3, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as § 18.48.180. In as much as there were already provisions so designated, Ord. No. O-03-15, § 15, has been codified herein as § 18.48.190 at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Chapter 18.49 - ADULT USE REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, adopted Feb. 16, 2016, amended Ch. 18.49 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 18.49, §§ 18.49.010—18.49.160, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 0-2-97, § 3(part), adopted in 1997. 
 
18.49.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide special design guidelines/standards and development regulations which regulate the time, place and manner of the operation of adult use facilities in order to minimize the negative secondary effects associated with such facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.020 - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions contained in the Municipal Code, the following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be defined as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended. Should any of the definitions be in conflict with the current provisions of the Municipal Code, these definitions shall prevail: 
"Adult Arcade" means any business establishment or concern to which the public is permitted or invited and where coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled amusement devices, still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images on a regular or substantial basis, where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
"Adult Bookstore" means any business establishment or concern having as a regular and substantial portion of its stock in trade, "Material" (as defined below) which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
"Adult Business" or "Adult Use" means: 
1.  Any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct operates as an Adult Bookstore, Adult Theater, Adult Arcade, Adult Cabaret, Adult Figure Modeling Studio, Adult Motel or Hotel; or 
2.  Any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers, sells or distributes Adult Oriented Merchandise or sexually oriented merchandise, or which offers to its patrons materials, products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Parts," but not including those uses or activities which are preempted by state law. 
"Adult Cabaret" or "Adult Nightclub" means a business establishment or concern (whether or not serving Alcoholic Beverages) which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, and where such performances are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
"Adult Dance Studio" means any business establishment or concern which provides for members of the public a partner for dance where the partner, or the dance, is distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, or describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
"Adult Oriented Merchandise" (or sexually oriented merchandise) means sexually oriented implements, paraphernalia or novelty items, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity or distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
"Adult Theater" means a theater or other commercial establishment with or without a stage or proscenium which is used for presenting, on a regular and substantial basis, "Material" which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, or describing, or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
"Arcade Booth" means any enclosed or partially enclosed portion of an establishment in which an Adult Arcade is located, or where a live performance is presented, on a regular or substantial basis, where the material presented is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, or describing, or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
"M-1 Light Industrial Zone" means any property within the City which is zoned M-1 Light Industrial Zone on the City's Official Zoning Map adopted by Ordinance No. 0-14-92, effective August 21, 1992, as may be amended from time to time. 
"M-2 Heavy Industrial Zone" means any Property within the City which is zoned M-2 Heavy Industrial Zone on the City's Official Zoning Map adopted by Ordinance No. 0-14-92, effective August 21, 1992, as may be amended from time to time. 
"Material" relative to Adult Businesses, means and includes, but is not limited to, accessories, books, magazines, photographs, prints, drawings, paintings, motion pictures, pamphlets, videos, slides, tapes or electronically generated images or devices including computer software, or any combination thereof. 
"Park" means any property within the City which is zoned "Public Park" on the City's Official Zoning Map adopted by Ordinance No. 0-14-92, effective August 21, 1992, as may be amended from time to time. 
"Performer" means any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the Adult Business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an Adult Business. 
"Religious Institution" means a facility used primarily for religious assembly or worship and related religious activities. 
"Residential Zone" means any property within the City which is zoned "Residential," including R-E (Residential Estate Zone), R-1 (Low Density Residential Zone), R-2 (Medium Density Residential Zone) and R-3 (High Density Residential Zone) as set forth on the City Zoning Map, adopted by Ordinance No. 0-14-92 on August 21, 1992 and fully incorporated by this reference, and as may be amended from time to time. "Residential Zone" also includes residential zones contained within Specific Plan areas and the Planned Community Development Overlay Zone as set forth on the City Zoning Map. 
"School" means any institution of learning for minors whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education and has an approved use permit, if required, under the applicable jurisdiction. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school. The definition of School does not include a community or junior college, college or university, or a vocational institution. 
"Specified Anatomical Areas" means: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region, 
b.  Buttock, or 
c.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
2.  Any device or covering, when exposed to view, which simulates the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, human genitals, pubic region or buttock; or 
3.  Human or simulated male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
"Specified Sexual Activities" means: 
1.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; and/or 
2.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation or arousal; and/or 
3.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; and/or 
4.  Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; and/or 
5.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; and/or 
6.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.030 - Locational Limitations. 
A.  Subject to the limitations of this chapter, Adult Businesses or Adult Use may be located in the M-2 (Heavy Industrial Zone) or M-1 (Light Industrial Zone) of the City, subject to the following: 
1.  Within a one thousand-foot radius of a Residential Zone. The distance between a proposed use and a Residential Zone shall be measured from the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the Adult Business or proposed Adult Use to the nearest property line included within the Residential Zone, measured along a straight line extended between the two points. 
2.  Within a one thousand-foot radius of a school or park. The distance between the proposed Adult Business or Adult Use and a school or park shall be measured from the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the Adult Business or Adult Use to the nearest property line of the school or park site, along a straight line extended between the two points. 
3.  Within a one thousand-foot radius of a religious institution. The distance between the Adult Business or proposed Adult Use and a religious institution shall be measured from the nearest exterior wall housing the Adult Business or proposed Adult Use along a straight line extended to the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the religious institution. 
4.  For properties located in the M-1 (Light Industrial Zone), it is unlawful to establish any adult business, except as specified in the following locations: 
Location 1: Properties south of 1-10 Freeway and west of intersection of Hunts Lane and Steel Road, eastern boundary is to include 2200 East Steel Road (APN: 0164-27-106) to western boundary to include 2131 East Steel Road (APN: 0164-311-29), southern boundary is north of 2150 Oliver Holmes Road (APN: 0164-311-02) and southeastern boundary is west of 551 South Hunts Lane (APN: 0164-27-103). 
Location 2: Properties west of 215 Freeway, from 2185 (APN: 1167-131-14) to 2283 La Crosse Avenue (APN: 1167-131-09) east of the Southern Pacific Railroad property (APN: 1167-131-11). 
B.  The Establishment of any Adult Business or Adult Use shall include the opening of such a business as a new business, the relocation of the business, or the conversion of an existing business, or an increase of more than fifty percent of the square footage of an existing business, or of an existing Adult Business or Adult Use to a different type of Adult Business or Adult Use. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.040 - Development and Operating Standards. 
A.  Hours of Operation. It is unlawful for any operator or employee of an Adult Business to allow such Adult Business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service, between the hours of twelve a.m. and eight a.m. of any day. 
B.  Lighting Requirements. All exterior areas of the Adult Business shall be illuminated at a minimum of one footcandle throughout the premises, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level. 
C.  Access Provision. The operator shall not permit any doors on the premises to be locked during business hours and, in addition, the operator shall be responsible to see that any room or area on the premises shall be readily accessible at all times and shall be open to view in its entirety for inspection by any Law Enforcement Officer. 
D.  Minors' Access. 
1.  X-Rated Movies. X-rated movies or video tapes shall be restricted to persons over eighteen years of age. If an establishment that is not otherwise prohibited from providing access to persons under eighteen years of age sells, rents or displays videos that have been rated "X" or rated "NC-17" by the Motion Picture Rating Industry (MPAA), or which have not been submitted to the MPAA for a rating, and which consist of images which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas," such videos shall be located in a specific section of the establishment where persons under the age of eighteen shall be prohibited and shall not be visible from outside the premises. 
2.  Other Adult Materials. Access to adult materials shall be restricted to persons over eighteen years of age. 
E.  Regulation of Closed Booths. No one shall maintain any Arcade Booth or individual viewing area unless the entire interior of such premises wherein the picture or entertainment that is viewed is visible upon entering into such premises; and further, that the entire body of any viewing person is also visible immediately upon entrance to the premises without the assistance of mirrors or other viewing aids. No partially or fully enclosed booths/individual viewing area or partially or fully concealed booths/individual viewing area shall be maintained. No Arcade Booth shall be occupied by more than one patron at a time. No holes shall be permitted between Arcade Booths or individual viewing area. 
F.  Regulation of Viewing Areas. All viewing areas within the Adult Business shall be visible from a continuous and accessible main aisle in a public portion of the establishment, and not obscured in any manner by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror or other device which would prohibit a person from seeing into the viewing area from the main aisle. A manager shall be stationed in the main aisle or video monitoring shall be established at a location from which the inside of all of the viewing areas are visible at all times in order to enforce all rules and regulations. All viewing areas shall be designed or operated to permit occupancy of either one person only, or more than ten persons. "Viewing area" means any area in which a person views performances, pictures, movies, videos or other presentations. 
G.  Business License. A person shall not own, operate, manage, conduct or maintain an Adult Business without first having obtained a Business License from the Development Services Director pursuant to Chapter 5.02 of the Colton Municipal Code. The issuance or denial of the Business License shall be made within fifteen days of the applicant's submitted application. 
H.  On-Site Manager—Security Measures. All Adult Businesses shall have a person who shall be at least eighteen years of age and shall be on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. Any and all individual(s) designated as the on-site manager shall be registered with the City's Development Services Director by the owner to receive all complaints and be responsible for all violations taking place on the premises. 
The Adult Business shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas, or in the alternative, uniformed security guards to patrol and monitor the parking lot areas during all business hours. A sign indicating compliance with this provision shall be posted on the premises. The sign shall not exceed two by three feet and shall at a minimum be one foot by one and one-half feet. 
I.  Adult Business—Operating Requirements. No person, association, partnership or corporation shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on the operation of an Adult Business unless each and all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  No Employee, Owner, Operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee of an Adult Business shall allow any person below the age of eighteen years upon the premises or within the confines of any Adult Business if no liquor is served, or under the age of twenty-one if liquor is served. 
2.  All Employees of Adult Businesses, other than performers while performing, shall, at a minimum while on or about the licensed premises, wear an opaque covering which covers their Specified Anatomical Areas. 
3.  No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an Adult Business except upon a permanently fixed stage which is at least eighteen inches above the level of the floor, separated by a distance of at least six feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons and surrounded with a three-foot-high permanent barrier.. No patron shall be permitted within six feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by a performer. 
When patrons are present at the establishment, they shall not be allowed to directly touch, fondle or caress, as those terms are defined in Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986), the performers while they are performing. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by signs placed on the barrier and if necessary by employees of the establishment. 
4.  If patrons wish to tip performers, receptacles shall be at least six feet from the permanently fixed stage. Patrons shall not throw tips to performers, hand tips directly to performers or place tips in the performers' costumes. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.050 - Adult Use Development Permit—Requirements. 
A.  No Adult Business may be established or operate within the City by right—all persons wishing to establish an Adult Business or Adult Use within the City must apply for and receive an Adult Use Development Permit under this chapter. 
B.  It is the burden of the applicant to supply evidence to justify the grant of an Adult Use Development Permit. Such evidence shall include information, maps and/or exhibits that shows compliance with the provision of section 18.49.030 of this chapter. 
C.  Any Person desiring to establish or operate an Adult Business or Adult Use within the City shall file with the Development Services Director an Adult Use Development Permit application on a standard application form supplied by the Development Services Department. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.060 - Permit—Contents of Application. 
A.  The application must be signed by the owner or lessee of the property where the Adult Business or Adult Use will take place. If the application is signed by a lessee, a notarized statement signed by the owner shall accompany the application. Proof of status is required. 
B.  The Development Services Department shall set forth the contents required for such applications for an Adult Use Development Permit. 
C.  All applicants for an Adult Use Development Permit must also fill out the City's environmental package for purposes of complying with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.070 - Permit—Application Fee. 
The City Council, by resolution, shall set a reasonable nonrefundable application fee for persons applying for an Adult Use Development Permit. The fee shall not exceed the reasonable estimated costs of the City expended in processing the application. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.080 - Permit—Decision to Grant or Deny. 
A.  The Planning Commission (the Commission) shall grant, conditionally grant or deny an application for an Adult Use Development Permit in accordance with the approval criteria contained in Section 18.49.120 of this chapter. Any conditions imposed upon the permit shall be in keeping with the objective development standards of this chapter and the underlying zoning district in which the property is located. 
B.  The completeness of the application shall be determined by the Development Services Director within fifteen calendar days of its submittal to the Development Services Director. 
C.  Upon the filing of a completed application, the Commission shall cause to be made by its own members, or members of its staff, an appropriate investigation, including consultation with the Building, Police, Fire and Health Departments and inspection of the premises as needed. Consultation is not grounds for the City to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application. 
D.  In reaching a decision, the Commission shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. 
E.  After the investigation has been completed within ten days or a specified time period that falls within subsection (G) of this section, the Commission shall conduct a noticed public hearing on the application for an Adult Use Development Permit. 
F.  Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given by notice through the U.S. Mail, with postage prepaid, to all persons shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the County, as owning property within a distance of three hundred feet from the external boundaries of the property described in the application. Further notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City at least ten days before the scheduled hearing. 
G.  The Planning Commission shall render a written decision on the application for an Adult Use Development Permit within thirty days of receiving a completed application. The Commission is authorized to impose conditions reasonably related to the impacts generated by the proposed Adult Business or Adult Use. However, in the event a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration or any type of Environmental Impact Report needs to be prepared for the Project pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA, Public Resources Code Section 21000, et seq.) and the companion guidelines (CEQA guidelines, Title 14 California Code of Regulation Section 15000, et seq.), then those timeframes set forth in CEQA and the CEQA guidelines shall apply. 
H.  The failure of the Commission to render such a decision within the time frames set forth above shall be deemed to constitute an approval. 
I.  Written Notice of the Commission's decision shall be hand delivered or mailed to the applicant within forty-eight hours. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.090 - Permit—Appeal. 
A.  Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Commission to the City Council in writing within ten days after the Commission's written decision. The City Council within the same ten days may also initiate such an appeal. 
B.  Consideration of an appeal of the Commission's decision shall be at a public hearing which shall be noticed as provided in Section 18.49.080.F. above and shall occur within thirty days of the filing or initiation of the appeal. 
C.  The City Council action on the appeal of the Commission's decision shall be by a majority vote of the quorum and upon the conclusion of the de novo public hearing. The City Council shall grant, conditionally grant or deny the application in accordance with the approval criteria contained in Section 18.49.120 of this chapter. The City Council's decision shall be final and conclusive. 
D.  In reaching its decision, the City Council shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.100 - Permit—Judicial Review of Decision to Grant or Deny. 
A.  The time for court challenge to a final decision by the Commission or City Council is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
B.  Notice of the Commission's or City Council's decision and its findings shall be mailed to the applicant within forty-eight hours and shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.110 - Permit—Expiration. 
Any Adult Use Development Permit approved pursuant to this chapter shall become null and void if not exercised within one year from the date of the approval. If an Adult Business ceases to operate for a period of six months, the Adult Use Development Permit shall become null and void. A permit extension shall be granted if prior to the expiration date the permittee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City's Planning Commission that it has a good faith intent to presently commence the proposed use. Such extensions shall not exceed a total of two six-month extensions. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.120 - Permit—Approval Criteria. 
A.  The Commission or City Council shall approve or conditionally approve an application for an Adult Use Development Permit where the information submitted by the applicant substantiates the following findings: 
1.  That the proposed use complies with the objective development and design requirements of zone in which it is located and with the applicable standards of this chapter; 
2.  That the proposed site is not located within a one thousand-foot radius of a Residential Zone. The distance between a proposed use and a Residential Zone Shall be measured from the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the Adult Business or proposed Adult Use, to the nearest property line included within the Residential Zone, along a straight line extended between the two points; 
3.  That the proposed site is not located within a one thousand-foot radius of a school or park. The distance between the proposed use and a School or park shall be measured from the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the Adult Business or proposed Adult Use to the property line of the nearest school or park site, along a straight line extended between the two points; 
4.  That the proposed site is not located within a one thousand-foot radius of a religious institution. The distance between the Adult Business or proposed Adult Use and a religious institution shall be measured from the nearest exterior wall housing the Adult Business or proposed Adult Use along a straight line extended to the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the religious institution; 
5.  That neither the applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership, have been found guilty or pleaded nolo contendere within the past four years of a misdemeanor or a felony classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.130 - Permit—Revocation. 
A.  Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the City on the basis of any of the following: 
1.  That the business or use has been conducted in a manner which violates one or more of the conditions imposed upon the issuance of the permit or which fails to conform to the plans and procedures described in the application, or which violates the occupant load limits set by the Fire Marshal; 
2.  That the permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required City, County and State licenses and permits; 
3.  That the permit is being used to conduct a use different from that for which it was issued; 
4.  That the permittee has misrepresented a material fact in the application for Adult Use Development Permit or has not answered each question therein truthfully; 
5.  That the building or structure in which the Adult Business is to be conducted is hazardous to the health or safety of the employees or patrons of the business or of the general public under the standards set forth in the City's Building, Electrical, Plumbing or Fire Code; 
6.  That the permittee, if an individual, or any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership is found guilty or pleaded nolo contendere to a misdemeanor or felony classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense during the period of the Adult Business' operation; or 
7.  That the use for which the approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for six months or more. 
B.  Written notice of hearing on the proposed permit revocation, together with written notification of the specific grounds of complaint against the permittee shall be personally delivered or sent by certified mail to the permittee at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
C.  The Commission shall provide notice and conduct a public hearing on the proposed permit revocation. Written notice shall be provided within at least ten days prior to the hearing to all parties who have expressed their interest in writing. The notice shall inform the permittee of the reasons for revocation. 
D.  The revocation hearing shall be heard by the Commission. The Commission shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence at the hearing. 
E.  The Commission shall revoke, not revoke, or not revoke but add additional conditions to, the permittee's Adult Use Development Permit. Any additional conditions imposed upon the permit shall be in keeping with the objective development standards of this chapter as set forth in Sections 18.49.020 and 18.49.120 above, and the underlying zoning district in which the property is located. 
F.  The Commission shall make its decision within thirty days of the conclusion of the public hearing. 
G.  The Commission's decision shall be by resolution, and shall be hand delivered or mailed to the applicant within forty-eight hours and mailed to all property owners within three hundred feet of the use. 
H.  Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Commission to the City Council in writing within ten days after the written decision of the Commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.58.070 of this chapter. 
I.  In the event a permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter, another Adult Use Development Permit to operate an Adult Business shall not be granted to the permittee within twelve months after the date of such revocation. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.140 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of one thousand dollars and/or imprisonment in the County jail for a period of up to six months or any other legal remedy available pursuant to the Colton Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.150 - Applicability to other regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to provide exclusive regulation of the regulated adult uses. Such uses must comply with any and all applicable regulations imposed in other chapters of the zoning code, other City ordinances and state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
18.49.160 - Conduct constituting a Public Nuisance. 
The conduct of any business within the City in violation of any of the terms of this chapter is found and declared to be a public nuisance, and the City Attorney or the District Attorney may, in addition or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such Adult Business or Adult Use and restrain and enjoin any person from conducting, operating or maintaining an Adult Business or Adult Use contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 2-16-2016)  
Chapter 18.50 - SIGNS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, adopted April 4, 2017, amended chapter 18.50 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 18.50, §§ 18.50.010—18.50.160, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 0-02-08 § 2 (part), 2008; Ord. No. O-05-11, § 2, 10-18-2011; Ord. No. O-06-12, § 4, 6-19-2012; Ord. No. O-04-13, § 2, 10-1-2013; Ord. No. O-03-14, § 7, 3-4-2014. 
 
18.50.010 - Purpose. 
The City recognizes that Signs and other graphics are an essential element of a community's visual appearance. They also provide a means to identify and promote Businesses and are an important element in creating safer Public Streets and Highways. Consequently, the purpose of this chapter is to provide Sign regulations that are consistent with the goals and objectives of the General Plan and the community's visual and aesthetic goals. In addition, these regulations are intended to: 
A.  Promote an economically stable and visually attractive community and insure that the special character and image the City is striving for can be attained; 
B.  Promote Signs and graphics that are attractive, pleasing and harmonized with the physical character of the environment and surrounding Properties, while serving the advertising needs of the Business community; 
C.  Promote traffic safety and the smooth and efficient flow of Pedestrians and Vehicles to their destinations; 
D.  Direct Persons to various activities and enterprises, in order to provide for maximum public convenience. 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017)  
18.50.020 - Interpretation and substitution of text. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not be interpreted to nullify any easements, covenants or other private agreements which provide for more restrictive Sign regulations than are required by this chapter. 
B.  The Development Services Director is authorized and directed to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter. Whenever the application of this chapter is uncertain due to ambiguity of its provisions, the issue shall be referred to the Development Services Director for a determination. Such determination shall be made within ten days. Any decision made by the Development Services Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 18.50.040(F) of this chapter. 
C.  It is the City's policy and intent to regulate both commercial and Noncommercial Signs in a viewpoint-neutral or content-neutral manner. The message of the Sign shall not be reviewed except to the minimum extent necessary to identify the type of Sign. 
D.  In each instance and under the same conditions to which this chapter permits any Sign, a Sign containing an ideological, political or other Noncommercial Message that is constructed to the same physical dimensions of the permitted Sign shall be permitted. 
E.  Within this chapter, the distinction between on-premises and off-premises applies to Commercial Messages. 
F.  Signs not expressly permitted by this chapter are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017)  
18.50.030 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the provided definitions: 
"Abandoned Advertising Display" or "Abandoned Sign" means any display or Sign remaining in place or not maintained for a period of ninety days, which no longer identifies an ongoing business, product or service available on the business premises where the display or Sign is located or where the building, business or establishment to which the display or Sign is related has ceased operation. For purposes of this definition, abandonment for the applicable ninety-day period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of abandonment regardless of the property, business or Sign owner's intent. 
"Animated Sign" means any Sign that uses flashing, blinking, movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect. Any Sign with images or messages changing more than once within four seconds shall also be considered an Animated Sign. 
"Beacon" or "Spotlight" means any structure or equipment emitting laserlight or light with one or more beams (whether stationary or moving) that are directed into the atmosphere or at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source. 
"Banner" means any non-metallic paper, cloth, canvas, light-weight fabric or other non-rigid material, with or without frames, whether displayed horizontally or vertically freestanding (such as a flag), wall-mounted, pole-mounted, window-mounted or painted, or any other method of attachment, that is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time and intended to attract attention to the business or use conducted on the site, or intended to provide notice to City residents, as well as those who work in and visit the City, about special events that are sponsored by the City. 
"Billboard" means a type of Off-premises Advertising Display that sells advertising copy to businesses that may or may not be located within the City, and may or may not be associated with a specific business location. 
"Business District Sign" means a type of freeway-oriented Off-premises Advertising Display that sells advertising copy to businesses that are located within the respective Business District Sign Overlay identified on the Official Zoning Map. "Can Sign" means a Sign which contains all the text and/or Logo symbols within a single enclosed cabinet that is mounted to a wall or other surface. It specifically does not include the Sign cabinet that is part of a freestanding Sign. 
"Canopy Sign" means any Sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover (excluding a Marquee) over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area. 
"Changeable Copy Sign, Electronic " means a Sign whose primary advertising focus is the intermittent display of electronic, computerized, digital or similarly produced letters, numerals, words messages, scenes or images as part of the advertising message that is changed no more than once every four seconds. A Sign on which the message or image create the illusion of flashing, blinking, movement, or animation shall be considered an Animated Sign purposes of this chapter. 
"Changeable Copy Sign, Non-Electronic" means a Sign or portion thereof with characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged manually without altering the face or surface of the Sign. A Sign on which the message or characters change more than twelve times per day shall be considered an Animated Sign and not a Changeable Copy Sign for purposes of this chapter. 
"Channel Letter Sign" means a Sign made up of individual letters that are independently mounted to a wall or other surface. The "air space" between the letters is not part of the Sign structure but rather the building facade. A Logo may also be considered a channel letter provided it is clearly distinguishable from other Sign elements. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Colton or his or her designee. 
"Commercial Flag" means a "Banner." 
"Commercial Message" means any Sign, wording, Logo, or other representation that names or advertises a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
"Construction Sign" means a temporary Sign directly connected with a construction project and may include the construction company's name, addresses and telephone number. 
"Copy" means the words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, or other symbolic representations incorporated into a Sign. 
"Development Services Director" means the Development Services Director of the City of Colton or his or her designee. 
"Directional Sign" means any Sign intended to be permanently affixed and utilized only for the purpose of indicating the direction of any object, place, or area. 
"Field" means the part of the Sign with no letters or Logos. 
"Freeway-Oriented Sign" means a Sign, located on property which is adjacent to a freeway and meant to be seen from the freeway. 
"Frontage, Public" means that side of a building facing onto a public street, mall (pedestrian courtyard), or parking area. 
"Frontage, Street" means that side of a lot abutting a public street. 
"Future Tenant Identification Sign" means a temporary Sign not exceeding thirty-two square feet in area that identifies a future use of a site or building. 
"Gateway Sign" means a freeway-oriented Off-premises Advertising Display that promotes city businesses and other non-competing businesses and provides civic news and announcements, and is located within one-half mile feet of city corporate limits. 
"Grand Opening Sign" means a Banner not exceeding thirty-two square feet in area that promotes the opening of a new business or use at a site or building. 
"Graphic" means a symbol, pattern, or image used to advertise a product of a company, business, or organization and includes, but is not limited to, trademark Logos. 
"Inflatable Balloon Sign" means a Sign consisting of balloons, inflatables or similar air, helium or hydrogen filled materials, including balloons and inflatables made of metallic and cloth material, no matter the size that is used to attract attention. 
"Kiosk Sign" means an advertising and Directional Sign sponsored by the local building industry association or other local business and/or civic association and approved by the Planning Commission and/or City Council to advertise future residential subdivisions, residential planned communities or local business promotions and civic events sponsored by such associations. 
"Logo" means a proprietary Graphic and/or text used as an identifying mark of a company, business, or organization. For purposes of this chapter, Logos shall be limited to registered trademarks, with proof of trademark from the United States Department of Treasury, for companies with a minimum of five operating stores/locations. 
"Marquee" means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building for a distance of five or more feet, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
"Marquee Sign" means any Sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a Marquee. 
"Monument Sign" means a freestanding Sign less than six feet in height which is detached from a building and having a support structure that is a solid-appearing base constructed of a permanent material, such as concrete block or brick. All other freestanding Sign types shall be either "Pole Sign" or "Pylon Sign." See Figure 18.50-1 (Monument Sign). 
Figure 18.50-1: Monument Sign 
 
"Multi-Tenant Center" means a property or combination of properties containing two or more businesses and which share common parking, driveway and access areas. 
"Murals" means a painting on an exterior as a work of art with no Commercial Message. 
"Noncommercial Flag" means any cloth, paper, canvas, light-weight fabric or other non-rigid material that identifies the United States, the State of California and other countries and states, counties and municipalities, nationally recognized organizations or corporations, and any other vertical or horizontal flag with no text, characters, or other message. 
"Noncommercial Sign" means a Sign which displays noncommercial speech, e.g., commentary or advocacy on topics of public debate and concern. 
"Nonconforming Sign" means a Sign lawfully erected which does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
"Off-Premises Advertising Display" or "Outdoor Advertising Display" means any billboard, structure, housing, Sign, painting, message placard or other contrivance, or any part thereof, which has been designed, constructed, created, intended or engineered to have a useful life of fifteen years or more and intended or used to advertise or to provide data or information in the nature of advertising for a business or businesses not located on the same premises as the Sign. 
"On-Premises Advertising Display" means any structure, housing, Sign, device, figure, statuary, painting, message placard or other contrivance, or any part thereof, which has been designed, constructed, created, intended or engineered to have a useful life of fifteen years or more and intended or used to advertise or to provide data or information in the nature of advertising for a business or businesses located on the same premises as the Sign. 
"Painted Sign" means a Sign which is comprised only of paint applied on a Building or structure, except for Murals, as defined by this section. 
"Permanent Window Sign" means a Sign painted, attached, glued or otherwise affixed to a window or located within three feet of the interior side of the window or otherwise easily visible from the exterior of the Building. 
"Pole Sign" means a freestanding Sign in excess of six feet in height which is detached from a Building and is supported by one or more structural elements that are less than one-fourth the width of the Sign Face. See Figure 18.50-2 (Pole Sign). 
Figure 18.50-2: Pole Sign 
 
"Political Sign" means a Sign erected prior to an election to advertise or identify a candidate, campaign issue, election proposition or other related matters. 
"Portable Sign" means a temporary Sign that is not permanently attached to the ground or a Building or not designed to be permanently attached to the ground or a Building, including, but not limited to A-frames, sandwich boards or other freestanding signboards. 
"Pylon Sign" means a freestanding Sign in excess of six feet in height which is detached from a Building and is supported by one or more structural elements that are architecturally similar to the design of the Sign. Pylon Signs less than six feet in height are prohibited. See Figure 18.50-3 (Pylon Sign). 
Figure 18.50-3: Pylon Sign 
 
"Real Estate Sign" means a temporary Sign advertising the sale or lease of the property upon which it is located, and may include the identification of the firm handling such sale, lease or rent. 
"Roof Sign" means a Sign erected, constructed, painted or placed upon or over a roof or parapet wall of a Building and which is wholly or partly supported by such Building. 
"Sign" means any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses color, form, Graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public. Light banding along a Building is excluded from the definition of a Sign. 
"Sign Face" means that area or portion of a Sign on which Copy is intended to be placed. 
"Temporary Promotional Sign" means any portable sign, commercial flag, pennant, streamer, Banner, bunting material or other similar non-permanent sign made of non-metallic paper, cloth, canvas, light-weight fabric or other non-rigid material, with or without frames, whether displayed freestanding, wall-mounted, pole-mounted, window-mounted or painted, or any other method of attachment, that is displayed for a limited period of time less than one year and intended to attract attention to the business or use conducted on the site. Temporary Promotional Signs Shall not be used in lieu of permanent signage. 
"Uniform Sign Program" means an integrated, visual and/or written description of the Signs to be placed on a Building or grouping of Buildings for the purpose of aesthetic uniformity in Sign design, construction and placement. 
"Wall Sign" means a Sign attached to or erected against the wall of a Building or structure with the exposed face of the Sign parallel to the plane of such wall. 
"Window sign" means any Sign, picture, letter, character or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale or service that is placed upon and/or inside and/or within three feet of a window for the purpose of being visible from exterior of the window. 
"Year-Round Promotional Sign" means a Banner, Commercial Flag or Portable Sign that is prohibited pursuant to Section 18.50.070, but that the City may allow by subsequent ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017)  
18.50.040 - Permits and review procedures. 
A.  Permit Required. 
1.  A Sign permit shall be required prior to the placing, erecting, moving, modifying or reconstructing of any Sign, including refacing a panel on a can or cabinet Sign, in the City, unless expressly exempted by this chapter. Signs requiring a permit shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances. 
2.  A Uniform Sign Program, as described in subsection D of this section, shall be required for all new multi-tenant developments of three or more separate tenants that share either the same parcel or structure and use common Access and parking facilities. 
3.  Gateway Signs, Business District Signs and Off-Premises Advertising Displays (Billboards) shall require approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission, pursuant to Section 18.58.060 of this Title. For Billboards an accompanying Billboard Public Benefit Agreement between the Billboard Operator, Property Owner and the City shall also be required. The Agreement may include compensation to be paid to the City of the provision of other public benefits to be provided as a result of the installation and operation of any Gateway Sign, Business District Sign, and/or relocation of freeway-oriented off-premises display or modification thereof. 
4.  A Temporary Promotional Sign permit shall be required for all Temporary Promotional Signs unless specifically exempted by this chapter. Issuance of the temporary Sign permit shall be as described in subsection I of this section. 
B.  Method of Application. An application for a Sign permit, Uniform Sign Program, or a Temporary Promotional Sign shall be made on forms as prescribed by the development services department and shall be filed with the same. The application shall be accompanied by any fees as specified by City Council resolution. 
C.  Review Criteria for Sign Permit. 
1.  Criteria for Approval. A Sign permit may be Approved when it complies with the standards and requirements of this chapter. A permit application may be Approved subject to conditions, so long as those conditions are required by this chapter or some other applicable law, rule, or regulation. 
2.  Multiple Sign Applications. When an application proposes two or more Signs, the application may be granted in whole or in part, with separate decisions as to each proposed Sign. When an application is denied in whole or in part, written notice of determination shall specify the ground for such denial. 
3.  Revocation or Cancellation. The Development Services Director shall revoke any Approval or permit upon refusal by the permit holder to comply with the provisions of the permit after written notice of noncompliance and at least thirty days' opportunity to correct. This provision does not apply in the event that the Sign, by nature of its physical condition, is an imminent and significant threat to public safety. 
4.  Permits Issued in Error. Any Approval or permit issued in error may be revoked by the City upon written notice to the permit holder of the reason for the revocation. 
D.  Uniform Sign Program. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the Uniform Sign Program is to adopt unique and specific design and development standards for individual multi-tenant and mixed use developments. The intent is to integrate a project's Signs with the design of the structures to achieve a unified architectural statement. A Uniform Sign Program provides a means for defining common Sign regulations for multi-tenant projects, to encourage maximum incentive and latitude in the design and display of multiple Signs and to achieve, not circumvent, the intent of this title. 
2.  Review Procedure. Review and Approval of a Uniform Sign Program is the responsibility of the Planning Commission. The Development Services Director may make a recommendation on the program to the Commission, and the Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the program. Additionally, the Planning Commission shall be the approving authority for modifications and amendments to Uniform Sign Programs, except that the Development Services Director may be the approving authority for minor modifications that do not change or modify the intent or conditions of the original Approval. The Design Review Committee may elevate the decision to the Planning Commission. 
3.  Standards. The Uniform Sign Program shall include criteria for building-attached and freestanding Signs, including Directional Signs, for tenants, anchors, and the integrated development itself to establish consistency of Sign type, location, Logo and/or letter height, lines of Copy, illumination, and construction details of Signs for the project. All Signs within the development shall be consistent with the Uniform Sign Program as the adopted program establishes the Sign standards for the development. The message substitution policy of this chapter shall be deemed incorporated in every Sign program, even if the Sign program documents do not explicitly so state. Maximum size, location, height, setback, and other development standards for Signs in the Uniform Sign Program shall be consistent with the standards of this chapter. 
E.  Approving Authority. The designated approving authorities for Sign permits, Uniform Sign Programs, Gateways Signs, Business District Signs and Temporary Promotional Signs are listed in Table 18.50-1. 
1.  Each row of the table lists a specific Sign permit by Sign type. Each of the designated approving authorities is listed in a column. The symbol in the cell where the rows and columns meet identifies whether the Approval authority listed in that column is a recommending body, final decision body, or elevated final decision body for that permit type. For instance, the table identifies the Development Services Director as the final decision body and the Planning Commission as the elevated final decision body for Sign permit-building attached Signs. 
2.  Typically, the final decision body is the designated approving authority for the listed permit; however the approving authority may, if the designated approving authority determines that the proposed signage is of significant public interest, elevate the Approval to the next hearing body as listed in the table. 
3.  The approving authority shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed Sign permit Application in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
_____
Table 18.50-1: Approval Authority for Signs 
Type of Permit 	Designated Approving Authority 
"R" symbolizes the "Recommending Body" 
"F" symbolizes the "Final Decision Body" 
"E" symbolizes the "Elevated Final Decision Body" 
	Development Services Director 	Planning Commission 
Sign Permit—Building attached Signs 	F 	E 
Sign Permit—Temporary Promotional Signs 	F 	
Sign Permit—Freestanding permanent Signs (e.g., Monument, Pylon), not including freeway-oriented, electronic changeable Copy Pylon Signs 	F 	E 
Sign Permit—Freestanding freeway-oriented, electronic changeable Copy Pylon Signs 	R 	F 
Business District Sign* 	R 	F 
Gateway Sign* 	R 	F 
Uniform Sign Program—Minor amendment 	F 	E 
Uniform Sign Program—Adoption and major amendment 	R 	F 
 
*Conditional Use Permit and Billboard Public Benefit Agreement is required. 
_____
F.  Timely Decision. At each level of review or appeal, the decision shall be rendered, in writing, within the following time limits. The time period begins running when the application is deemed complete, or the notice of Appeal has been filed, whichever applies. 
1.  Upon receipt of a completed Sign review Application by the Development Services Director, the Director shall approve, deny, or refer the Application to the Planning Commission within thirty calendar days. 
2.  Upon referral by the Development Services Director, the Planning Commission Shall approve, deny the Application within thirty calendar days. 
3.  Notwithstanding the time limits imposed by this section, the department and the Applicant may mutually agree to an extension of the time limits. Such extension shall be in writing and Shall be for no more than ninety days. 
4.  Should the Director fail to render a decision on a Sign Application within the prescribed time limits established by this section, such Sign Application shall be deemed automatically Appealed to the Planning Commission to the extent it complies with the area and location requirements for Signs imposed by this chapter. 
5.  Notwithstanding any of the time limits contained in this section, the Development Services Director and Planning Commission shall endeavor to render decisions in a timely manner. 
G.  Variances. Applications for a variance from the terms of this title shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission according to the variance procedures as set forth in this title, except for deviations up to twenty percent of that standard for letter height, maximum Sign area, maximum Sign height, or separation between Signs may be allowed with the concurrent Approval of a minor Sign deviation by the same approving authority for the Sign, when it is found that the deviation is necessary to improve the effectiveness of the purpose of the Sign. 
H.  Appeals. 
1.  Unless otherwise specified herein, a decision of the Development Services Director may be Appealed by the Applicant or any interested person within fifteen days of the decision to the Planning Commission. The Appeal shall be made on the forms prescribed by the planning division and fees shall be paid in accordance with the fee resolution adopted by the City Council. Automatic Appeals made pursuant to subsection (F)(4) of this section shall not be required to submit a fee. The Planning Commission shall review an Appeal at a regularly scheduled meeting according to the schedule of meetings and deadlines for submission of Applications. Notwithstanding such schedule, an Appeal hearing shall be held within thirty days of the filing date of any Appeal. 
2.  A decision of the Planning Commission may be Appealed to the City Council by the Applicant or any interested person in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 18.58.070(C) of this code. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
3.  A final determination of the City Council may be Appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with applicable provisions of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
I.  Temporary Promotional Sign Permit. 
1.  Permit Requirements and Conditions. No Temporary Promotional Sign shall be displayed without first obtaining a Temporary Promotional Sign permit from the Development Services Director. Permits shall be issued within three working or business days of the filing of a completed Application that complies with all provisions of this chapter and the filing of all required fees for a Temporary Promotional Sign. The Development Services Director may, in his or her discretion, approve an Application that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter upon conditioning the permit with its compliance. The Development Services Director may also Attach additional reasonable conditions to assure that the Temporary Promotional Sign is safely displayed and will not constitute a hazard to public safety. 
2.  Permit/Deposit Fees. 
a.  A fee as established by resolution of the City Council shall be assessed for the Temporary Promotional Sign. The fee shall cover the City's reasonable administrative costs for enforcing compliance with this section and the processing of the Application. 
3.  Appeals. A decision of the Development Services Director denying a temporary promotional sign permit may be Appealed to the Planning Commission within five working or business days of the Director's decision. The matter shall be scheduled for consideration by the Planning Commission within thirty days from the filing date of any appeal. The Planning Commission shall render a decision within thirty days of the meeting where it first considers the Appeal. The decision of the Planning Commission Shall be final. 
4.  Authority. The Development Services Director is hereby authorized to develop all appropriate guidelines and policies and develop all appropriate forms for the implementation of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017; Ord. No. O-18-17, §§ 2, 3, 11-7-2017)  
18.50.050 - Enforcement. 
A.  General Enforcement Provisions. 
1.  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be a continuing violation until the violation has been corrected. 
2.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Notwithstanding the above, the City Attorney may, in his or her discretion, file the violation as an infraction. In Addition to these penalties or as an alternative, a person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the assessment of administrative fines and penalties pursuant to Title 8 of this code. 
3.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the City Attorney, upon the order of the City Manager or his or her designee, may commence an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain an injunction prohibiting the construction, erection, maintenance or display, or requiring the removal, of any Sign which is in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. In any such action, the City shall be entitled to recover its costs and its reasonable attorney's fees. 
4.  The owner or other person entitled to possession of a Sign which is removed, stored and/or destroyed pursuant to any provision of this section shall be liable to the City for the cost of removal, storage and/or destruction and the City may recover the same through an action commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction together with the City's court costs and reasonable attorney's fees. 
5.  Any illegal Sign found and declared to be a public nuisance may be abated by the City in accordance with the provisions contained in Title 8 of this code. 
6.  Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be in accordance with Title 8 of this code. 
B.  Temporary, Limited Term, and Political Sign Enforcement Provisions. 
1.  The Development Services Director or code compliance office may summarily and without prior notice remove any Temporary Promotional Sign or Political Sign which constitutes an immediate peril to persons or property or constitutes a nuisance. 
2.  If the Development Services Director or code compliance office finds that any Temporary Promotional Sign or Political Sign has been posted or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this section, the Development Services Director or code compliance office may issue to the property owner, Sign owner or the owner's authorized agent an oral or written demand for the removal of such Sign or for correction of the violation. Such notice shall include a brief statement of the reasons for requiring removal. 
3.  The Development Services Director or code compliance office may use due diligence to provide such notice by telephone or in person, and in Addition, may provide such notice in writing by hand delivery or by placing such notice in the United States mail addressed to the last known address of the owner of any Sign posted in violation of this chapter. 
4.  Upon the failure of any owner of any Temporary Promotional Sign posted in violation of this chapter to correct the violation or to remove such Political Sign or Temporary Promotional Sign after notice by the Development Services Director or code compliance office, these entities shall have the authority to remove all such illegally posted Temporary Promotional Signs or Political Signs, and to dispose of such Signs if they are not claimed by the owner within ten working days. 
5.  The Development Services Director or code compliance office may remove any abandoned Temporary Promotional Sign or Political Sign summarily and without prior notice. A Temporary Promotional Sign or Political Sign shall be deemed abandoned under the following circumstances: 
a.  The owner of a Temporary Promotional Sign posted in violation of this section or the owner's authorized agent cannot in good faith be located within five working days; or 
b.  Any Temporary Promotional Sign or Political Sign remains posted for more than ten days after the event or election to which it relates. 
6.  The owner of a Sign that is informed by the Development Services Director or code compliance office of a violation of these provisions Shall have the right to Appeal such notice to the City Council within five days of its receipt, if the election or event to which such Sign relates has not occurred. Such Appeal Shall be in writing and shall temporarily stop enforcement of the required removal until the matter is heard by the City Council. The City Council's determination Shall be final. 
7.  The City Council may, by resolution, adopt such fees as are necessary and reasonable to cover the cost of removal of illegally posted temporary promotional or Political Signs and the Development Services Director or code compliance office is authorized to collect such fees when any Temporary Promotional Sign or Political Sign is claimed by an owner, or by legal action after the claim period expires. 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017)  
18.50.060 - Exempt Signs. 
The following Signs may be erected without a permit, provided they comply with the development standards listed herein: 
A.  Official traffic Signs or other municipal governmental Signs, legal notices, advertisements prescribed by law and placed by governmental entities, and Signs indicating the location of buried utility lines or any notice posted by a governmental officer in the scope of his duties. The City has a compelling interest in permitting such Signs in order to comply with state and local laws and promote public safety. 
B.  Street address Signs consistent with Section XIV(B) of Security Ordinance Number 0-13-89, notwithstanding anything in this section, may be illuminated and may contain reflective paint or material. The City has a compelling interest in permitting such Signs to promote the identification of property to guide emergency response personnel. 
C.  Direction, warning or information Signs or structures required or authorized by law, or by federal, state, county, or City authority. The City has a compelling interest in permitting such Signs in order to comply with state and local laws and to promote public safety. 
D.  Noncommercial Flags attached to poles that identify the United States, the state of California and other countries and states, counties and municipalities, nationally recognized organizations or corporations, and any other vertical or horizontal flag with no text, characters, or other message, not to exceed three flags/poles on properties containing less than one acre of land, and not to exceed six flags/poles on properties containing more than one acre of land. Poles shall not exceed thirty feet in height and flags shall not exceed forty-two square feet in surface area. Such flags shall be maintained in good condition and free of tattering or tearing. 
E.  Historical and/or memorial tablets and identification plaques installed by or on behalf of a recognized governmental historical agency. The City has a compelling interest in permitting such Signs to promote interest in historical structures and events and to promote public safety and identification. 
F.  Permanent Window Signs not exceeding four square feet per Street Frontage shall be permitted. Such Signs should be encouraged to promote business identification, hours of operation and address information. Such Signs may not be illuminated. 
G.  Time and temperature Signs containing no advertising Copy. The City has a compelling interest in permitting such Signs to promote awareness of local conditions for individuals with medical problems. 
H.  Interior Signs within a structure not visible from the exterior of the structure, except temporary Window Signs. 
I.  Signs and advertising for the California State Lottery as authorized by California Government Code, Section 8800 et seq. 
J.  Kiosk Signs and other similar identification Signs placed on City property and Approved by the Planning Commission and/or City Council that are used to identify and promote economic development efforts or significant commercial enterprises in the City. For purposes of this subsection the term "significant commercial enterprises" Shall be defined as a grouping of similarly situated commercial land uses with an integrated commercial or economic development theme. 
K.  Signs carried by individuals while standing, sitting, or traveling along any public sidewalk or other public property not to exceed two square feet. Such Signs may not be illuminated. 
L.  Signs placed within community sports facilities as defined in Section 12.24.141. 
M.  Construction Signs are allowed on private property outside of the public right-of-way and any required clear vision triangle, with the following limitations: 
1.  Residential Subdivisions. One Sign, limited to a maximum of thirty-two square feet. May only be erected after Approval of tentative map and must be removed immediately upon the close of escrow of the sale of the last lot. The maximum height shall be eight feet. 
2.  Multiple-family Residential. One Sign, not exceeding twenty-four square feet in area, May be placed on property upon which an Apartment Building is under construction or for which a site plan has been Approved. Such Sign shall be subject to removal when the vacancy rate is reduced to twenty-five percent or less. The maximum height shall be five feet. 
3.  Nonresidential Property. One Sign per property not to exceed thirty-two square feet in area. The maximum height shall be five feet. The Sign may not be illuminated. Such Signs shall not be erected prior to the commencement of construction or grading and shall be removed upon first issuance of an occupancy certificate for the Building(s). 
N.  Future Tenant Signs. One Future Tenant Identification Sign per business or use shall be permitted not to exceed thirty-two square feet in area. A Future Tenant Identification Sign listing the name of future tenants, responsible agent or realtor, and identification of the specific complex shall be encouraged. Said Sign is permitted until such time as a certificate of occupancy is issued for the Building(s). The maximum height shall be five feet. The Sign may not be illuminated. 
O.  Real estate for sale or rental Signs provided they are not located in the public right-of-way. 
P.  Directional Signs whose function is guiding traffic, parking, and loading on private property, with no advertising/Commercial Message. Maximum of one Sign per driveway. Sign area is limited to a maximum of six square feet per Sign and a maximum height of four feet if freestanding. Exceptions to standards regarding Copy, quantities, Sign area, and height may be allowed for larger sites with multiple Buildings, tenants, and/or driveways as part of Uniform Sign Program by the Planning Commission or a Minor Amendment to an existing Uniform Sign Program by the Development Service Director. 
Q.  Nameplates identifying (and Copy limited to) the address of the Building, property, or tenant to a maximum of one square foot per Sign. Nameplates may only be lit by either an indirect light (e.g., porch light) source, low-wattage Spotlight without glare to the adjoining property, or internal light source with opaque (non-transparent) background. The Signs may be combined into one single tenant directory at the shared entrances of a multi-tenant Building subject to the Approval of a Sign permit by the Director if attached to a Building wall and as part of Uniform Sign Program by the Planning Commission or a Minor Amendment to an existing Uniform Sign Program by the Director if not attached to a Building wall. 
R.  Political signs complying with the following regulations: 
1.  Political signs Shall not exceed sixteen square feet in total area within a residential zone or thirty-two square feet in total area within a commercial or industrial zone. Aggregate total sign area for a single candidate Shall not exceed thirty-two square feet per parcel. 
2.  Political signs Shall not be placed sooner than forty-five days prior to the date of the election to which such sign relates. Political signs originally placed for a primary election May remain in place if such signs also relate to the next general election. 
3.  All political signs Shall be removed not later than ten days following the date of the election to which such sign relates. Political signs existing on property longer than ten days following the election to which such sign relates Shall be deemed abandoned and a nuisance and Shall be abated pursuant to Title 8 of this code. 
4.  No political sign Shall exceed an overall height of twelve feet from the finished grade. 
5.  No political sign Shall be placed in a manner that obstructs visibility of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or that poses a public safety or health hazard; such signs are deemed to be public nuisances and Shall be removed in accordance with Title 8 of this Code. 
6.  No political sign Shall be placed or fixed to any publicly owned tree, fence, or utility pole within the public right-of-way or otherwise posted on any public property. Placement of such political signs Shall be deemed a public nuisance pursuant to California Government Code, Section 38773.5 and Shall be subject to summary Abatement. 
7.  No sign Shall be placed on a vacant or unimproved lot without prior Approval from the property owner. 
S.  Grand Opening Signs. One Grand Opening Sign per business or use shall be allowed, not to exceed thirty-two square feet in area. Said Sign is permitted for a maximum of forty-five days after occupancy is issued for the business or use by the City. The maximum height shall be five feet. The Sign may not be illuminated. 
T.  Murals, subject to Approval by the City Council after advisory review by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017)  
18.50.070 - Prohibited Signs. 
It shall be unlawful to erect, and no permit shall be issued, for any of the following Signs: 
A.  Any Sign not specifically in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
B.  Signs painted or mounted on roofs or placed above the roof line (except for roof parapet walls and mansard roofs); 
C.  Animated Signs and flashing Signs, with the exception of time and temperature signs and electronic reader Signs; 
D.  Commercial Flags, pennants, Banners, balloons or other paraphernalia composed of paper, cloth or other flexible material, unless otherwise permitted; 
E.  Signs which rotate, move, reflect, blink or incorporate elements that do so, except time and temperature Signs and electronic reader Signs; 
F.  Off-Premises Advertising Displays (billboards), except as otherwise provided; 
G.  Signs placed on the public right-of-way or affixed to an element or structure on the public right-of-way, except where required by a governmental agency or permitted as part of Kiosk Sign program, Gateway Sign or Business District Sign; 
H.  Portable Signs, including A-frame Signs, unless otherwise permitted; 
I.  Inflatable Balloon Signs, including, but not limited to individual balloons, balloon strings, and other inflatables made of a flexible material and inflated so as to be lighter than air, except when part of a bona fide special event Approved through a Special Events Permit; 
J.  "Can Signs," except as allowed by Section 18.50.090.3.f; 
K.  "Pole Signs" and other freestanding Signs constructed with a single supporting pole that is not covered with architectural cladding or other covers so as to appear as a solid base or structure, or supported by one or more structural elements that are less than one-fourth the width of the Sign Face; 
L.  Signs made of paper and placed on the exterior of a building and handwritten Signs/flyers placed in windows; 
M.  Signs located in the public right-of-way or located on a publicly owned tree, fence, or utility pole or otherwise posted on public property; 
N.  Signs made of neon, except that neon tubing may be used as a source of illumination, provided it is behind the face of the Sign, or used as a logo, or included as part of an interior window sign; 
O.  Signs affixed to vehicles where the primary purpose of the vehicle is advertising. This does not apply to Signs maintained on vehicles when such advertising is incidental to the primary purpose for which the vehicle is being uses (e.g., delivery service) or is required by state or federal law (e.g., contractor's license number); 
P.  Signs exceeding two square feet in area carried by individuals while standing, sitting or traveling along any public sidewalk, other public property or any private property when visible from a public right-of-way; 
Q.  Signs attached to light standards unless part of a Uniform Sign Program; 
R.  Beacons, except when part of a bona fide special event approved through a Special Events Permit; 
S.  Painted Signs (which does not include Murals or temporary Window Signs), except where attached to building walls and it is determined that the Sign is complementary to an overall building design and approved through a Sign Permit at the discretion of the Director of Development Services. 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 40, 12-18-2018)  
18.50.080 - General development, maintenance, and removal provisions. 
A.  Construction of Signs. Every Sign and all parts, portions and materials shall be manufactured, assembled, and erected in compliance with all applicable state, federal and City regulations, including the City's adoption of the California Building Code. 
B.  Maintenance of Signs. Every Sign and all parts, portions and materials shall be maintained and kept in proper repair and condition as approved by Sign permit. The display surface of all Signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from rust, corrosion, damage, and graffiti. Damage and graffiti will be repaired, replaced, recovered, refaced, or repainted with color matching paint and materials so as to produce the appearance that graffiti or damage never existed. Any cracked, broken surfaces, malfunctioning lights, missing Sign Copy, or other non-maintained, damaged, or graffiti portions of a Sign shall be repaired or replaced within thirty days following notification by the City. Noncompliance with such a request will constitute a nuisance condition and zoning violation and will be enforced as such. 
C.  Determination and Measurement of Sign Area. 
1.  General Area Calculation. Generally, the area of a Sign shall be measured as the overall length of the Sign times the overall height of each segment of Copy or Logo. When the Sign is composed of individual letters applied to the building without a distinctive background (e.g., channel letters), the area of the Sign shall be measured as seventy-five percent of the area of the Sign Copy (height of the letters times the length of each line of letters, e.g., length × height × seventy-five percent). 
2.  Awning or Canopy Signs. Sign Copy which is applied to an awning or canopy shall be computed at one hundred percent of the area within a single rectangle enveloping the Sign Copy. 
3.  Freestanding Signs. Freestanding Signs are to be computed as total height by the total length of the Sign or Signs which contain Sign Copy, excluding structure framework (e.g., post or column). The base of a freestanding Sign is not part of the Sign when of wood or masonry. 
a.  For double sided freestanding Signs, only one side of the Sign shall be used to make the calculation. 
b.  For three-sided Signs, only the side with the largest Sign area shall be used to make the calculation. 
c.  For four-sided Signs, the area shall be calculated by the greatest distance between the area of two sides. 
D.  Measurement of Sign Height. Sign height shall be measured from the upper most part of the Sign used in determining the area of the Sign to the lowest elevation at the base of the Sign. For freestanding Signs, the Sign structure may project above the upper most part of the Sign used in determining the area of the Sign by a maximum of ten percent of the Sign height. 
E.  Setback and Spacing of Freestanding Signs. 
1.  The minimum setback distance for freestanding Signs shall be measured from back of the public right-of-way or side of a driveway, unless an encroachment permit is granted. All freestanding Signs shall be located outside of the public right-of-way at least three feet from any property line and any required clear vision triangle. 
2.  The minimum spacing distance between permanent freestanding Signs, excluding on-premises directory Signs, should be fifty feet, including distance from Signs on other properties. The designated approving authority will review the proposed location on a case-by-case basis to ensure the Sign is located outside the required clear vision triangle and does not otherwise inhibit motorist safety. 
F.  Sign Removal or Replacement. A Sign that consists of a can or panel shall be provided with a solid white opaque covering or other method acceptable to the Director within thirty days following cessation of the business which uses the Sign. When a Sign is removed or replaced, all brackets, poles, and other structural elements that support the Sign shall also be removed. Affected building surfaces shall be restored to match the adjacent portion of the structure. This provision does not apply to routine maintenance. 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017)  
18.50.090 - Design standards. 
The following criteria shall be utilized for permanent advertising displays and Signs, and shall not be construed to govern the design of temporary promotional or Political Signs. 
A.  General Design Standards for onsite signs. 
1.  Architectural Style. Each Sign shall be designed to be compatible with and relate to the architectural style of the main building or buildings upon the site where such Sign is located. Each Sign shall also be compatible with the style and character of the existing improvements upon the lots adjacent to the site. Signs located on commercial sites but in a predominately residential area shall be designed to be compatible with such residential area and unobtrusive. 
2.  Relationship to Buildings. Signs located upon a lot with one main building or several buildings shall be designed to incorporate at least one of the predominant visual elements of such building or buildings, such as type of construction materials, color, or other design detail. 
3.  Color. The color(s) of a Sign should be harmonious and complementary to the colors of the building on or near which it is to be located. Fewer colors will generally produce the most attractive Sign. 
4.  Letter Style. The letter style to be used on a Sign should also be compatible with the architectural style of the building. For example, simple block letters are generally most compatible with the Spanish style buildings. For those buildings that have been recently constructed and having no particular architectural style, simpler letter styles are desirable. 
5.  Sign Materials. The goal of Sign design is to maintain moderate, attractive, and compatible styling so as not to conflict or distract from the architectural character of the area. The choice of materials shall be left to the discretion of the applicant, subject to the recommendations of the Development Services Director, the provisions of this chapter and the approval of the City. 
6.  Relationship to Other Signs. Where there is more than one Sign on a site or building, all permanent Signs displaying a Commercial Message shall have designs that similarly treat or incorporate the following design elements: 
a.  Letter size and style of Copy; 
b.  Shape of total Sign and related components; 
c.  Type of construction materials; 
d.  Sign/letter color and style of Copy; 
e.  Method used for supporting Sign (e.g., wall or ground base); and 
f.  Location. 
7.  Sign Illumination. The artificial illumination of Signs, either from an internal or external source, shall be designed to minimize negative impacts on surrounding rights-of-way and properties. The following standards shall apply to all illuminated Signs: 
a.  External light sources shall be directed and shielded to limit direct illumination of an object other than the Sign; 
b.  The light from an illuminated Sign shall not be of an intensity or brightness that will create glare or other negative impact on residential properties in direct line of sight to the Sign; 
c.  Unless otherwise permitted by another provision of this chapter, Signs shall not have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights, or other illumination devices that have a changing light intensity, brightness, or color notwithstanding electronic changeable copy ("digital") signs, which are regulated by Section 18.050.090B.4.a—c; 
d.  Colored lights shall not be used at a location or in a manner so as to be confused or constructed as traffic control devices; 
e.  Reflective type bulbs and incandescent lamps that exceed fifteen watts shall not be used on the exterior surface of Signs so that the face of the bulb or lamp is exposed to a public right-of-way or adjacent property; and 
f.  Light sources shall utilize energy efficient fixtures to the greatest extent possible and shall comply with Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations (California Building Standards Code). 
8.  For increased readability, the City encourages the use of light or translucent Sign Copy on dark and non-translucent background or Sign Field. 
9.  The maximum coverage of Copy allowed on a Sign shall be eighty percent of the Sign Face. 
B.  Design Standards for Special Sign Types. 
1.  Awning and Canopy Signs. Awning and Canopy Signs may be permitted only as an integral part of the awning or canopy to which they are attached or applied, as follows: 
a.  Lettering shall be allowed on awning valances only and shall not exceed eight inches in height. Logos, symbols, and Graphics that do not include text may be allowed on the shed (slope) portion of an awning and shall not exceed four square feet in area for each awning. See Figure 18.50-4 (Awning and Canopy Sign). 
Figure 18.50-4: Awning and Canopy Sign 
 
b.  Lettering shall be located within the middle seventy percent of the valance area. 
c.  Only permanent Signs that are an integral part of the awning or architectural projection shall be allowed. Temporary Signs shall not be placed on awnings. 
d.  Awning Signs shall only be allowed for first and second story occupancies. 
e.  Awnings shall not be lighted from under the awning (back-lit) so that the awning appears internally illuminated. Lighting directed downwards that does not illuminate the awning is allowed. 
f.  Awnings shall be regularly cleaned and kept free of dust and visible defects. 
g.  The style of the awning/canopy shall complement the architectural style of the building to which it is attached. Awnings should generally have a simple horizontal valance if located over rectangular or square window/door openings. Domed or barrel shaped awnings are appropriate for buildings with arched window/door openings. 
2.  Blade/Bracket Signs. 
a.  Location. Blade or bracket Signs shall be placed only on ground floor facades, except for businesses located above the ground level with direct exterior pedestrian access. 
b.  Height. The lowest point of a blade or bracket Sign shall be a minimum of eight feet above grade. 
c.  Projection. The Sign may project a maximum of four feet from the building. 
d.  Sign Structure. Sign supports and brackets shall be compatible with the design and scale of the Sign. 
e.  Encroachment. Blade or bracket Signs may not encroach into the public right-of-way or be located above it, or into City-owned property. 
3.  Building Attached Wall Signs. 
a.  Wall Signs shall be compatible with the predominant visual architectural elements of the building facade. 
b.  Place Wall Signs to establish facade rhythm, scale, and proportion where such elements are weak. In many existing buildings that have a monolithic or plain facade, Signs can establish or continue appropriate design rhythm, scale, and proportion. 
c.  Utilize a consistent proportion of signage to building scale, such as one-third text to two-thirds wall area or one-fourth text to three-fourths wall area. See Figure 18.50-5 (Text Scale). Parapet roof or mansard Roof Signs may be allowed with review and approval by the Director of Development Services only if building does not provide adequate surface area for Wall Signs. 
Figure 18.50-5: Text Scale 
 
d.  Wall Sign raceways shall be concealed from public view (e.g., within the building wall or painted to match the exterior color of the building where the Sign is located) or otherwise integrated with the design of the Sign and building so as to not detract from the architectural character of the building. 
e.  Direct and indirect lighting methods are allowed provided that they are not harsh or unnecessarily bright. Light shall either be directed down or in such a way that it does not cause light trespass or glare onto adjoining property or the public right-of-way. 
f.  Panel signs either within Can-type Signs or within frames are prohibited, except where the Development Services Director finds that such a sign will not detract from other signs on the property or on surrounding area, and that sign anchoring and installation can comply with the California Building Code. Channel letters are preferred. Channel letters shall be made of a durable material. Channel letters may not utilize gold-colored (or a shade of gold) trim cap. 
g.  If a tenant's signage on one facade is made up of multiple elements (e.g., Logo and text), locate, and scale the elements with relationship to each other. See Figure 18.50-6 (Multiple Element Signs). 
Figure 18.50-6: Multiple Element Signs 
 
4.  Electronic changeable Copy Signs. 
a.  Electronic changeable Copy Signs shall be permitted as part of a freestanding Sign located along a freeway right-of-way or a major arterial, as defined by the General Plan Mobility Element, or on the site of a public facilities, educational facilities, or other civic institutions, including religious uses integrated within the design of the freestanding Sign. 
b.  The changeable Copy of Signs within six hundred sixty feet of a freeway centerline shall not change more than once every six seconds. 
c.  The changeable Copy of Signs not within six hundred sixty feet of a freeway centerline shall not change more than once every thirty seconds. 
d.  Time and temperature display, of at least six seconds, shall be required to appear during every two minutes of operation. 
e.  Public service messages shall be accommodated at no additional charge, and may constitute ten percent of the messages displayed during each one-hour period. These public service messages are in addition to the required time and temperature displays. The City shall have authority to review and approve public service messages. 
f.  Electronic changeable Copy Signs shall automatically adjust the brightness of illumination between night and day. 
g.  Electronic changeable Copy Signs may not identify commercial uses/contain Commercial Message for uses not located on the same site as the Sign, unless they are Gateway Signs or Business District Signs, for which different standards apply. 
5.  Freestanding Signs. 
a.  Monument and Pylon Signs are allowed, subject to setback and spacing requirements in Section 18.50.080.E., because they can be more fully integrated in to the overall development design. Pole Signs are specifically prohibited. Pylon Signs shall be constructed with architectural cladding or similar material covering the supporting framework so they are architecturally integrated with the rest of the Sign. 
b.  Voids between the Sign Face and the Sign structure are prohibited. Either the Sign Face shall utilize the full width of the Sign structure or coverings that are architecturally consistent with the rest of the Sign shall be used to fill any voids. The intent is to have the Sign be fully architecturally integrated. 
c.  Materials and design for freestanding Signs shall be complementary to the materials and design of the buildings for the related development. For example, if the facade of the building is made of brick or brick veneer, a complementary freestanding Sign would also include brick. 
d.  Landscaping shall be provided at the base of the Sign equal to the area of the Sign, except for freeway-oriented freestanding Signs, Gateway Signs and Business District Signs. Landscaping shall be complementary to and designed in concert with the landscaping for the overall site. The design of the landscaping shall be such that natural growth will not obscure the Sign from the public right-of-way. 
e.  The minimum letter height on a freestanding Sign shall be ten inches. For freeway-oriented freestanding Signs, Gateway Signs and Business District Signs, the minimum letter height shall be eighteen inches. The intent is to limit the clutter of text on the Sign and increase readability for the motoring public, thereby providing for public safety. Monument and Pylon Signs shall contain the main address number or range of numbers of the site in minimum eight-inch high letters and this area shall not be counted towards the maximum Sign area. Deviations from letter height requirements may be approved through a Uniform Sign Program by the Planning Commission. 
f.  The maximum letter height on a freestanding Sign shall be thirty-two inches. For freeway freestanding Signs the maximum letter height shall be forty-eight inches. The intent is to limit the negative visual impact of large text size. 
g.  Freeway-oriented freestanding Signs, Gateway Signs and Business District Signs shall include City identification Copy consisting of the text "City of Colton" with letter height proportional to overall Sign size, or otherwise identify "Colton" on the Sign. The intent is to help identify the site as being located within the City of Colton. The City identification Copy shall not be counted towards the total Sign area and shall be exempted from the height maximum. The City identification Copy shall be illuminated at night. This requirement may be waived by the approving authority, at its discretion, if it is determined that City identification of adequate size is provided on other Signs within four hundred fifty feet of the proposed Sign. 
6.  Changeable Copy Sign, non-electronic. These types of Signs shall be considered to be the same as any other type of Sign and shall be regulated by their location, i.e., if located on a wall, they shall be deemed Wall Signs and the changeable Copy portion shall not exceed more than one-half the proposed Sign area. 
7.  Menu Board. One single-face freestanding or Wall Sign oriented towards an approved drive-through lane containing menu or other list of products with a maximum Sign area of thirty-two square feet and maximum height of six feet. 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017; Ord. No. O-12-18, § 41, 12-18-2018)  
18.50.100 - Allowed permanent On Premises Sign standards. 
Table 18.50-2 lists the development standards for all on-premises Signs based on use type and zoning district, as well as allowed Sign type. As identified in Section 18.50.040, a Sign permit and Building permit are required before any of the Sign types listed herein are installed, erected, or otherwise established. The intent of the Sign permit is to ensure that the development standards listed are adhered to. The intent of the Building permit is to ensure that the installed signs comply with California Building Standards and are installed in a safe manner. Only those Signs that may be permitted are listed. Regulations for temporary promotional on-premises Signs are listed in Section 18.50.110. Regulations for off-premises Signs are listed in Section 18.50.120. The following general rules/standards apply to permanent Signs regulated in this section: 
A.  Building Signs are those Signs that are permanently attached to a building (e.g., Wall Signs, awning/Canopy Signs, blade/bracket Signs). Only one type of building Sign (wall, awning/canopy, blade/bracket) is allowed per establishment. 
B.  Illumination standards refer to whether or not the Sign may be illuminated and how. Signs that may be illuminated may be done so by "indirect or background" (indirect light source, low-wattage Spotlight, or internal light source with opaque, nontransparent background) or by any method that minimizes glare onto neighboring residential property and the public right-of-way. 
_____
Table 18.50-2: Allowed Permanent On-Premises Sign Standards 
Sign Type 	Maximum Number Permitted 	Maximum Area 	Maximum Height 	Illumination Allowed 	Other Standards/Notes 
Residential Signs (RE and R-1 Zones) 
Wall Sign 	1/home 	6 sf 	Roofline 	No illumination 	
Multiple-family Residential Signs (R-2, R-3, MU-D & MU-N Zones) 
Wall Sign, project identification 	1/frontage, either type 	6 sf 	Roofline 	Indirect or background 	
Freestanding Sign, project identification 		6 sf 	8 ft. 	Indirect or background 	
Wall Sign, tenant 	1/tenant 	4 sf 	Roofline 	No illumination 	
Nonresidential Signs 1 
Wall Sign 	1/Each Public Frontage for storefront tenants with an exclusive exterior entrance. 	three square feet per one lineal foot and 70% wall length 	Roofline 	Indirect or background 	(2)(7) (8) 
Freestanding Monument Sign 	1/Street Frontage 3 	50 sf 	6 ft. 	Indirect or background 	(3)(5)(9) 
Freestanding Pylon Sign 		50 sf 	20 ft. 	Indirect or background 	(3)(5) (9) 
Window Sign 	1/Window per building elevation per establishment 	20% of window area per building elevation 	- 	No illumination 	
Freestanding freeway-oriented pylon Sign 	1/site w/minimum 150 ft. freeway frontage 	500 sf 4 	50 ft. 5 	Indirect or background 	(4)(5)(6) 
 
Notes: 
1. All nonresidential properties shall be limited to a maximum of one of each Sign type per property/development, except as otherwise provided. For example, a site may have a maximum combination of one Wall Sign, one freestanding Sign, and one Window Sign. In no instance may an establishment have both an awning/canopy sign and a blade/bracket Sign or an awning/Canopy Sign and a Wall Sign. Only one type of building Sign (wall, awning/canopy, blade/bracket) is allowed per establishment. 
2. Maximum letter height allowed is twenty-four inches, except for Signs for an individual tenant with public entrances along a Public Frontage of one hundred feet or greater of lineal feet shall be allowed letter height up to thirty-six inches. Logos and Graphics shall not exceed three feet by three feet. Logos greater than three feet by three feet are not allowed as standard Can Signs with shapes similar to rectangles, but may be Approved as contoured cabinet Signs if the Logo serves as a single Sign for the establishment, in which case the underlying maximum Sign area prevails. 
3. Applicant may choose one type or the other but is limited to one freestanding Sign per Street Frontage, except as otherwise provided; however Multi-Tenant Centers on sites greater than four acres in size or with more than three hundred linear feet of frontage per street may increase the Sign Face area of each Sign to a maximum of one hundred square feet and have one additional freestanding Sign above the otherwise allowed maximum. 
4. Signs which only include Logo Copy and do not include text may exceed the maximum Sign area to a maximum of three hundred sixty square feet. 
5. Sign height shall be measured from the finish grade of the freeway or adjacent roadway, whichever is higher. 
6. Applies to properties which are adjacent to a freeway or are only separated from a freeway by a public or quasi-public right-of-way or easement. The design and character of the Sign must be consistent with the standards for Pylon Signs. Freeway oriented Signs may not identify commercial uses/contain Commercial Message for uses not located on the same site as the Sign. Otherwise, they are considered off-premises Signs and are prohibited by this code. 
7. For multiple-tenant Buildings or parts of Buildings with tenants without exclusive exterior entrances, the building/site name or name of one on-site tenant as a Building identification Sign may be permitted by right. Additional signage may be permitted for a maximum of four tenants without exclusive exterior entrances on a multiple-story office Building subject to review of a Uniform Sign Program by the Planning Commission. 
8. Parapet roof or mansard Roof Signs may be allowed with review and Approval by the Planning Commission only if Building does not provide adequate surface area for Wall Signs. 
9. Copy on freestanding Signs, in Addition to building/site name and address, shall be limited to that related to tenants with exclusive exterior entrances and with installed Wall Signs, except for Monument Signs Approved by the Planning Commission through a Uniform Sign Program allowing Copy for tenants without exclusive exterior entrances subject to all applicable standards. 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017) 
_____ 
18.50.110 - Allowed temporary promotional On-Premises Sign standards. 
This section describes standards for temporary promotional on-premises signs. These signs require the issuance of a temporary sign permit as described in Section 18.50.040. The development standards for temporary signs are listed in Table 18.50-3. The following general rules/standards apply to all Temporary Promotional Signs: 
A.  Time duration. Display periods for Temporary Promotional Signs Shall be limited to a maximum of sixty days, continuous or non-continuous, within a one-hundred-and-eighty-day period not to exceed a total of one hundred and twenty days within a three-hundred-and-sixty-day period. Non-continuous days must be specified on the temporary sign permit. 
B.  Illumination. No Temporary Promotional Signs May be illuminated by lighting exclusively designed for the Temporary Promotional Sign. 
C.  Encroachment. Temporary Promotional Signs Shall not encroach on or above the public right-of-way or be attached to utility poles, traffic signal, utility cabinets and street sign posts, except where all of the following criteria are met: a) the business is located in a Building built at property line with no setback to the public right-of-way, b) the business obtains an encroachment permit from the Public Works Department, and c) the sign conforms to the display specifications of in Section 18.50.110.F. 
D.  Obstruction. Temporary Promotional Signs Shall not obstruct required paths, driveways, crosswalks, walkways for pedestrians and vehicles and views of vehicular traffic, including sight distances for vehicular traffic at corners. 
E.  Maintenance. Temporary Promotional Signs Shall be maintained in good condition and free of tattering or tearing. 
F.  Display specifications. All Temporary Promotional Signs Shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Maximum of one of each of the following signs for a maximum of three signs: one wall Banner (maximum fifty square feet), one commercial flag (maximum ten feet high and thirty-two square feet), or one portable/A-frame (maximum six square feet sign face; maximum two faces; height between three and four feet above grade). 
2.  Maximum of one promotional sign per business exterior wall and one portable sign such as a commercial sign or portable/A-frame sign. 
3.  Sign Shall not detract from the appearance of the Building and/or site as determined by the Director. 
4.  No illumination (lighting) exclusively designed for the sign is permitted. 
5.  Sign Shall be removed or replaced if tattered, torn, damaged, or otherwise not in good condition. 
6.  Sign Shall be kept clean and clear or graffiti. 
7.  No attachment to the sign, including balloons, streamers, lights, or other attention-getting devices. 
8.  Portable/A-frame Sign Standards: 
a.  Signs Shall leave at least four feet for pedestrian Access. If located in the public right-of-way, a City Encroachment Permit shall be obtained from the Public Works Department. 
b.  Signs Shall not impede the sight distance of vehicular traffic. 
c.  Signs Shall consist of durable materials (metal, wood, plastic) and the use of paper or cardboard is not allowed except as changeable copy within and safely fastened to a framed area made of durable rigid materials. Signs Shall be professionally made or have the appearance of a professionally made sign. Signs with wheels Shall be fixed (locked) in position. 
d.  Sign Shall contain the name and phone number of the business and owner of the sign in order (not required on the sign face, but somewhere on the sign structure). 
e.  Signs May be displayed only during normal hours of the business and Shall be removed (placed indoors) when the business ceases operation for that day. 
Table 18.50-3: Temporary Sign Standards 
Use Type 	Maximum Temporary Number 	Maximum Area 	Maximum Height 
Single family Residential Dwelling 	1/dwelling 	6 sf 	5 ft. freestanding; roofline wall 
Multiple-family residential dwelling 	1/dwelling 	4 sf 	5 ft. freestanding; roofline wall 
Multiple-family residential, apartment rental 	1/complex 	4 sf 	5 ft. freestanding; roofline wall 
Nonresidential, Wall Sign or Banner 	1/business 	50 sf total; 20% of window space if located in window 	roofline wall 
Nonresidential, Portable 	1/business 	6 sf 	4 ft. 
 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017)  
18.50.120 - Allowed Off-Premises Signage. 
A.  Generally, all new Off-Premises Commercial Message Signage is prohibited within the City. Existing off-site Commercial Message Signs (e.g., billboards) are considered Nonconforming Signs as regulated by Section 18.50.140. However, the following off-premises signage is permitted as specified below: 
1.  Business District Sign. Pursuant to the City's interest in promoting businesses located within major commercial districts of the City (Hub City Centre Specific Plan, Downtown Colton and Cooley Ranch), Business District Signs (electronic changeable copy only) are permitted within major commercial districts, as specified by the Business District Sign Overlay on the Official Zoning Map, subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit and Billboard Public Benefit Agreement. 
2.  Gateway Sign. Pursuant to the City's interest in promoting businesses citywide, one Gateway Sign (electronic changeable copy only) is permitted within one-half mile of each major freeway entry to the City (Interstate 10 and Interstate 215), subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit and Billboard Public Benefit Agreement. 
3.  Kiosk Program. Under the City's authority and capacity as proprietor of City property, the City has created a program for off-premises signage kiosks for certain uses and activities of City-wide benefit and interest. For purposes of this section, "city-wide benefit and interest" shall mean those uses or activities that, individually, generate significant revenue for the City. Additionally, such uses shall have a minimum total of one thousand feet lineal public Street Frontage. 
Such program is adopted by resolution and may be updated from time-to-time as deemed necessary and appropriate by the City Council. The program shall, at a minimum, specify the following: 
a.  Uses which qualify for the off-premises signage kiosk program; 
b.  Development standards, design, and allowable Copy for off-premises signage kiosks; 
c.  Allowable locations for the kiosks; 
d.  A process for determining which businesses, developments, and other uses are allowed to be listed in the kiosks; 
e.  An administration process for the program, including establishment of a fee schedule; 
f.  Any other element of the program deemed necessary and appropriate by the City. 
_____
Table 18.50-4: Off-Premises Sign Standards 
Sign Type 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Area 	Maximum Height 	Other Standards/Notes 
Business District 	Business Districts (per Zoning Map Overlay) 	672 sf (cumulative area - max. 2 sign faces) 	35 ft. 	(1) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
Gateway 	Maximum 4 Signs (1/major freeway gateway) 	1,200 sf (cumulative area - max. 2 sign faces) 	55 ft. 	(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (7) (8) 
Kiosk 	Per Kiosk Program adopted by City Council Resolution 	Per Kiosk Program adopted by City Council Resolution 	Per Kiosk Program adopted by City Council Resolution 	
 
Notes: 
1. Conditional Use Permit and Billboard Public Benefit Agreement are required. 
2. Maximum display area is 25 feet in height and 60 feet in length. 
3. Height shall be measured from the finish grade of the freeway or adjacent roadway, whichever is higher. 
4. Distance and Separation. 
A. Sign may not be located closer than 500 feet from another permitted display on the same side of freeway, or closer than 1,000 feet from another freeway-oriented electronic changeable copy ("digital") Sign. 
B. Sign shall be located no farther than 150 feet from a freeway right-of-way, and only on a property that is immediately adjacent to or abutting a freeway right-of-way, or separated from a freeway right-of-way by only a frontage road, a railroad right-of-way, a public flood control channel, or public utility easements. No Business District or Gateway Sign shall be located within 150 of property for which zoning does not allow outdoor advertising displays (e.g., residential property). 
C. Gateway Sign shall be located a maximum of one-half mile from freeway point of entry into City. 
5. Caltrans Standards. Sign shall comply with all Caltrans standards, including restrictions pertaining to Classified Landscape Freeways, minimum distance/separation standards, and shall obtain a State Outdoor Advertising Permit. 
6. Each Business District Sign shall identify the name of the business district in which it is located and shall only advertise businesses which are located within the Business District and on the same side of the freeway where the Sign is located (per Outdoor Advertising Act, Section 5274). 
7. Sign shall comply with electronic changeable copy Sign standards contained in Section 18.050.090B.4. 
8. Billboard Public Benefit Agreement. 
a. Application requirements. In addition to the Conditional Use Permit and Sign Permit requirements, the applicant shall request in writing the approval of an Agreement that includes the following: 
i. The name, address, phone number and other contact information of the person or entity proposing the Agreement. 
ii. Identification of the location proposed for a new or relocated or modified billboard and the billboard(s) being permanently removed, where applicable. 
iii. Information that establishes that the person or entity proposing the Agreement has legal or equitable interest in the billboard being removed or modified and the site proposed for relocation or placement. 
iv. An explanation of the compensation to be paid or public benefits to be provided to the City. 
v. The Applicant must pay a filing fee in accordance with an approved resolution. This fee shall be in addition to any other required fees for permits relative to development of the property and of all existing structures and improvements on the property, and the proposed billboard. 
b. Review Process. All Agreements shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission at a duly noticed public hearing, concurrent with the required Conditional Use Permit. The Planning Commission shall review the Agreement and make a recommendation to the City Council, whether the proposed or modified billboard meets the findings in Section c., below. 
c. Findings. No later than forty-five days after the Planning Commission makes its recommendation, the City Council shall review and consider the Agreement at a duly noticed public hearing. In order to approve a request for an Agreement, the City Council shall make the following findings: 
i. The proposed Agreement is consistent with the goals, objectives, purposes and provisions of the General Plan, Zoning Code and any applicable specific plans; 
ii. The proposed billboard would not result in a threat to the general health, safety and welfare of City residents; and 
iii. The proposed billboard, in addition to its aesthetic treatment, provides public benefits that would not otherwise accrue to the public in the absence of its installation. 
B.  Pursuant to Business and Professions Code, Section 5412, the City Council is authorized to enter into relocation agreements, including identification of public benefits, with off-premises display owners on whatever terms are agreeable to the display owner and the City. 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017; Ord. No. O-08-17, § 4, 11-7-2017) 
_____ 
18.50.130 - Amortization of Off-Premises and Outdoor Advertising Displays. 
The City Shall comply with all provisions of the California Business and Professions Code regarding amortization and removal of existing Off-Premises and Outdoor Advertising Displays and billboard Signs. 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017)  
18.50.140 - Nonconforming Signs. 
A.  All Signs which do not meet the requirements of this chapter but which have been previously Approved by the City and issued a lawful permit shall be deemed Nonconforming Signs and shall either be removed or brought up to code when a substantial Alteration to the Sign is made. For purposes of this section a "substantial Alteration" Shall be defined as repair or refurbishing of any Sign that alters its physical dimensions, height or replaces any integral component including, but not limited to Alterations to exterior cabinets, bases or poles. Substantial Alteration Shall not include the replacement of individual panels on a can or cabinet Sign when the exterior boundaries of individual cans or cabinets are not replaced or altered. In Addition, substantial Alteration Shall also include any repair or refurbishing of Sign that exceeds fifty percent of the depreciated value, as determined by the City, of the Sign and structure, but excepting customary maintenance. "Customary maintenance" Shall be defined as any activity or work performed for the purpose of actively maintaining the Sign in its existing Approved physical configuration and size dimensions at the specific location approved by the City and includes the following: 
1.  Repainting the Sign text, cabinet or other component of the Sign without changing the advertising message; or 
2.  Routine replacement of border and trim with substantially the same colors and materials. 
B.  A Nonconforming Sign may continue to be used, provided no additions or enlargements are made thereto and no structural alterations are made therein, except as permitted for customary maintenance in subsection A of this section. If said Nonconforming Sign is destroyed or removed, or ceases to be used for the use in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, every future Sign shall be in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  A Nonconforming Sign may be reused upon issuance of a Business Occupancy Permit for a business use which does not require a Conditional Use Permit or other discretionary permit, and no exterior modifications are made to the exterior of building which require a Building Permit. No additions or enlargements may be made to the Nonconforming Sign, except for customary maintenance described in Subsection A of this section, and additions or modifications which bring the Sign into closer conformity with City standards. 
D.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any premises containing a Nonconforming Sign (including a Sign painted directly upon the surface of a structure) to remove said Nonconforming Sign within ninety days of cessation of business at that location. 
E.  The City shall comply with all provisions of the California Business and Professions Code, Section 5490 et seq., regarding enforcement and removal of On-Premises Advertising Displays and Signs and California Business and Professions Code, Section 5400 et seq., regarding enforcement and removal of Off-Premises Advertising Displays and Signs. 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017)  
18.50.150 - Banners and pennants on City-owned utility poles. 
Notwithstanding Section 18.50.070, the City of Colton may install banners and/or pennants on City-owned utility poles. The City Manager shall establish a written program to regulate the installation of banners and pennants on City-owned utility poles. Banners and pennants shall be installed in compliance with the program established by the City Manager. Noncommercial flags may be installed by the City of Colton without compliance with a banner program. 
(Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 4-4-2017)  
Chapter 18.52 - RECYCLING 
 
18.52.010 - Definitions. 
"Mobile Recycling Unit" means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles, which is Used for the collection of Recyclable Materials. A "Mobile Recycling Center" also means the bins, boxes and containers transported by trucks, vans or trailers, and Used for the collection of Recyclable Materials. 
"Recyclable Material" is reusable Material, including but not limited to metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable Material does not include Refuse or Hazardous Materials. Recyclable Material May include motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Sections 25250.11 and 25143.2(B4) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Recycling Facility" means a center for the collection and/or processing of Recyclable Materials. A certified Recycling Facility or certified processor means a Recycling Facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A Recycling Facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the Premises of a residential, commercial or manufacturing Use and Used solely for the recycling of Material generated by that residential Property, Business or manufacturer. Recycling Facilities May include the Following: 
1.  Collection Facility. A "Collection Facility" is a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption or purchase of Recyclable Materials from the public. Collection facilities May include the Following: 
a.  Reverse vending machines; 
b.  Small collection facilities which occupy an area of not more than five hundred square feet, and May include a mobile unit, bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than fifty square feet, kiosk type units, or unattended containers placed for the donation of Recyclable Materials; 
c.  Large collection facilities which May occupy an area of more than five hundred square feet and May include permanent Structures. 
2.  Processing Facility. A "Processing Facility" is a Building or Enclosed Space Used for the collection and processing of Recyclable Materials. "Processing" means the preparation of Material for efficient shipment, or to an end User's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the Following: 
a.  A "light Processing Facility" which occupies an area of under forty-five thousand square feet of gross collection, processing and storage area and has up to an average of two outbound truck shipments per Day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated Recyclable Materials and repairing of reusable Materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing Facility. A light processing Facility Shall not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers. 
b.  A "Heavy Processing Facility" is any processing Facility other than a light processing Facility. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.52.020 - Permits required. 
No Person Shall Permit the placement, construction or operation of any Recycling Facility without first obtaining a Permit pursuant to the provisions set forth in this section. Recycling Facilities May be Permitted as set forth in the Following table. In addition to the Permits described below, a reverse vending machine or a small collection Facility May also be allowed in special zones which allow Uses Permitted in Commercial or Industrial Zones with an administrative Permit; and a large collection Facility or processing Facility May be allowed in Agricultural Zones with a Conditional Use Permit. 
Type of Facility 	Zones Permitted 	Permit Required 
Reverse vending machines 	All commercial and industrial 	By right 
Small collection 	All commercial and industrial 	Administrative 
Large collection 	C-2 and all industrial 	Conditional Use 
Light processing 	All industrial 	Conditional Use 
Heavy processing 	Heavy industrial 	Conditional Use 
 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.52.030 - Permits for multiple sites. 
A single administrative Permit May be granted to allow more than one reverse vending machine or small collection Facility located on different sites under the Following conditions: 
A.  The Operator of each of the proposed facilities is the same; 
B.  The proposed facilities are determined by the Community Development Director to be similar in nature, size and intensity of activity; and 
C.  All of the applicable criteria and standards set forth in Section 18.58.040 are met for each such proposed Facility. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.52.040 - Criteria and standards. 
Those Recycling Facilities Permitted with an administrative Permit Shall meet all the applicable criteria and standards listed in this section. Those Recycling Facilities Permitted with a Minor Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit, Shall meet the applicable criteria and standards; provided, that the Community Development Director, Planning Commission or City Council, as the case May be, May relax such standards or impose stricter standards as an exercise of discretion upon a finding that such modifications are reasonably necessary in order to implement the general intent of this section and the purposes of this title. 
If this title has a section requiring all activities in a Commercial Zone to be conducted completely within an enclosed Structure and which lists exceptions, that section Shall be amended to add "Recycling Collection Facilities" to the list of exceptions. The criteria and standards for Recycling Facilities are as follows: 
A.  Reverse Vending Machines. Reverse vending machines within a commercial Structure do not require discretionary Permits. Reverse vending machines do not require additional Parking Spaces for recycling customers and May be Permitted in all commercial and industrial zones with an administrative Use Permit; provided, that they comply with the Following standards: 
1.  Shall be established in conjunction with a commercial Use or community service Facility which is in compliance with the Zoning, Building and Fire Codes of the City; 
2.  Shall be located within thirty feet of the entrance to the commercial Structure and Shall not obstruct Pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
3.  Shall not occupy Parking Spaces required by the primary Use; 
4.  Shall occupy no more than fifty square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective Enclosure, and Shall be no more than eight feet in height; 
5.  Shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof Material; 
6.  Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of Material to be deposited, operating instructions and the identity and phone number of the Operator or Responsible Person to call if the machine is inoperative; 
7.  Shall have a Sign area of a maximum of four square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions; 
8.  Shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis; 
9.  Operating hours Shall be at least the operating hours of the host Use; and 
10.  Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn. 
B.  Small Collection Facilities. Small collection facilities May be sited in commercial and industrial with an administrative Permit, provided they comply with the Following conditions: 
1.  Shall be established in conjunction with an existing commercial Use or community service Facility which is in compliance with the Zoning, Building and Fire Codes of the City; 
2.  Shall be no larger than five hundred square feet and occupy no more than five Parking Spaces not including space that will periodically be needed for the removal of Materials or exchange of containers; 
3.  Shall be set back at least twenty feet from any Street Line and Shall not obstruct Pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
4.  Shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, paper and reusable items. Used motor oil May be accepted with Permission of the Local Fire Chief; 
5.  Shall Use no power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines; 
6.  Shall Use containers that are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof Material, covered when the site is not attended, Secured from unauthorized entry or removal of Materials, and Shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate Materials collected; 
7.  Shall store all Recyclable Material in containers or in the mobile unit Vehicle, and Shall not leave Materials outside of containers when attendant is not present; 
8.  Shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable Materials, and mobile facilities, at which truck or containers are removed at the end of each collection Day, Shall be swept at the end of each collection Day; 
9.  Shall not exceed Noise levels of sixty dBA as measured at the Property line of residentially zoned or occupied Property, otherwise Shall not exceed seventy dBA; 
10.  Attended facilities located within one hundred feet of a Property zoned or occupied for residential Use Shall operate only between the hours of nine a.m. and seven p.m.; 
11.  Containers for the twenty-four-hour donation of Materials Shall be at least thirty feet from any Property zoned or occupied for residential Uses unless there is a recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential Use; 
12.  Containers Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of Material which May be deposited; the Facility Shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the Facility Operator and the hours of operation, and display a Notice stating that no Material Shall be left outside the recycling Enclosure or containers; 
13.  Signs May be provided as follows: 
a.  Recycling Facilities May have identification Signs with a maximum of twenty percent per side, or sixteen square feet, whichever is smaller, in addition to informational Signs required in Subdivision 12 of this subsection; in the case of a wheeled Facility, the side will be measured from the pavement to the top of the container, 
b.  Signs Must be consistent with the character of the location, 
c.  Directional Signs, bearing no advertising message, May be installed with the Approval of the Community Development Director if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation, or if the Facility is not visible from the public Right-of-Way, 
d.  The Community Development Director May authorize increases in the number and sizes of Signs upon findings that it is compatible with adjacent Businesses; 
14.  The Facility Shall not impair the Landscaping required by Local Ordinances for any concurrent Use by this title or any Permit issued pursuant thereto; 
15.  No additional Parking Spaces will be required for customers of a small collection Facility located at the established Parking Lot of a host Use. One spot will be provided for the attendant, if needed; 
16.  Mobile Recycling Units Shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present; 
17.  Occupation of Parking Spaces by the Facility and by the attendant May not reduce available Parking Spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host Use unless all of the Following conditions exist: 
a.  The Facility is located in a Convenience Zone or a potential Convenience Zone as Designated by the California Department of Conservation, 
b.  A parking study shows that existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the Recycling Facility will be on the site, 
c.  The Permit will be reconsidered at the end of eighteen Months. 
A reduction in available Parking Spaces in an established Parking Facility May than be allowed as follows: 
For a commercial host Use: 
Number of Available 
Parking Spaces 	Maximum Reduction 
0 — 25 	0 
26 — 35 	2 
36 — 49 	3 
50 — 99 	4 
100+ 	5 
 
For a community Facility host Use: A maximum of five space reduction will be allowed when not in conflict with parking needs of the host Use; 
18.  The initial Permit to be issued Shall expire in twelve Months from the date of issuance, subsequent Permits Shall be effective for three-Year intervals; 
19.  If the Permit expires without renewal, the collection Facility Shall be removed from the site on the Day Following Permit expiration. 
C.  Large Collection Facilities. A large collection Facility is one that is larger than five hundred square feet, or is on a separate Property not appurtenant to a host Use, and which May have a permanent Building. A large collection Facility is Permitted in C-2 Commercial and Industrial Zones with a Conditional Use Permit, provided the Facility meets the Following standards: 
1.  Facility does not abut a Property zoned or planned for residential Use; 
2.  Facility will be screened from the public Right-of-Way by operating in an Enclosed Building or within an area enclosed by an opaque Fence at least six feet in height with Landscaping, or at least one hundred fifty feet from Property zoned or planned for residential Use, and meets all applicable Noise standards in this title; 
3.  Setbacks and landscape requirements Shall be those provided for the zone in which the Facility is located; 
4.  All exterior storage of Material Shall be in sturdy containers which are covered, Secured and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable Materials Shall be constructed of nonflammable Material. Oil storage Must be in containers Approved by the Fire Chief. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing; 
5.  Site Shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable Materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis; 
6.  Space will be provided on site for six Vehicles or the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is higher, to circulate and to deposit Recyclable Materials, except where the Community Development Director determined that allowing overflow traffic above six Vehicles is compatible with surrounding Businesses and public safety; 
7.  One Parking Space will be provided for each commercial Vehicle operated by the Recycling Facility. Parking requirements will be as provided for in the zone, except that parking requirements for Employees May be reduced when it can be shown that Parking Spaces are not necessary such as when Employees are transported in a company Vehicle to a work Facility; 
8.  Noise levels Shall not exceed fifty-five dBA as measured at the Property line of residentially zoned Property, or otherwise Shall not exceed seventy DBA; 
9.  If the Facility is located within five hundred feet of Property zoned, planned or occupied for residential Use, it Shall not be in operation between seven p.m. and seven a.m.; 
10.  Any containers provided for after-hours donation of Recyclable Materials will be at least fifty feet from any Property zoned or occupied for residential Use, Shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, Shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate Materials collected, and Shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of Materials. Containers Shall be at least twenty feet from any Building; 
11.  Donation areas will be kept free of litter and any other undesirable Materials and the containers will be clearly marked to identify the type of Material that May be deposited; Facility Shall display a Notice stating that no Material Shall be left outside the recycling containers; 
12.  Facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the Facility Operator and the hours of operation; identification and informational Signs will meet the standards of the zone; and Directional Signs, bearing no advertising message, May be installed with the Approval of the Community Development Director if necessary, to facilitate traffic circulation or if the Facility is not visible from the public Right-of-Way; 
13.  Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of Material, May be Approved through a Use Permit process or at the discretion of the Community Development Director if Noise and other conditions are met. 
D.  Processing Facilities. A light processing Facility is Permitted in Heavy Commercial Zones and Light Industrial Zones with a Minor Use Permit. A large processor is Permitted in Light Industrial Zones with a Conditional Use Permit. All processors are Permitted in Heavy Industrial or Manufacturing Zones with a Conditional Use Permit or according to the practice of the City for similar Uses. A processor will meet the Following conditions: 
1.  Facility does not abut a Property zoned or planned for residential Use; 
2.  In a Commercial or Light Industrial Zone, processors will operate in a wholly Enclosed Building except for Incidental storage, or: 
a.  Within an area enclosed on all sides by masonry Wall not less than eight feet in height and landscaped on all Street Frontages, 
b.  Located at least one hundred fifty feet from Property zoned or planned for residential Use; 
3.  Power-driven processing Shall be Permitted, provided all Noise level requirements are met. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated Recyclable Materials and repairing of reusable Materials; 
4.  A light processing Facility Shall be no larger than forty-five thousand square feet and Shall have no more than an average of two outbound truck shipments of Material per Day and May not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers; 
5.  A processing Facility May accept Used motor oil for recycling from the generator in accordance with Section 25250.11 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
6.  Setbacks and Landscaping requirements Shall be those provided for the zone in which the Facility is located; 
7.  All exterior storage of Materials Shall be in sturdy containers or Enclosures which are covered, Secured and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable Material Shall be constructed of nonflammable Material. Oil storage Must be in containers Approved by the Fire Chief. No storage excluding truck trailers and overseas containers will be visible above the height of the fencing; 
8.  Site Shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable Materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis and will be Secured from unauthorized entry and removal of Materials when attendants are not present; 
9.  Space Shall be provided on site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park and deposit Recyclable Materials. If the Facility is open to the public, space will be provided for a minimum of ten customers, except where the Community Development Director determines that allowing overflow traffic above six Vehicles is compatible with surrounding Businesses and public safety; 
10.  One Parking Space will be provided for each commercial Vehicle operated by the processing center. Parking requirements will otherwise be as mandated by the zone in which the Facility is located; 
11.  Noise levels Shall not exceed sixty dBA as measured at the Property line of residentially zoned or occupied Property, or otherwise Shall not exceed seventy dBA; 
12.  If the Facility is located within five hundred feet of Property zoned or planned for residential Use, it Shall not be in operation between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m. The Facility will be administered by on-site personnel during the hours the Facility is open; 
13.  Any containers provided for after-hours donation of Recyclable Materials will be at least fifty feet from any Property zoned or occupied for residential Use; Shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction; Shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate Materials collected; and Shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of Materials; 
14.  Donation areas Shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable Material. The containers Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of Material that May be deposited. Facility Shall display a Notice stating that no Material Shall be left outside the recycling containers; 
15.  Sign requirements Shall be those provided for the zone in which the Facility is located. In addition, the Facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the Facility Operator and the hours of operation; 
16.  No dust, fumes, Smoke, vibration or odor above ambient level May be detectable on neighboring Properties. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.52.050 - Fees. 
The City Council recognizes that staff, as well as administrative time and City resources, will be utilized in processing Permits per this chapter. It is therefore authorized that staff should present to the City Council a Resolution setting the appropriate Fee for such Permits. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.52.060 - Violation and enforcement. 
A.  All Persons, except for an authorized recycling agent, are prohibited pursuant to California State Law AB3717, Chapter 1475, from removing from any Designated recycling location, Material which has been segregated from other waste Material for the purpose of recycling and placed at a Designated collection Facility or deposited with a certified Recycling Facility. 
B.  Any Person May donate or sell recyclables to any other Person whether operating for profit or not for profit. 
C.  No Person Shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Any Person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with the requirements of this chapter will be subject to enforcement by the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.54 - ANIMALS 
 
18.54.010 - Fowl and similar animals. 
A.  It is unlawful to keep fowl, rabbits, guinea pigs or similar animals in the City except as follows: 
1.  In an R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-E Zone to keep a total combination thereof of three or less and providing all of them are kept at least twenty feet from any house built or Used for human residence; 
2.  In an R-E Zone to keep a total combination thereof of twelve or less and providing all of them are kept at least forty feet from any house built or Used for human residence; 
3.  In an A Zone. 
B.  Even those animals which are Permitted by this section May not be allowed if the Design Review Committee finds that the animals create an unsanitary condition or Nuisance. 
C.  Variation from the conditions stated in this section May be Approved by the Design Review Committee. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.54.020 - Pigs and livestock. 
A.  It is unlawful to keep any pig, hog, sheep, bull, stallion, mare, cow, burro, jack, jenny, mule, goat, kid, horse or similar animal in the City except as follows: 
1.  In an R-E, M-1 or M-2 Zone to keep a total combination thereof of three or less animals per acre, and providing all of them are kept at least sixty feet from any surrounding residence and forty feet from any residence of the Property in which they are kept; 
2.  In an A Zone. 
B.  Even those animals which are Permitted by this section May not be allowed if the Design Review Committee finds that the animals create an unsanitary or unsafe condition. 
C.  Variation from the conditions stated in this section May be Approved by the Design Review Committee. 
(Ord. 0-24-04 § 3, 2004; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.54.030 - Appropriate and sanitary housing. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, no Person, firm or corporation Shall keep any kind of animal, as mentioned in this chapter, or otherwise, without housing the same in an appropriate coop, barn, Building or other Enclosure Approved by the Community Development or such other qualified Person as the City Council Shall Designate, so as the same May be safe, sanitary and appropriate for the purpose intended and so as not to cause an unsanitary or unhealthy condition or create a Nuisance. The coop, barn, Building or Enclosure Shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times and not be Permitted to accumulate Refuse, Rubbish, manure or other unsanitary Materials. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.54.040 - Prohibition of slaughtering. 
There Shall be no slaughtering Permitted within all sections of the City, of any type of animal. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.54.050 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any Person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six Months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
Chapter 18.58 - ADMINISTRATION 
 
18.58.010 - Roles. 
A.  The City Council. The Council Shall adopt zoning regulations as stated in this title; approve any changes to the Zoning Map; consider Appeals of Commission Decisions; and perform such other duties as are required by state Law. 
B.  The Planning Commission. The Commission Shall review, advise the Council on, and administer regulations of, this title; grant or deny Conditional Use Permits and Variances; and perform such other duties as are required by the Council and/or state Law. 
C.  The Development Services Department. The Department Shall advise the Council, and Planning Commission on Matters concerning zoning regulations; Shall maintain records of all Matters relating to administration of zoning regulations; Shall advise the public of the provisions hereof; and Shall review Building Permits and Business Occupancy Permits as to the provisions of this title. The Department May also approve Minor modifications to a Development plan Approved by the Commission and/or Council. 
D.  The Department of Public Works. 
1.  The Director of Public Works, or his or her Designee(s), Shall determine whether a public works Project is exempt from environmental review, pursuant to CEQA and the City's CEQA guidelines. 
i.  Where the Project is exempt, the Director of Public Works, or his or her Designee(s), Shall make such findings and file all required forms. 
ii.  Where the Project is not exempt, the Director of Public Works, or his or her Designee(s), Shall determine which, if any, document(s) need to be prepared under the provisions of CEQA and the City's Local CEQA guidelines and Shall recommend to the City Council the appropriate environmental document in accordance with the City's Local CEQA guidelines. 
2.  The environmental determination of the Director of Public Works, or his or her Designee, regarding public works Projects Shall, if required, be subject to the Approval of and/or Appeal to the City Council only. 
(Ord. 0-12-06 § 1, 2006: Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-03-14, § 8, 3-4-2014)  
18.58.020 - Business Occupancy Permits. 
A.  No Building erected, moved, enlarged or altered Shall be occupied, Used, or changed in Use or ownership until a Business Occupancy Permit has been issued by the Department. Such Business Occupancy Permit Shall be applied for coincidentally with the Application for a Building Permit and Shall be issued only after such Building, erection, enlargement or Alteration has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this title and when the proposed Use conforms thereto. Any Use legally occupying an existing Building at the time the Ordinance codified in this title became effective May be continued but Shall not be changed unless a Business Occupancy Permit for the new Use Shall have been issued by the Department, after finding that such Use conforms with the provisions of this and other applicable chapters and Ordinances. 
B.  The conformity to the Property Development standards of this title May include the provisions of required Walls, Landscaping, parking, trash Enclosures, Street Improvements, aesthetic Improvements and all other Improvements determined by the Community Development Department to be necessary or required by any regulating Ordinance for the particular Use. 
C.  A Business Occupancy Permit Shall also be applied for before any Vacant land is hereafter Used or before an existing Use of Vacant land is changed. The Director Shall issue such Permits, provided such Use is in conformity with the provisions of this title. No Business Occupancy Permit Shall be required where the land is to be Used for tilling the soil and growing thereon farm, garden or orchard products. 
D.  The Business Occupancy Permit Shall state that the Building or proposed Use of a Building or land complies with all the Laws and Ordinances and with the provision of this title. A record of all Permits Shall be kept on file in the Department and copies Shall be furnished on request to any Person having a proprietary or Tenancy interest in the Building or land affected. 
(Ord. 0-6-94 § 1, 1994; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.58.030 - Administrative Application review procedures. 
A.  Authority. 
1.  The Director is authorized to review, approve, deny or conditionally approve all Development Applications as further described in this section. 
2.  The Director Shall be assisted in his/her decisions by an Application Review Committee ("Committee") and May appoint members to the Committee to assist him/her in carrying out the Application review procedures outlined in this section. 
3.  The Director May receive recommendations from the Committee on all Projects described in this section. 
4.  The Director May have regularly scheduled meetings of the Committee and May call special meetings at his/her convenience or as the situation May warrant. 
B.  Intent and purpose. The City finds that an administrative Application review process will support the implementation of the General Plan and Zoning Code by ensuring compliance with all purposes, objectives, policies and standards in an efficient and objective manner. 
C.  Powers. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, the Director is granted power to receive, administratively hear and determine Applications and collect a fee in accordance with the most current adopted fee schedule on the Following Matters only: 
1.  Minor deviations. The Director Shall have the power to hear and approve, conditionally approve or deny minor deviations from the provisions of the zoning regulations in the limited situations enumerated below: 
a.  An increase of up to ten percent of Floor Area Ratio over the maximum allowed; 
b.  A ten percent maximum reduction on the front Setback, two feet maximum reduction on the side Setback, twenty percent maximum reduction on the rear Setback, and twenty percent maximum reduction on the separation between Buildings; 
c.  Width reduction not exceeding two feet of the amount prescribed for paved vehicular Access; 
d.  A maximum of five percent reduction of the minimum Floor Area for Dwelling Units; 
e.  A maximum height increase of two feet for Fences, Hedges and Walls; 
f.  Allowance for the Use of common Recreation Space as a substitute for private Recreation Space; 
g.  Area, width and Setback reductions up to ten percent of the amount prescribed for automobile service stations; 
h.  Reduction of up to ten percent of the amount of Parking Spaces required. 
i.  Increase of up to ten percent of the maximum sign area, maximum height, or increase/reduction of ten percent in maximum/minimum letter height for Building attached or freestanding signs. 
2.  Minor Subdivisions. Where basic criteria for a Minor Subdivision are met as prescribed by Section 16.20.020 of this Code, the Director Shall have the power to recommend Approval, conditional Approval or disapproval to the Public Works Director of any proposed Minor Subdivision in the Following limited situations and provided no Variances are required: 
a.  Realignment of Lot Lines, where the Minor Subdivision Application consists of the realignment of existing Lot Lines; 
b.  Where the Application for the Minor Subdivision consists of an Application to split off a portion of the Lot (or to acquire a portion of another Lot) not to exceed twenty-five percent of the Lot of the Applicant involved; 
c.  Where the Application consists of division into not more than four Parcels. 
3.  Architectural and Site Plan Review. The Director Shall review, and approve, deny or conditionally approve Architectural and Site Plan Review for Projects which do not exceed fifteen thousand square feet of gross floor area. The Director Shall only make recommendations on Projects of larger size and the Planning Commission Shall have the authority to approve, deny or conditionally approve Architectural and Site Plan Review for all such proposed Projects in the City that exceed fifteen thousand square feet of gross floor area. Only plans for the Development of a Single Family detached Dwelling including accessory Buildings, and additions or Alterations to existing Structures, fences, hedges and walls which do not change the external appearance nor increase the intensification of Use of the Structure, Shall be exempt from Architectural and Site Plan Review. The Director and/or the Planning Commission Shall approve or conditionally approve Architectural and Site Plan Review , except where they make one or more of the Following findings: 
a.  The provisions for vehicular parking and for vehicular and Pedestrian circulation on the site, and onto adjacent public Right-of-Way will create safety hazards; 
b.  The bulk, location and height proposed will be detrimental or injurious to other Development in the neighborhood or will result in the loss of or damage to unique natural or topographic features of the site that are important to the environmental quality of life for the citizens of Colton, and the Project is feasible in a manner that will avoid such detrimental or injurious results or such loss or damage; 
c.  The provisions for on-site Landscaping do not provide adequate protection to neighboring Properties from detrimental features of the proposed Project that could be avoided by adequate Landscaping; 
d.  The provisions for exterior lighting are either inadequate for human safety or will diminish the value and/or usability of adjacent Property; 
e.  The exterior design of the Buildings and Structures will be injurious or detrimental to the environmental or historic features of the immediate neighborhood in which the proposed Project is located and will cause irreparable damage to Property in the neighborhood, to the City and to its citizens; 
f.  The proposed Project will impose an undue burden upon Off-Site public services, including sewer, water and streets, which conclusion Shall be based upon a Written report of the City Engineer; and there is no provision in the capital works program of the City to correct the specific burden within a reasonable period after the Project will be completed. 
4.  Signs. The Director Shall review Applications for all Signs within the City, recognizing that the height, size, shape, number, color, lighting and movement of any Sign Shall be proportional to the size and/or intensification of Use of any given Development. The Director Shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve or deny those signs identified in Table 18.50-1 of this Title as being subject to Approval by the Director. 
5.  Determination of appropriate environmental documents to be prepared pursuant to CEQA. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection D. herein, the Director Shall direct City staff regarding the appropriate document(s) to prepare on each proposed Project for Commission and/or Council review and certification pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Where the Project is deemed to be exempt from environmental review pursuant to CEQA Guidelines, the Director Shall make such findings and file all required forms. 
6.  Approval of architectural and site plan review within a Specific Plan Area. In cases where all standards, criteria and guidelines specified by a specific plan are met, the Director Shall have the power to approve any Architectural and Site Plan Review. 
7.  Unlisted Uses. The Director Shall make determinations whether a use not specifically listed in this Zoning Code is permitted, conditionally permitted or not permitted pursuant to Subsection 18.060.060 K. 
D.  Environmental determination for public works projects. Notwithstanding any other provision in this title, the Director of Public Works, or his or her Designee(s), Shall determine the appropriate level of environmental review necessary for CEQA compliance. In the event a Project is not exempt from CEQA, the Director of Public Works Shall recommend to the City Council the appropriate environmental document in accordance with CEQA Guidelines. If required, the Decision of the Director of Public Works, and his or her Designee(s), Shall be subject to the Approval of and/or Appeal to the City Council only. The procedures for Appeal to the City Council Shall be the same as those set forth in Subsections F.2. and F.3. of this section, except that such Appeal Shall be in writing and delivered to the Director of Public Works and the City Clerk, rather than the Director. 
E.  Decisions. 
1.  All Decisions Shall be effective ten Days after the Director's Decision. 
2.  In all cases, Written Notice of the Director's Decision Shall be mailed or personally delivered to the Applicant. If personally delivered, the Written Notice Shall be deemed received by the Applicant upon personal delivery. If mailed, the Written Notice Shall be deemed received by the Applicant three calendar days following deposit in the mail. 
F.  Appeals and Discretion to decline jurisdiction. 
1.  Notwithstanding any provisions giving the Director the power and the authority to hear and determine the foregoing Matters, the Director May, at his/her discretion, decline to hear or determine the Matter and instead May refer it to the Commission. 
2.  Any Applicant not satisfied with a determination by the Director Shall have the right to Appeal to the Planning Commission. Such Appeal Shall be made in writing and delivered to the Office of the Director within ten calendar Days after the Applicant's receipt of notification of the Director's Decision. A Fee Shall be paid as established by City Council Resolution. 
3.  In the event of an Appeal as provided in Subsection F.1. or F.2. of this section, the action of the Director in the Matter Shall be suspended pending the Appeal. After a Decision by the Commission, Appeal Shall be to the Council. Such Appeal Shall be made in the same time and manner as the Appeal to the Commission, except that the Appeal Shall be Written and delivered to the City Clerk, rather than the Director. 
G.  Filing Fee. With respect to Applications filed under the provisions of Subsections C.1., C.2., C.4. and C.8. of this section, a Uniform Fee set by Council Resolution Shall be paid to the City upon the filing of each Application to cover the costs and expenses involved. 
(Ord. 0-12-06 § 2, 2006: Ord. 0-16-05 § 10, 2005; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-03-14, § 8, 3-4-2014)  
18.58.040 - Variances. 
A.  Variances from the terms of this title Shall be granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the Property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict Application deprives such Property of privileges enjoyed by other Property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification. 
B.  Any Variance granted Shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized Shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other Properties in the vicinity and zone in which such Property is situated. 
C.  The Planning Commission, upon its own motion May, or upon the verified Application of any interested Person Shall, initiate proceedings for consideration of the granting of a Variance from the provision of this title. 
D.  Application for Variances Shall be made to the Commission in writing, and Shall contain such information as May be specified by the Director. In cases where the Department considers the conditions set forth on the Application not within the scope of the Variance procedure, the Applicant Shall be so informed, whereupon, if the Application is accepted, it Shall be signed by the Applicant to the effect that he was informed. 
E.  A Uniform Fee set by Council Shall be paid to the City upon filing of each Application. 
F.  The Commission Shall hold one Public Hearing upon the Matters referred to in the Application. Additional hearings May be held at the discretion of the Commission. Within forty Days of said first hearing, the Commission Shall make a determination and report thereon, unless the Matter is continued for further investigation and study. 
G.  Notice of time and place of the hearing Shall be given through the United States mail, with postage prepaid, to all Persons shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the County, as owning Property within a distance of six hundred sixty feet from the external boundaries of the Property described in the Application. 
H.  In Addition, further Notice May be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, or in such manner as May be deemed necessary or desirable. 
I.  Any Variance granted Shall be subject to such conditions as deemed necessary and reasonable to protect the best interests of the surrounding Property or neighborhood, the General Plan, or the intent thereof. Such conditions May include the dedication and Development of Streets adjoining the Property, and other Improvements. All such conditions Shall be binding upon the Applicants, their successors and assigns. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-03-14, § 9, 3-4-2014; Ord. No. O-05-16, § 3, 4-5-2016)  
18.58.050 - Zone changes and General Plan amendments. 
A.  Subject to the provisions of the state planning and zoning Law, proceedings to change zones and/or General Plan or specific plan Designations, or Uses within zones and/or Designations, to alter boundaries of zones and/or Designations, to impose regulations not heretofore imposed May be initiated and conducted in the Following manner: 
1.  By motion of the Council on its own initiative; 
2.  By action of the Commission on its own initiative, or the Owner(s) of record of the Parcel(s) of Property for which a change is sought, or by a purchaser thereof under a contrast in writing duly executed and acknowledged by both the Buyer and the seller, by a lessee in possession thereof with the Written consent of the Owner(s) or by the agent of any of the foregoing, duly authorized thereto in writing. 
B.  Any Application for a change of zone and/or General Plan or specific plan Designation Shall contain such information as is requested by the Director. The accuracy of all information, maps and lists submitted Shall be the responsibility of the Applicant. The Department May reject any Application that does not supply the information requested. 
C.  A Uniform Fee set by Council Resolution Shall be paid to the City upon the filing of each such Application. 
D.  No Application (other than one initiated by the Commission or Council) Shall be accepted, for a change of zone and/or General Plan Designation, for Parcels of Property, or portions thereof, which have been included in an Application upon which final action has been taken by the Council within twelve Months prior to the date of said Application for the same or substantially the same change. If, however, a substantial change of circumstance is shown to have occurred since the previous unsuccessful Application and good cause is shown therefor, the Applicant May reapply after the final action on the prior Application, by applying to the Commission for Permission to file the subsequent Application for the change. A denial by the Commission of Permission to file a new Application May be Appealed. 
E.  The Commission Shall hold one Public Hearing upon the Matters referred to in a petition for a zone change and/or General Plan amendment. Additional hearing May be held, at the discretion of the Commission. Within forty Days of the first hearing, the Commission Shall make a determination and a Written recommendation thereof to the Council, unless the Matter is continued for further investigation and study, in which event, the Commission Shall make a progress report to the Council at least once every forty Days. When such hearings, investigations and studies have been completed, the Commission Shall render its Decision in the form of a Written recommendation to the Council. The Council, after receipt of the recommendation, Shall hold one Public Hearing and May in its discretion hold additional hearings, after the completion of which it Shall either approve, modify or reject the same. Any Decision by the Council Shall be by majority vote of the entire membership of the Council. 
F.  In considering any request for a change of zone, the Commission Shall satisfy itself that the Following conditions prevail before recommending to the Council that the change be granted: 
1.  That the proposed change of zone is in conformity with the General Plan of the City; 
2.  That there is a need in the community for more of the types of Uses Permitted by the zone; 
3.  That the proposed change of zone would not adversely affect the surrounding area or the community in general. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.58.060 - Conditional Use Permits and Minor Conditional Use Permits. 
A.  The purpose of a Conditional Use Permit or Minor Conditional Use Permit is to allow certain Uses that contribute to the orderly growth and Development of the City to be properly integrated into the overall community pattern and zone where located. 
B.  A Minor Conditional Use Permit application may be filed for uses that are of less complexity and require less staff time to process than uses which require a Conditional Use Permit. Uses subject to a Minor Conditional Use Permit are listed in Section 18.06.060—Uses Permitted in each Zone. 
B.  In considering a Conditional Use Permit or Minor Conditional Use Permit, the Commission Shall affix those conditions which it determines will tend to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare in the zone. 
C.  Applications for Conditional Use Permits or Minor Conditional Use Permits Shall be made to the Commission, in writing, and Shall contain such information as May be specified by the Director. 
D.  A Uniform Fee, set by Council Resolution, Shall be paid to the City upon the filing of each Application. 
E.  The Commission Shall hold one Public Hearing upon the Matters referred to in the Application. Additional hearings May be held, at the discretion of the Commission. The Commission Shall investigate the facts bearing on each case to provide information necessary to assure action consistent with the intent and purpose of this title. 
F.  Notice of the time and place of the hearing Shall be given by Notice through the United States mail, with postage prepaid, to all Persons shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the County, as owning Property, and tenants of each Property, within a distance of six hundred sixty feet from the external boundaries of the Property described in the Application. 
G.  In addition, further Notice May be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, or in such other manner as May be deemed necessary or desirable. 
H.  Before approving a Conditional Use Permit or Minor Conditional Use Permit, the Commission Shall make certain findings that the circumstances prescribed below do apply: 
1.  That the proposed Use is in accord with the General Plan, the objectives of this title, and the purposes of the zone in which the site is located; 
2.  That the proposed Use, together with the conditions applicable thereto will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or Materially injurious to Properties or Improvements in the vicinity; 
3.  That the proposed Use complies with each of the applicable provisions of this title. 
I.  The Commission Shall make its findings and render its Decision granting or denying the Conditional Use Permit or Minor Conditional Use Permit in writing forty Days after the date of the first hearing, unless continued for further investigation, study or hearing. 
J.  A revision or modification to an Approved Conditional Use Permit or Minor Conditional Use Permit such as, but not limited to, change in conditions, expansions, intensification, location, hours of operation or change of ownership May be requested by an Applicant. The Applicant Shall supply necessary information as determined by the City, to indicate reasons for the requested change. 
K.  The Planning Commission May periodically review any Conditional Use Permit or Minor Conditional Use Permit to ensure that it is being operated in a manner consistent with conditions of Approval or in a manner which is not detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or Materially injurious to Properties in the vicinity. If, after review, the Commission deems that there is sufficient evidence to warrant a full examination, then a Public Hearing date Shall be set. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-05-16, § 4, 4-5-2016; Ord. No. O-11-16, § 4, 8-2-2016)  
18.58.070 - Expiration of land Use entitlements. 
Any land Use entitlement described in this chapter granted by the Commission becomes subject to revocation or surrender if not exercised within one Year of the date of Approval thereof. Upon Written Application by the Applicant or Property Owner filed prior to the expiration of the Approved land Use entitlement, the time at which the land Use entitlement expires May be extended by the Commission for an additional one Year period, at a time, for good cause. The existence of "Good Cause" will be determined at the sole discretion of the Commission. No more than four extensions May be granted for any Approved land Use entitlement. Upon Written Application by the Applicant or Property Owner filed prior to the expiration of the land Use entitlement, the Approved land Use entitlement Shall automatically be extended for thirty Days or until the Application for extension is Approved or denied, whichever occurs first. All requests for extension Shall be acted upon by the Commission on the consent calendar. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 15, 2007: Ord. 0-21-99 § 1, 1999; Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. O-13-17, § 2, 12-19-2017)  
18.58.080 - Revocation of land Use entitlements. 
A.  Any land Use entitlement described in this chapter may, by action of the Commission, be revoked or surrendered upon any one or more of the Following grounds: 
1.  That the Approval was obtained by fraud; 
2.  That the Use for which such Approval is granted has not been exercised within one Year of the date of Approval thereof; 
3.  That the Use for which such Approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for one Year or more; 
4.  The land Use entitlement granted is being, or recently has been, exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of such Approval, or in Violation of any statute, Ordinance, Law or regulation; 
5.  That the Use for which Approval was granted was so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health and safety, or so as to constitute a Nuisance; 
6.  That the Use for which such Approval is granted has not been exercised and the Owner wishes to surrender or remove the land Use entitlement. 
B.  A Public Hearing Shall be held before the Commission or before a Neutral Hearing Officer, appointed as specified in Section 18.58.101, to determine whether there are grounds to revoke or surrender the land Use entitlement. Written Notice of the Public Hearing Shall be served on the Owner of the Property for which such land Use entitlement was granted, at least ten Days before such Public Hearing. The Notice May be served either personally or by registered mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. 
C.  At the Public Hearing, the Commission or the Hearing Officer, as applicable, Shall investigate the facts bearing on each case and render its Decision in writing within forty Days after the date of the first hearing, unless continued for further investigation, study or hearing. The Decision of the Commission or the Hearing Officer on the revocation of any land Use entitlement Shall be final Following a ten-Day Appeal period. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 16, 2007) 
(Ord. No. O-13-17, § 3, 12-19-2017)  
18.58.090 - Referral of extension or revocation determination to City Council. 
Notwithstanding any provision hereof giving the Commission the power and authority to hear and determine whether there are grounds for an extension or a revocation of a land Use entitlement, the Commission may, at its discretion, decline to hear or determine the Matter and instead May refer it to the City Council. The City Council May consider the foregoing Matters, or May instead refer such Matters to a neutral Hearing Officer, to be appointed as further specified in Section 18.58.101. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 17, 2007)  
18.58.100 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  The Decision of the Commission on all land Use Applications Shall be final Following a ten-Day Appeal period. The Commission Shall, within two working Days from the date of the Commission's action of any land Use Application, notify the Applicant by forwarding a Copy of the Resolution to the address shown upon the Application. 
B.  The action of the Planning Commission in denying an Application Shall be final and conclusive unless, within ten calendar Days Following the Notice of the Commission's action to the Applicant, an Appeal in writing is filed with the City Clerk by the Applicant, persons residing or owning property within six hundred sixty feet from the external boundaries of the Property subject to the Planning Commission's decision, or the City Council pursuant to subsection H below. 
C.  Upon receipt of a Written Appeal, the City Clerk Shall advise the Secretary of the Planning Commission who Shall transmit the Planning Commission's Complete Record of the case. 
D.  Within forty Days Following receipt of the filing of a Written Appeal, the City Council Shall conduct a duly advertised Public Hearing on the Matter, or Shall appoint a Neutral Hearing Officer, as further specified in Section 18.58.101, to conduct a duly advertised Public Hearing on the Matter, Public Notice of which Shall be given. 
E.  The City Council Shall announce its findings and Decision by formal Resolution not more than forty Days Following the conclusion of the hearing, and the Resolution Shall recite, among other things, the facts and reasons which, in the opinion of the City Council, make the Approval or denial of the Application necessary to carry out the general purpose of this title. 
F.  The action by the City Council Shall be by a majority vote of those members present and voting and Shall be final and conclusive. Any Resolution adopted shall require a minimum of four (4) votes. 
G.  In the event of an Appeal as provided above, the action of the Commission in the Matter Shall forthwith be suspended pending the Appeal. Upon the City Council's or Hearing Officer's rendering of a decision on Appeal, the action of the Commission in the Matter shall be void and of no force of effect. In the event that the City Council is unable to render a decision on Appeal, the decision of the Commission shall be final and conclusive. 
H.  Any two members of the City Council May Appeal the Decision of the Commission on a land Use Application, within ten calendar Days after mailing of the Notice of the Commission's decision. Notice of the Commission's decision Must be mailed within two working Days after such decision to the members of the City Council. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 18, 2007) 
(Ord. No. O-13-17, § 4, 12-19-2017; Ord. No. O-06-18, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
18.58.101 - Appointment of Neutral Hearing Officer. 
A.  If a Decision regarding a land Use entitlement is referred for consideration to a Neutral Hearing Officer according to the provisions set forth in this chapter, the City Shall arrange for a qualified Hearing Officer pursuant to any of the Following methods selected in its sole discretion: (1) pursuant to an agreement for a qualified Attorney with the California Office of Administrative Hearings; (2) pursuant to an agreement for a qualified Attorney with the County of San Bernardino; (3) by mutual agreement with the holder of the land Use entitlement/appellant; or (4) pursuant to any other method or agreement which satisfies applicable Law. "Qualified Attorney" means an Attorney at Law having been admitted to practice before the Courts of this state for at least five Years prior to his/her appointment. Hearing Officers Shall be assigned to Matters on a rotating basis to assure fair and impartial review and analysis of applicable issues. The City Shall have no role in the selection, assignment or rotation of the Hearing Officers, except as provided for in (3) above when mutually selected with the appellant. 
B.  The City and holder of the land Use entitlement/appellant Shall each be responsible for paying one-half of the Fees and costs charged by the Hearing Officer, unless and except to the extent that a specific provision of this Code provides otherwise. 
C.  Nothing contained in this section Shall be construed to prohibit any Person from seeking prompt judicial review of a Decision of a City Official regarding an activity protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, as applicable. The City Shall comply with all requirements provided for by the California Government Code, Code of Civil Procedure, or other applicable Laws, rules or regulations necessary for prompt judicial review. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 19 (part), 2007)  
18.58.102 - Development agreements. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish procedures and requirements for the City's consideration of Development agreements upon Application by, or on behalf of, a Property Owner or other Person having a legal or equitable interest in the Property which is to be the subject of a Development agreement. In adopting this section, the City Council has considered the General Plan of the City and the legislative findings and declarations set forth in Section 65864 of the Government Code. 
B.  Development Agreement—Authorized. Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2.5 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code (Section 65864 et seq.), the City Council is authorized to enter into Development agreements upon Application by, or on behalf of, a Property Owner or other Person having legal or equitable interest in the Property which is the subject of the proposed agreement. 
C.  Development Agreement—Application, Fees. 
1.  A Developer wishing to enter into a Development agreement with the City Shall submit to the Planning Director a Written Application on a form provided by the Planning Director. 
2.  The Planning Director May require the Developer to submit such additional information and supporting data as May be considered necessary to properly evaluate the proposed Development agreement. 
3.  The Written Application required in this section Shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing Fee in an amount as set by Resolution of the City Council. 
D.  Proposed Form of Agreement. Each Application Shall be accompanied by the form of Development agreement proposed by the Applicant. 
E.  Review of Application. The Planning Director Shall review the Application to determine whether or not it is complete. If it is found that the Application is complete, the Planning Director Shall accept it for filing. If the Application is found to be incomplete, the Planning Director Shall refuse to accept the Application for filing and Shall inform the Applicant of the items necessary to properly complete the Application. 
F.  Development Agreement—Hearing by Planning Commission. 
1.  The Planning Director Shall refer all Applications for Development agreement to the Planning Commission for a Public Hearing. 
2.  Upon receipt of the Application, the Planning Director Shall set a date for the Public Hearing. 
3.  The Planning Director Shall insure that the public is given proper Notice of said Public Hearing in accordance with state planning, zoning and Development Law. 
G.  Conduct of Hearing. The Public Hearing held pursuant to this section Shall be conducted as nearly asMay be possible in accordance with the procedural standards adopted under Government Code Section 65804 for the conduct of zoning hearings. Each Person interested in the Matter Shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The Applicant Shall have the burden of proof at the Public Hearing on the proposed Development agreement. 
H.  Irregularity in Proceedings. No action, inaction or recommendation regarding the proposed Development agreement Shall be held void or invalid, or be set aside by a Court by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect or omission ("error"), as to any Matter pertaining to petition, Application, Notice, finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation, or any Matters of procedure whatever unless after an examination of the entire case, including the evidence, the Court is of the opinion that the error complained of was prejudicial and that by reason of the error the complaining Party sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. There is no presumption that error is prejudicial or that injury was done if error is shown. 
I.  Determination by Planning Commission. 
1.  After the hearing by the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission Shall forward its Written recommendation and the Application to the City Council. The recommendation Shall include the Planning Commission's determination of whether or not the Development agreement proposed: 
a.  Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land Uses and programs specified in the General Plan and any applicable specific plan; 
b.  Is compatible with the Uses authorized in, and the regulations prescribed for, the land Use District in which the Real Property is located; 
c.  Is in conformity with public convenience, general welfare, and good land Use practice; 
d.  Will be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare; 
e.  Will adversely affect the orderly Development of Property or the preservation of Property valued. 
2.  The recommendation Shall include the factual bases for said determination. 
J.  Development Agreement—Hearing by City Council. 
1.  Upon receipt of the Application and the Written recommendation of the planning, the City Council Shall set a date for a Public Hearing on the Matter. 
2.  The City Clerk Shall insure that the public is given Notice of the Public Hearing in accordance with the state planning, zoning and Development Laws. 
K.  Action by City Council. 
1.  After the Public Hearing, the City Council May approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning Commission. It May refer back to the Planning Commission, for report and recommendation, Matters not previously considered by the Planning Commission. 
2.  Upon receipt of a referral as set forth in subsection (K)(1) of this section, the Planning Commission, without further Public Hearing, Shall consider the new Matters and report its recommendations in writing to the City Council within forty Days after receipt of said referral. Failure to act within the forty-Day limit Shall constitute a favorable endorsement on the Matters set forth in the referral. 
3.  If the City Council approves the Development agreement, it Shall do so by Ordinance. 
L.  Requirements for Approval. No Development agreement May be Approved by the City Council unless all of the Following conditions are met: 
1.  The City Council Must find that: 
a.  The provisions of the agreement are consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan, and 
b.  The Development agreement complies with all applicable zoning, Subdivision, and Building regulations, and with the general and any relevant specific plan; 
2.  The agreement Must state: 
a.  The specific duration of the agreement, 
b.  The Permitted Uses of the Property, 
c.  The density and intensity of Use, 
d.  The maximum height and size of proposed Buildings, 
e.  Specific provisions for reservations or dedication of land for public purposes. 
M.  Effective Date of Development Agreement. In adopting this subsection, the City Council recognizes the fact that a Development agreement is a legislative Act which is subject to referendum. Therefore, notwithstanding the fact that the City Council adopts an Ordinance approving a Development agreement and causes said agreement to be signed, said agreement Shall be effective and Shall only create obligations on the Part of the City from and after the date that the Ordinance approving said Development agreement takes effect. 
N.  Development Agreement—Amendment or Cancellation. Either Party May propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in Part of a Development agreement previously entered into. However, with the exception of modification or revocation pursuant to subsections Q through V of this section, both parties Must agree in writing to an amendment, or cancellation, of a Development agreement before it Shall be effective. 
O.  Amendment or Cancellation Procedure. 
1.  The procedure for proposing an adoption of an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in Part of the Development agreement is the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement in the first instance as outlined in this section. 
2.  However, where the City Council initiates the proposed amendment to or cancellation in whole or in Part of the Development agreement, it Shall first give Notice to the Property Owner of its intention to initiate such proceedings at least fifteen calendar Days in advance of the giving of Notice of the Public Hearing regarding the amendment or cancellation pursuant to subsection F of this section. 
P.  Recordation of Development Agreement, Amendment or Cancellation. 
1.  Within ten Days after the effective date of the Development agreement, the City Clerk Shall have the agreement recorded with the County Recorder. 
2.  If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the agreement as provided in Government Code Section 65868, or if the City terminates or modifies the agreement as provided in Government Code Section 65865.1 for failure of the Applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the City Clerk Shall have Notice of such action recorded with the County Recorder. 
Q.  Periodic Review of Development Agreement. 
1.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council shall review the Development agreement at least once every twelve Months after the effective date of the Adopting Ordinance (hereinafter called periodic review). The City Council may, on its own motion or on the advice of the City Manager, review the Development agreement more often than once every twelve Months as it is deemed necessary (hereinafter "Special Review"). 
2.  The City Council May delegate or refer the periodic review of the Development agreement to the Planning Commission or to the City Manager or his Designated Representative. 
R.  Notice of Periodic Review. Notice of periodic review Shall be given as follows: 
1.  Notice to Developer. 
a.  The Planning Director Shall give the Developer thirty calendar Days' advance Notice of the review by placing such Notice to the Developer into the U.S. mail, first class, postage prepaid, and addressed to such address as the Developer has listed in the Development agreement. 
b.  The City Clerk Shall give the Developer Notice of a special review in the same manner as provided in subsection (R)( 1 )(a) of this section for annual review. 
2.  Notice to the Public. Public Notice of periodic or special reviews Shall be accomplished as set forth in subsection F of this section. 
S.  Periodic Review—Hearing, Burden, Findings. 
1.  Any periodic review conducted pursuant to subsection Q of this section Shall be accomplished in the form of a Public Hearing as required by subsection G of this section. 
2.  The burden Shall be on the Developer or his successor in interest, to demonstrate good-faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. 
3.  At the conclusion of the Public Hearing, the City Council Shall make findings regarding whether or not the Developer has, for the period under review, complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement. 
T.  Periodic Review—Action by Council. 
1.  If the City Council finds and determines on the basis of the evidence given that the Property Owner has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the review for that period Shall be concluded. 
2.  If the City finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the Property Owner has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the Council May modify or terminate the agreement. 
3.  If the periodic review has been referred by the City Council to the Planning Commission or to the City Manager or his Designated Representative, the determination resulting from said review Shall be Appealable in writing to the City Council within ten calendar Days after the final action. A hearing Shall be conducted in accordance with the City Council's rules for consideration of Appeals. 
4.  If the periodic review is conducted by the City Council, the determination resulting from said review Shall be deemed to be final for all purposes. 
U.  Periodic Review—Modification or Termination of Agreement—Public Hearing, Notice. 
1.  If, upon a finding pursuant to subsection (V)(2) of this section, the City determines to proceed with modification or termination of the agreement, the City Shall set a hearing date and give Notice to the Property Owner and the public of the hearing. Said Notice Shall be given in the manner set forth in subsections F and R of this section. 
2.  In addition to the informational content required by subsections F and R of this section, the Notice required by this section Shall contain: 
a.  A statement concerning whether the City proposes to terminate or to modify the Development agreement; 
b.  Other information which the City considers necessary to inform the Property Owner of the nature of the proceedings. 
V.  Periodic Review—Modification or Termination—Hearing. 
1.  Any Public Hearing on the subject of modification or termination of the agreement based upon a periodic review Shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in subsection G of this section. 
2.  Upon concluding said hearing, the City Council May take whatever action it deems necessary to protect the interest of the City. 
3.  The Decision of the City Council Shall be final. 
(Ord. 0-15-07 § 19 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. O-12-18, § 42, 12-18-2018)  
Chapter 18.60 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
18.60.010 - Roles. 
A.  It Shall be the duty of the Department to enforce the provisions of this title pertaining to the location, design, erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, Alteration of, or addition to, any Building Structure or other Improvements; and to enforce the requirements of Occupancy in any Dwelling, Apartment house, or other Building not otherwise regulated by the Director of Building and Safety or by the License Officer as herein stated. 
In addition, the Director of the Community Development Department of the City is authorized to enforce Colton Municipal Code Titles 15 and 16. 
B.  Police Department. It Shall be the duty of the Police Department of the City to assist the Department, License Officer or other Administrative Officer or agent of the City, in enforcing all of the requirements of this title pertaining to land Use, Development or Occupancy and it Shall be the duty of all Police Officers to service all complaints filed or to be filed against all Persons violating any of the requirements of this title unless such action is otherwise delegated, as stated herein. 
C.  License Officer. Before any new Business License is issued by the License Officer for the Use or Occupancy of any Property or Buildings, a certificate of clearance indicating satisfactory compliance with the rules, regulations and Ordinances delegated to other City Departments for enforcement Shall be obtained by the License Officer from the Department and from the Police, Fire, Building and Health Departments. 
D.  City Attorney. It Shall be the duty of the City Attorney to commence, upon Order of the Council, legal actions to enjoin and correct Violations of this title. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.60.020 - Procedure. 
Any Building, Structure or other Improvements set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, any Use of land, Building, or Premises established, conducted or operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title Shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a Public Nuisance. Upon a request by the Director, the City Attorney Shall immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and the enjoining thereof in the manner prescribed by Law, and Shall take such other steps and Shall apply to such Courts as May have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove the Structure or Building, and enjoin any Person, firm or corporation from setting up, erecting, Building, maintaining or the Use of any such Building or Structure or using Property contrary to the provisions of this title. The remedies provided herein Shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.60.030 - Citation authority. 
The Director and his authorized Designees are authorized to issue a citation for an infraction as to such Violation after such Notice if there is neither correction nor compliance. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992)  
18.60.040 - Violation—Penalties. 
Any Person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, Employee, or otherwise, violating or causing the Violations of any of the provisions of this title Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof Shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the City Jail or County Jail for a term not to exceed six Months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such Person, firm or corporation Shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every Day during any portion of which any Violation of this title is committed or continued by such Person, firm or corporation and Shall be punishable as herein provided. 
(Ord. 0-14-92 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1992) 

