CAMARILLO - MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of Camarillo, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 10, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
> 
PREFACE 
The Camarillo Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1977, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 10, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 1160, passed January 9, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 10, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 10, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 10, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 10, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. This guide will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, this code was numbered with consecutive page numbers. As it is amended, new material may require the insertion of new pages that are numbered with hyphens. (Example: 31, 32, 32-1.) Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) are left unnumbered but the number is "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com. 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this code, shall have the following meanings, unless from the text a different meaning is construed: 
A.  "City" is the City of Camarillo. 
B.  "Council" is the city council of the city. 
C.  "County" is the County of Ventura. 
D.  "Enforcement officer" means any city officer, employee or agent, including a code enforcement officer or a peace officer, who is authorized by the city manager, police commander, fire chief, or director of community development to enforce certain provisions of this code. 
E.  "Goods" means and includes wares or merchandise. 
F.  "Oath" means and includes affirmation. 
G.  "Operate" means and includes carry on, keep, conduct or maintain. 
H.  "Owner," applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, joint tenant, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
I.  "Peace officer" means any person designated as a peace officer under Chapter 4.5 of Title 3 of Part 2 of the California Penal Code beginning at Section 830. 
J.  "Person" means and includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, company or corporation, and any municipal, political or governmental corporation, district, body or agency, other than the city. 
K.  "Sale" means and includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. 
L.  "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
M.  "State" is the State of California. 
N.  "Street" means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, sidewalks, parkways, curbs, or other public ways in the city which have been or may be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state. 
O.  "Tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, means and includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
P.  Title of Office. The use of the title of any officer, employee, office or ordinance means such officer, employee, office or ordinance of the city. 
Q.  "Writing" means and includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
(Prior code §§ 1305, 1312—1325.) 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 4, 2-26-2014)  
1.04.020 - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in this code, unless a different meaning is construed from the text: 
A.  The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present. 
B.  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
C.  The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
(Prior code §§ 1309—1311.)  
1.04.030 - Act by agent deemed act by principal. 
Whenever a power is granted to or duly is imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized, pursuant to law or ordinance or by an officer of the county or by a deputy or employee of such officer when by contract with the city such officer is obligated and has agreed to perform certain duties on behalf of the city, unless this code expressly provides otherwise. 
(Prior code § 1304.)  
1.04.040 - Prohibited acts include causing, permitting or suffering. 
Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing such act or omission. 
(Prior code § 1303.)  
1.04.050 - Serving notice. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made in this code, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. 
(Prior code § 1307.)  
1.04.060 - Proof of notice. 
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city, or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen years, which shows service in conformity with the code, or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Prior code § 1308.)  
1.04.070 - Reference to acts or omissions within the city. 
This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside of the city over which the city had jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. 
(Prior code § 1302.)  
1.04.080 - Reference applies to amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this code, or to any ordinances of the city, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. 
(Prior code § 1306.)  
1.04.090 - Effect of catchlines. 
Article and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any article or section in this code. 
(Prior code § 1301.)  
1.04.100 - Construction. 
Unless the provisions of the context otherwise require, these general provisions, rules of construction and definitions shall govern the construction of this code. The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. 
(Prior code § 1300.)  
1.04.110 - Validity of code. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The city council declares it would have adopted this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 468 § 1, 1980.)  
Chapter 1.08 - LABOR FOR PROBATIONERS 
 
1.08.010 - Public work by probationers. 
In accordance with the provisions of Penal Code Section 1203.1 and Government Code Section 36904, any or all persons granted summary probation may be compelled to perform labor under the direction of the probation officer, or such other person as the court may direct, on public property or works within the city. Public property or works shall include, but not be limited to, public grounds, roads, streets, alleys, highways, trails, parks, public buildings, or in such other places as the city may deem advisable for the benefit of the public; provided, however, that no probationer shall be compelled to perform labor if the performance of such labor is beyond a person's physical capabilities, or if to do so would endanger the safekeeping of such probationer in any respect. 
(Ord. 346 § 1, 1976: Ord. 204 § 1, 1971.)  
1.08.020 - Labor upon public works defined. 
"Labor upon public works," as used in this chapter, means and includes, among other things, clerical and menial labor in public buildings, public parks and other public grounds. 
(Ord. 204 § 2, 1971.)  
1.08.030 - Not to be city employee. 
No probationer engaged in the performance of labor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be considered an employee of, or to be employed by, the city in any capacity and no such person shall come within any of the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation, Insurance and Safety Act of 1970 (Divisions 4 and 5 of the Labor Code), nor shall such person be entitled to any benefits thereunder whether on behalf of himself or any other person. 
(Ord. 204 § 3, 1971.)  
Chapter 1.12 - CITY CODE AND ENTITLEMENT VIOLATIONS, GENERAL PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT* 
 
1.12.010 - Purpose. 
The provisions of this chapter represent the general means and methods by which the city may secure compliance with the provisions of this code and city approvals, licenses or permits. The city may use any available legal remedy to secure compliance and multiple enforcement remedies may be used to achieve compliance with respect to persons who commit continuing violations. 
(Ord. 1008 § 1 (part), 2007.)  
1.12.020 - Code violations. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any requirement of this code. 
B.  Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, maintaining, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
C.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this code is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless: (1) the offense is specifically classified in this code or by state law as an infraction, or (2) the city attorney reduces the charge to an infraction, or (3) a peace officer as designated in Penal Code Section 830.1 or a city code enforcement officer as designated in Section 1.12.040 of this chapter issues an infraction citation for the violation, or (4) a civil penalty is imposed. 
D.  Each day that any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this code continues will constitute a new and separate violation. 
E.  The owner of any property, building or structure within the city has the responsibility for keeping such property, building or structure free of violations related to its use or condition. The owner of such property, building or structure is separately liable for violations committed by tenants or occupants relative to the use or condition of the property. 
(Ord. 1008 § 1 (part), 2007.) 
(Ord. No. 1072, § 2, 6-13-2012)  
1.12.030 - City license, permit, land use approval or entitlement violations. 
A.  Each person or the successor of each person who holds a city-issued license, permit, land use approval, or entitlement authorized under this code must comply with each mandatory provision of the applicable license, permit, land use approval or entitlement. 
B.  Each person who violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished as provided in Section 1.12.060 or in Section 1.12.070 if the charge is reduced to an infraction. The penalty provided in this section is in addition to other provisions of this code that provide for revocation of a license, permit, land use approval, or entitlement, or which authorize the imposition of a civil fine or penalty. 
(Ord. 1008 § 1 (part), 2007.)  
1.12.040 - Authority to issue criminal citations. 
Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5, city code enforcement officers are authorized to issue criminal citations following the procedures set forth in Penal Code Sections 853.5 through 853.6a, or such other procedures as the State of California may subsequently enact. 
(Ord. 1008 § 1 (part), 2007.)  
1.12.050 - Criminal prosecution. 
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 36900, the city attorney may prosecute any violation of this code in the name of the people of the State of California. In any such criminal prosecution, the city attorney is authorized to reduce the charge for any misdemeanor violation to an infraction. 
(Ord. 1008 § 1 (part), 2007.)  
1.12.060 - Misdemeanor penalties. 
Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for the violation of this code may be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by the imposition of both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 1008 § 1 (part), 2007.)  
1.12.070 - Infraction penalties. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection (B) below, any person convicted of an infraction for the violation of this code may be punished by: 
1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same code section within one year; 
3.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same code section within one year. 
B.  Any person convicted of an infraction for a violation of any city building or safety code may be punished by: 
1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for a second violation of the same code section within one year; 
3.  A fine not exceeding one thousand dollars for each additional violation of the same code section within one year. 
(Ord. 1008 § 1 (part), 2007.)  
1.12.080 - Public nuisances. 
In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this code is deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the city in any manner provided by law or in this code for the abatement of a nuisance. 
(Ord. 1008 § 1 (part), 2007.)  
1.12.090 - Administrative citations. 
Upon a finding by a city official vested with the authority to enforce the provisions of this code that a violation exists, such official may issue an administrative citation under Chapter 1.13. 
(Ord. 1008 § 1 (part), 2007.)  
1.12.100 - Civil actions. 
The city attorney, at the direction of the city council or city manager, may institute an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin or abate any condition found to be in violation of this code or any approval, order, rule or regulation issued by any duly authorized officer or agent of the city in the manner provided by law. In any action or proceeding in which the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys' fees and costs, the prevailing party in any such civil action or proceeding will be entitled to the recovery of its reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred in such action or proceeding. 
(Ord. 1008 § 1 (part), 2007.)  
Chapter 1.13 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
1.13.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and Government Code Section 53069.4 for the purpose of making any violation of the Camarillo Municipal Code subject to an administrative fine and to set forth the procedures for the imposition and collection of such fines. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.020 - Applicability. 
This chapter authorizes use of administrative citations that are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, that the city may pursue to address any violation of this code. The use of this chapter is at the sole discretion of the city officer or employee enforcing this code. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.030 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter. 
A.  "Citee" means the person(s) to whom a code enforcement officer issued an administrative citation pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  "Enforcement officer" means any city employee or agent with the authority to enforce any provision of this code. 
C.  "Director" means community development director or designee. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.040 - Notices. 
Unless otherwise provided, all notices and citations required by this chapter must be served on citee via personal service or first-class mail, postage prepaid, to citee's last known address. Service is effective when personally served or when deposited into the United States mail. The individual serving a citee with notice must complete a declaration of service. Failure to receive any notice does not affect the validity of the proceedings conducted under this chapter. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
Article II. - Administrative Citations 
 
1.13.050 - Administrative citations. 
A.  Issuing an administrative citation pursuant to this chapter is in lieu of any criminal citation that could have been issued for the same violation. Issuing an administrative citation does not, however, prevent issuance of a criminal citation for a subsequent violation of the same code provision. 
B.  Contents of administrative citation. Each administrative citation must contain the following information: 
1.  The date of the violation; 
2.  The address or a definite description of the geographic location where the violation occurred or is occurring; 
3.  The section of this code that was violated; 
4.  A description of the conditions causing the code violation; 
5.  The amount of the administrative fine for the code violation; 
6.  A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which, and the place where, the fine must be paid; 
7.  An order prohibiting the continued or repeated occurrence of the code violation described in the administrative citation; 
8.  Notification that payment of a fine under this chapter does not excuse or discharge any continued or repeated occurrence of the code violation that is the subject of the administrative citation; 
9.  A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the manner in which a request for review of the citation may be requested; and 
10.  The name of the citing enforcement officer. 
C.  Service and Filing of Administrative Citations. The enforcement officer must serve the original citation on the person cited in the manner set forth in this chapter and forward a copy of the administrative citation to the director or designee. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.060 - Amount of administrative fines. 
The amounts of the administrative fines imposed for code violations under this chapter are established by city council resolution. That resolution must also set forth any increased fines for repeat violations of the same code provision by the same person within twelve months from the date of a previous administrative citation. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.070 - Payment of administrative fines. 
An administrative fine must be paid to the city within thirty days from the date of the administrative citation or, if a request for an initial administrative review is submitted, within fifteen days after the date of the notice of the conclusions of that initial administrative review, whichever is later. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.080 - Delinquent administrative fines—Penalties and interest. 
A.  A penalty of ten percent is added on any delinquent fines on the last day of each month after the due date. The penalty will not exceed fifty percent of the fine. 
B.  In addition to penalties provided by this section, delinquent fines accrue interest at the rate of one percent per month, exclusive of penalties, from the due date. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.090 - Issuance of permits. 
Should an enforcement officer issue a citation because the citee lacks a required permit and the fine is delinquent, the city will not issue a permit until the delinquent fine, and any applicable penalties and interest is paid. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.100 - Compliance orders. 
Before issuing an administrative citation for any violation of building, plumbing, electrical, or similar regulation set forth in this code or incorporated by reference, or any violation of Title 19 of this code, the enforcement officer must first issue a written compliance order to the person(s) responsible for the violation unless the violation constitutes an immediate threat to public health or safety. The compliance order must contain all of the following: 
A.  The date on which, and geographic location where, the violation was observed; 
B.  The section of this code violated; 
C.  A description of the conditions causing the code violation; 
D.  Actions required to correct the violation; 
E.  A reasonable time period for the correction of the violation; 
F.  Notice that if the violation is not corrected by the date specified in the compliance order, that an administrative citation may be issued and administrative fines imposed for failure to correct violations by the date specified. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.110 - Correction of violation. 
No further action is required if the enforcement officer determines that all violations in the compliance order were cured. If the enforcement officer determines that all violations were not corrected within the time specified, an administrative citation may be issued to each person named in the compliance order as a responsible person. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
Article III. - Administrative Review and Hearings 
 
1.13.120 - Initial administrative review—Request. 
Citees may request an initial administrative review of the citation within twenty days of its issuance. This request must be made in writing to the director and set forth with particularity the reasons the citee believes a violation did not occur or that the citee was not responsible for the violation(s); must include a copy of the citation; and contain the address to which the conclusions of the city's review should be mailed. A request for an initial administrative review is a mandatory prerequisite to a request for an administrative hearing. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.130 - Initial administrative review—Decision. 
A.  Upon receiving a request for initial administrative review, the director will review the request and provide the citee with a written notification that: 
1.  The citation should be vacated because there was no violation, or the citee was not responsible for the violation, and setting forth the basis for that conclusion; 
2.  The citation should not be vacated because no justification could be found; 
B.  The director should mail a copy of the notification to the citee at the address on the request for initial administrative review along with notice establishing the fine due date and the procedure for requesting an administrative hearing. 
C.  The director should complete his or her review within ten days of receiving the citee's request. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
Article IV. - Administrative Hearing Procedures 
 
1.13.140 - Request for administrative hearing. 
Any citee dissatisfied with the conclusions of an initial administrative review may contest that citation by requesting an administrative hearing. A citee must request an administrative hearing within fifteen days after the date the city served the citee with notice of the administrative review decision. Requests must be submitted to the director and be accompanied by an advance deposit of the fine or a request for a hardship waiver. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.150 - Advance deposit—Hardship waiver. 
A.  Citees financially unable to make an advance deposit of the administrative fine may file for a hardship waiver. The request for a hardship waiver must be filed with the director on a form containing information that may be required by the director. The director will review the request and determine whether a waiver is justified. A waiver may only be approved if the request for waiver is accompanied by a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating that the citee's actual financial inability to deposit the full amount of the fine. 
B.  The director will inform the citee in writing regarding whether the director approved the waiver. This determination must be served upon the citee by mail at the address provided in the waiver application. The director's determination is final. 
C.  Should the director determine that a waiver is unjustified, the citee must deposit the fine amount with the city not later than ten days after the date of that decision. Failure to make a deposit within ten days after waiver denial is deemed a waiver of the citee's right to an administrative hearing and the administrative fine will be deemed delinquent. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.160 - Hearing officer. 
The city manager designates the hearing officer for the administrative citation hearing. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.170 - Hearing date. 
After receiving a timely hearing request and deposit or waiver of the fine amount, the director sets an administrative hearing on a date not less than fifteen nor more than sixty days from the date the hearing is requested. Written notice of the date, time and location of the administrative hearing must be provided to the citee at least fifteen days before the hearing date. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.180 - Conduct of hearings. 
A.  Evidentiary Rules. The administrative citation is prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in the citation. Both the citee and enforcement officer have the opportunity to testify and present additional evidence concerning the administrative citation. Evidence may include, without limitation, witness testimony, documents or other similar evidence. Evidence sought to be introduced is not limited to any legal rules of evidence except for the rule that it be relevant and material to the issues of whether the violation alleged in the citation occurred and whether the citee was responsible for the violation. 
B.  Waiver of Personal Appearance at Hearing. In lieu of personally appearing at an administrative hearing, the citee may request that the hearing officer decide the matter based on the citation itself and any other documentary evidence submitted by the citee or enforcement officer before the hearing date. 
C.  Failure to Appear at Hearing. Failure of a citee to appear at the hearing is deemed a waiver of the right to be personally present at the hearing. The hearing officer must then decide the matter based upon the citation itself, any documentary evidence previously submitted, and any additional evidence that may be presented at the hearing by the enforcement officer. 
D.  Attendance of Enforcement Officer. The enforcement officer who issued the administrative citation may, but is not required to, attend the administrative hearing. If the enforcement officer does not attend, the enforcement officer may, before the hearing date, submit reports, photos or other documentation regarding the violation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing. 
E.  Continuation of Hearings. The hearing officer may continue any hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or citee before issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.190 - Hearing officer's decision. 
A.  The hearing officer must issue a written decision to uphold or set aside the administrative citation and present the reasons for that decision. 
B.  The director must send a copy of the hearing officer's decision to the citee with notice of the citee's right to appeal the decision in Superior Court. 
C.  The hearing officer's decision is the city's final action on the matter. There is no right to an appeal other than as provided in this chapter. The hearing officer's decision is final as of the date of the decision. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.200 - Disposition of administrative fines. 
A.  Should the hearing officer uphold the administrative citation, the city can retain the deposited fine amount. 
B.  Should the hearing officer vacate the administrative citation, the city must promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine, if any. 
C.  Should the hearing officer uphold the administrative citation and a hardship waiver was previously granted, the due date for paying the administrative fine will be thirty days from the date of the notice of the hearing officer's decision. 
D.  The city may use all legal means to collect any past due fines, including penalties and interest, should a citee fail to pay in a timely manner. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
1.13.210 - Right to judicial review. 
A.  A citee may appeal the hearing officer's decision by filing an appeal with the Superior Court pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4, or any successor statute, within twenty days from service of the hearing officer's decision. 
B.  Should the citee file a timely appeal with the Superior Court, the requirement to pay the fine is suspended and the payment of the fine, if any, will be in accordance with the Superior Court decision. 
(Ord. 968 § 1 (part), 2004.)  
Article V. - Collection of Unpaid Fines and Penalties* 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 968. 
 
1.13.220 - Collection of administrative citation fines and costs. 
The failure of any person to pay a fine or penalty assessed by administrative citation within the time specified on the citation constitutes a debt to the city. To enforce that debt, the city may file a civil action, lien and/or place a special assessment on the subject property, or pursue any other legal remedy to collect such debt. A person who fails to pay any fine or other charge owed to the city under this chapter is liable in any action brought by the city for all costs incurred in securing payment of the delinquent amount, including administrative costs and attorneys' fees. Such collection costs are in addition to any applicable fines, interest, and late charges. 
(Ord. 1017 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
1.13.230 - Lien and assessment procedures. 
In addition to any other legal remedy, the city may place a lien and/or assessment on property that is the subject of a citation if the citation has been issued to the property owner. The following procedures will apply: 
A.  The city manager may initiate proceedings to record a lien and/or place an assessment against the subject property. 
B.  Before recording the lien or assessing the property, the city manager must cause a report to be submitted to the city clerk stating the amounts due and owing. The report may include an administrative fee, as established by city council resolution, for the administrative costs associated with the processing and recordation of the proposed lien. 
C.  The city clerk must fix a time, date, and place for a hearing before the city manager to consider the report and any protests or objections to the report. 
D.  The city clerk must serve the property owner with a hearing notice not less than ten days before the hearing date. The notice must set forth the amount of the delinquent administrative fine, and any penalties and interest that is due. Notice must be sent by first-class and certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the property owner's address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of the County of Ventura, whichever is more current. Service by mail is effective on the date of mailing and failure of property owner to actually receive notice does not affect its validity. 
E.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager must adopt a report confirming, discharging, or modifying the delinquent amount. The decision of the city manager will be final. Following the adoption of the report, the city clerk may cause the lien to be filed in the county recorder's office. 
F.  Prior to recordation of the lien and/or placement of an assessment against the property owner's parcel, the city clerk must give ten day's notice to the property owner, by first-class and certified mail, addressed to the property owner's address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of the County of Ventura, whichever is more current. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the proposed lien or assessment in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and by publishing notice of the lien or assessment in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in the manner provided by Government Code Section 6062. 
G.  If the city intends to make the delinquent amount an assessment against the subject property, the notice must specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. 
H.  Upon recordation, the lien will have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien and may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law. 
I.  In addition to, or as an alternative to recordation of the lien, the city may collect the amount owed as a special assessment against the property owner's parcel. To do so, the city must present a copy of the lien to the county auditor controller to add the amount of the lien to the next regular property tax bill levied against the parcel for municipal purposes. This amount will be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected, and will be subject to the same penalties and procedures under foreclosure and sale as provided for with ordinary municipal taxes. 
(Ord. 1017 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
1.13.240 - Satisfaction of lien. 
Once the city receives full payment for the outstanding principal, penalties, and costs related to a recorded lien, the city clerk will cause to be recorded a notice of satisfaction at the county recorder's office. This notice of satisfaction will cancel the city's lien. 
(Ord. 1017 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
Chapter 1.14 - APPEALS 
 
1.14.010 - Reimbursement of fees on certain appeals. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, whenever an appeal is taken pursuant to the provisions of this code and the resulting decision on appeal is in favor of the appealing party, the appealing party shall recover from the city its filing fees paid by it with respect to the appeal. 
(Ord. 912 § 3, 1999.)  
Chapter 1.16 - CITY SEAL AND LOGO 
 
1.16.010 - City seal. 
The corporate seal of the city is depicted below and is comprised of two concentric circles. The inner circle depicts a man seated on a horse, pictured against a background of hills, palm trees, sky and clouds. The mounted man is depicted holding his hat in his left hand in a position of greeting, and his right hand holding the reins of the horse. Below the horse and rider it states, "Incorporated October 22, 1964." The outer circle contains the following words: "The City of Camarillo California" and "Las Personas Son La Ciudad." 
For certain purposes, as may be determined by the city clerk, a text only version of the city seal may be used. 
  
(Ord. 1021 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
1.16.020 - City logo. 
The city logo consists of the words "City of Camarillo" with a magenta bougainvillea wrapped around the "C" in Camarillo as is depicted below: 
  
(Ord. 1021 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
1.16.030 - Use of city seal and city logo. 
A.  The city clerk has charge of the city seal and city logo, and will affix the city seal to all certificates and documents as may be required by law, by this code, or by ordinance of the city. 
B.  All other uses of the city seal or city logo are restricted to official city business and such other appropriate uses that promote the interests of the city as may be authorized in writing by the city clerk. 
C.  No person may make or use the city seal or city logo or any cut, facsimile, or reproduction of the city seal or city logo, or to make or use any seal or logo or any design which is an imitation, in the design of, or which may be mistaken for the city seal or city logo or the design of the city seal or logo, without the written authorization of the city. 
D.  City officers, city employees, members of the city council, and members of city boards and commissions, may use stationary and printed materials with the city seal or city logo, or facsimile of the city seal or city logo, while acting within the scope of their office or employment. 
E.  No person, including any elected officer of the city, may use the city seal or city logo, or facsimile of the city seal or city logo, in any correspondence or other printed materials distributed in favor of or against any ballot measure or in favor of or against any candidate for public office. 
(Ord. 1021 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY MANAGER 
 
2.04.010 - Office established. 
The office of city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council solely on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications and ability, and shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2200.)  
2.04.020 - Eligibility. 
Residence in the city at the time of appointment shall not be required as a condition of appointment. 
No person elected to membership on the city council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after he/she has ceased to be member of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2201.)  
2.04.030 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1034, § 1, adopted May 27, 2007, repealed § 2.04.030, which pertained to "bond." See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List.  
2.04.040 - Appointment during absence. 
The city manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the other officers or department heads of the city to serve as manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager and his/her failure to so appoint a manager pro tempore, the city council may designate some duly qualified person to perform the duties of the city manager, during the period of absence or disability of the city manager; subject, however, to the person furnishing a corporate surety bond conditioned on faithful performance of the duties required to be performed, as set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2203.)  
2.04.050 - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution, and the compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. 
The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him/her in the performance of his/her duties, or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council; reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to the city council, and duly approved and allowed by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2204.)  
2.04.060 - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city government under the direction and control of the city council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The city manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all city affairs under the city manager's control. In addition to the general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be the city manager's duty and the city manager shall have the power: 
A.  To see that all laws and ordinances of the city are duly enforced, and that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed; 
B.  To control, order and give direction to all heads of departments, subordinate officers and employees of the city, except the city attorney; and to transfer employees from one department to another; and to consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under the city manager's direction; provided, however, that nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to supersede the authority of the civil service or personnel system of the city in the manner of classification of city officers or employees; 
C.  To appoint, promote, demote and remove any officers and employees of the city except the city attorney, subject to the civil service personnel merit system of the city, if any; the appointment, promotion, demotion or removal of the city clerk and the city treasurer shall be subject to the approval of the city council; 
D.  To exercise control over all departments of the city government and over all appointive officers and employees thereof, except the city attorney; 
E.  To attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom by the council, except when the council considers the city manager's removal; 
F.  To recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as deemed necessary or expedient; 
G.  To keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the city's financial conditions and needs; 
H.  To prepare and submit to the city council the annual budget; 
I.  To purchase or acquire in any lawful manner all property, equipment, services, materials and supplies for the city and for all departments and divisions thereof; provided the purchase or acquisition thereof is approved by the city council or is included in a budget approved and adopted by the city council. No expenditure shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on report or approval of the city manager; 
J.  To sign contracts on behalf of the city as directed by the city council or as necessary to fulfill the city manager's purchasing duties under this code; 
K.  To make investigations into the affairs of the city, and any department or division thereof, and any contract, or the proper performance of any obligations running to the city; 
L.  To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city, and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully performed and observed; 
M.  To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council and not specifically delegated to a particular board or officer; 
N.  To devote the city manager's entire time to the duties of the city manager's office and the city's interest; 
O.  To provide leadership for civic movements designed to benefit the residents of the city when so authorized by the city council; 
P.  To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated from time to time by city council ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. 943 § 2, 2002: Ord. 508 § 1, 1981; prior code § 2205.)  
2.04.070 - Powers subject to personnel merit system. 
A.  The exercise of the powers and duties of the city manager set out in this chapter, and the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to this code and to any rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this code as to classification of employees, the appointment, transfer, promotion, demotion, removal, suspension, dismissal and reinstatement of such employees and the procedures outlined therein governing the same. 
B.  The city manager shall be the appointing power under the terms of this code. 
(Prior code § 2206.)  
2.04.080 - Orders and directions. 
The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any members thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. 
(Prior code § 2207.)  
2.04.090 - Removal. 
A.  The removal of the city manager shall be only on a majority vote of the whole council; subject, however, to the provisions of Section 2.04.100. In case of his/her intended removal by the council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council's intention to remove him/her and the reasons therefor, at least thirty days before the effective date of his/her removal. 
B.  Within seven days after the delivery to the city manager of such notice, he/she may by written notification to the city clerk, request a public hearing before the council. Thereafter, the council shall fix a time for the public hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place, but before the expiration of the thirty-day period, and at which the city manager shall appear and be heard. 
C.  After furnishing the city manager with written notice of intended removal, the city council may suspend him/her from duty, but his/her compensation shall continue until his/her removal by resolution of the council passed subsequent to the public hearing set out in subsection B. 
D.  In removing the city manager, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing; the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to publicly present to the city council his/her grounds of opposition to removal prior to its action. 
(Prior code § 2208.)  
2.04.100 - Removal after municipal election. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2.04.090, the city manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected; the purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected member to the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his/her office. After the expiration of the ninety-day period, the provisions of Section 2.04.090 as to the removal of the manager shall apply and be effective. 
(Prior code § 2209.)  
2.04.110 - Manager not in personnel merit system. 
The office of the city manager is specifically excluded from the personnel system of the city, and the city manager shall not be entitled to the benefits, advantages or protection of the personnel system of the city; and he/she shall not be subject to the procedures outlined or prevailing in the system. 
(Prior code § 2210.)  
2.04.120 - Contract of employment. 
The city council may, in its discretion, enter into a contract of employment with any person appointed to the position of city manager. If such a contract of employment provides for a method of termination by the city council for cause, the provisions of Section 2.04.090 shall not apply to the person holding the position of city manager which is subject to such a contract of employment. 
(Ord. 929 § 1, 1999.)  
Chapter 2.08 - CITY COUNCIL* 
 
2.08.010 - Meetings. 
There shall be two regular meetings of the city council during each calendar month and such meetings shall be held on the second and fourth Wednesdays thereof, at an hour to be determined by the current city council by minute action and posted on all agendas; provided, however, that if the date of any such regular meeting falls on a holiday, the regular meeting shall be held the next succeeding day which is not a holiday. 
(Ord. 626 § 1, 1987: Ord. 406 § 1, 1978: prior code § 2100.)  
2.08.020 - Meeting place. 
The meeting place of the city council shall be 601 Carmen Drive, Camarillo, California, or such other place as the council may designate by resolution. 
(Ord. 368 § 1, 1977: Ord. 106 § 1, 1967: prior code § 2101.)  
2.08.030 - Expense reimbursement. 
A.  General. Government Code Section 36514.5 provides that members of the city council may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties. Reimbursement for these expenses is subject to the requirements set forth in Government Code Sections 53232.2 and 53232.3. 
B.  Reimbursement Policy. The city must adopt a written expense reimbursement policy that satisfies the requirements of Government Code Sections 53232.2 and 53232.3. 
C.  Reimbursement. Members of the city council are entitled to reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties, and which are in compliance with the city's expense reimbursement policy, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 987 § 1, 2006: Ord. 879 § 1, 1997: Ord. 747 § 1, 1991: Ord. 234 § 1, 1973: prior code § 2102.)  
2.08.040 - Compensation. 
Effective January 1, 2019, the salary for each member of the city council is one thousand four hundred and fifty-three dollars and fifty cents per month. 
Effective January 1, 2020, the salary for each member of the city council is one thousand four hundred and eighty-two dollars and fifty-seven cents per month. 
(Ord. 1027 §§ 2, 3, 2008: Ord. 995 § 3, 2006: Ord. 986 § 1, 2006: Ord. 972 § 1, 2004: Ord. 934 § 1, 2000: Ord. 724 § 1, 1990: Ord. 234 § 2, 1973: prior code § 2103.) 
(Ord. No. 1055, §§ 2, 3, 6-23-2010; Ord. No. 1073, §§ 2, 3, 6-27-2012; Ord. No. 1091, §§ 2, 3, 7-9-2014; Ord. No. 1125, §§ 2, 3, 7-13-2016; Ord. No. 1155, §§ 2, 3, 8-22-2018)  
2.08.050 - Term limits. 
A.  The purpose of this section is to create more competitive elections by ensuring that periodically the advantages of incumbency of a city council member will yield to increased citizen participation in seeking elective office. 
B.  No person shall serve more than three consecutive terms of office as a member of the city council, either by election or appointment, until at least four years after the expiration of the third consecutive term in office. After a break in service of at least four years, an individual who has previously served on the city council for three or more terms will become eligible to again serve on the city council. 
C.  Any person who, either by appointment or election, serves a partial term of office as a member of the city council for more than two years shall be deemed, for the purpose of this section, to have served a full four-year term. Any member of the city council who resigns or is removed from office during a term shall be deemed to have served a full term. 
D.  The three consecutive terms limit established by this section shall apply prospectively only to those terms of office which commence on or after November 6, 2018. 
E.  This section shall not be amended or repealed except by a majority vote of the voters of the City of Camarillo at a regularly scheduled election. 
F.  If any part of this section is held by a court of law of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the remaining parts of this section shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1159, 11-6-2018)  
Chapter 2.12 - CITY CLERK 
 
2.12.010 - Duties. 
Any applications required to be filed with the city or fees required to be paid to the city, pursuant to the provisions of this code, shall be filed with or paid to the city clerk, unless otherwise provided by this code. 
(Prior code § 2301.)  
Chapter 2.16 - OFFICIAL BONDS 
 
2.16.010 - Bonds required for designated officials. 
A.  The city manager, city clerk, director of finance, and city treasurer are each required to execute an official bond in such amount as may be reasonably required by city council resolution in order to ensure the faithful performance of the duties of each position. 
B.  Each bond, renewal, or substitute must be maintained and kept in force during the entire time that each such official occupies his or her respective office. 
C.  The premiums for such bonds will be paid by the city, and the term of such bonds may not exceed one year. 
(Ord. 861 § 2, 1996: prior code § 2302.) 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 2, 5-27-2009)  
Chapter 2.20 - OFFICERS GENERALLY 
 
2.20.010 - Offices and positions. 
The offices and positions in the city employment, other than those created or established by state law or by this code, shall be fixed and established by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2303.)  
2.20.020 - Compensation. 
The salaries and compensation of officers and employees of the city shall be as fixed and determined by resolution of the city council, except those fixed in this title. 
(Prior code § 2304.)  
2.20.030 - City attorney. 
The city attorney shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. 508 § 2, 1981: prior code § 2305.)  
2.20.040 - Code enforcement officer. 
The position of code enforcement officer is created. Such person shall be designated as a public officer whose duties in such capacity shall be limited to the enforcement of the municipal code violations. Such person shall be authorized to make arrests only for the purpose of issuing citations for violations of the municipal code which constitute infractions or misdemeanors. Such person shall be entitled to carry a shield identifying the person as a code enforcement officer for the city. Such shield may only be used in connection with the officer's duties in enforcing the municipal code. 
(Ord. 744 § 1, 1991: Ord. 467 § 1, 1980.)  
2.20.050 - Business tax officer. 
The position of business tax officer is created. Such person shall be designated as a public officer whose duties in such capacity shall include the enforcement of Title 5 of this code. Such person shall be authorized to make arrests only for the purpose of issuing citations for violations of Title 5 which constitute infractions or misdemeanors. Such person shall be entitled to carry a shield identifying the person as the business tax officer for the city. Such shield may only be used in connection with the officer's duties in enforcing Title 5 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 744 § 2, 1991.)  
Chapter 2.24 - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
 
2.24.010 - System adopted. 
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters and to comply with applicable laws relating to the administration of the personnel process, the following personnel system is adopted. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
2.24.015 - Definitions. 
The terms used to administer the personnel system shall be defined in the personnel rules. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
2.24.020 - Administration. 
The city manager shall administer the city personnel system and may delegate any of the powers and duties of such administration to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in Section 2.24.190. The city manager shall: 
A.  Act as the appointing authority for the city; 
B.  Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the council; 
C.  Prepare and recommend to the council revisions and amendments to the personnel rules. The city attorney shall approve the legality of such revisions and amendments prior to their submission to the council; 
D.  Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan; 
E.  Prepare a plan of compensation, and revisions thereof, covering all classifications in the competitive service. The plan and any revisions thereof shall become effective upon approval by the council; 
F.  Have the authority to discipline employees in accordance with this chapter and the personnel rules of the city; 
G.  Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of tests for positions in the competitive service; the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting and grading of tests; the certification of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the competitive service; and performing any other duty that may be required to administer the personnel system. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
2.24.030 - Competitive service. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions, and employments in the service of the city which offices, positions, and employments shall be in the competitive service, except this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Members of the city council; 
B.  Members of appointive boards, commissions, and committees; 
C.  Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional or technical services for a definite period of time; 
D.  Volunteer personnel, who receive no regular compensation from the city; 
E.  City attorney, city manager, assistant city manager or assistant to the city manager; 
F.  Department heads; 
G.  Assistant directors hired after March 1, 2014; 
H.  Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood, or earthquake which threatens life or property; 
I.  Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in permanent positions. "Regularly employed in permanent positions" means an employee hired for an indefinite term into a budgeted position, who is regularly scheduled to work no less than one thousand forty hours per year, and has successfully completed the probationary period and been retained as provided in this chapter and the personnel rules; 
J.  Any position primarily funded under a state or federal employment program; 
K.  Employees not included in the competitive service under this section shall serve at the pleasure of their appointing authority. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1989.) 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 2, 1-22-2014; Ord. No. 1086, § 2, 4-9-2014)  
2.24.040 - Adoption and amendment of rules. 
Personnel rules shall be adopted, and may be amended from time to time, by resolution of the council. The rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system, including: 
A.  Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class; 
B.  Preparation, revision, and administration of a plan of compensation directly correlated with the position classification plan providing a rate or range of pay for each class; 
C.  Public announcement of all tests and the acceptance of applications for employment; 
D.  Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment; 
E.  Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of temporary and emergency appointments; 
F.  Establishment of probationary testing periods; 
G.  Transfer, promotion, demotion, and reinstatement of employees in the competitive service; 
H.  Evaluation of employees during the probationary testing period and thereafter; 
I.  Separation of employees from the city service; 
J.  Content, maintenance, and use of personnel records and forms; 
K.  The establishment of any necessary appeal procedures. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
2.24.050 - Appointments. 
A.  Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness. Examinations shall be used and conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees, and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates such as achievement and aptitude tests and other written tests, personal interviews, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples, or any combination of these or other tests. The probationary period shall be considered an extension of the examination process. Physical, medical, and psychological tests may be given as a part of every examination. 
B.  In any examination the city manager or his/her designee may include, in addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards therefor. 
C.  The appointing authority of employees in the competitive service is the city manager. The city manager may delegate the appointing authority to any other officer or employee of the city. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
2.24.060 - Probationary period. 
All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period in accordance with applicable provisions of the personnel rules. Determinations as to satisfactory completion or extension of said period, and/or rejection of an employee during said period, shall also be consistent with the applicable provisions of the personnel rules. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
2.24.070 - Status of present employees. 
Any person holding a position in the competitive service who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the competitive service for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his class, shall assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date without qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules. 
Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
2.24.080 - Demotion, dismissal, reduction in pay, suspension, reprimand. 
The city manager or any appointing authority shall have the authority to demote, discharge, reprimand, reduce in pay, or suspend, any regular employee for cause in accordance with procedures included in the personnel rules. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
2.24.090 - Right of appeal. 
Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal a demotion, reduction in pay, suspension, or discharge for disciplinary or medical reasons, except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this chapter or the rules adopted thereunder. All appeals shall be processed in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel rules adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
2.24.100 - Layoff and reemployment. 
Layoff and reemployment actions shall follow the process outlined in the personnel rules. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
2.24.110 - Political activity. 
The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law and any local provision adopted pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
2.24.120 - Contract for special service. 
The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
2.24.130 - Appropriation of funds. 
The council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
Chapter 2.28 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
2.28.010 - Created. 
A planning commission for the city is created. 
(Prior code § 2400.)  
2.28.020 - Members. 
The planning commission shall consist of five members who shall be qualified electors of the city. Of the members of the commission first appointed under this chapter, one shall be appointed for the term of four years, one for the term of three years, one for the term of two years, and two for the term of one year. The successors shall be appointed for terms of four years. If vacancies occur, other than by expiration of term, such vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. Members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 5 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 2401.)  
2.28.030 - Absence from meetings. 
If a member of the planning commission is absent from three successive regular meetings of the commission without cause, the office of such member shall be deemed to be vacant and the term of such member ipso facto terminated and the planning commission shall immediately inform the city council of such termination. 
(Ord. 5 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 2402.)  
2.28.040 - Absence for cause. 
An absence due to illness or an unavoidable absence from the city and written notice thereof to the planning commission on or before the day of any regular meeting by the commission shall be deemed absence for cause. 
(Ord. 5 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 2403.)  
2.28.050 - Regular meeting. 
A regular meeting as provided for by law or by rule of the planning commission or any regularly advertised public hearing shall be deemed a regular meeting. 
(Ord. 5 § 2 (part). 1965: prior code § 2404.)  
2.28.060 - Organization. 
The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its appointed members for a term of one year and, subject to other provisions of law, may create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of the resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. 5 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 2405.)  
2.28.070 - Duties. 
The city planning commission shall perform the duties and have all the rights, powers and privileges specified and provided for in this code or by state law. 
(Ord. 5 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 2406.)  
2.28.080 - Fee procedure. 
Not withstanding any of the provisions of Titles 18 and 19 of this code to the contrary, the fees for matters concerning zoning, land use, subdivisions and other procedures within the planning department of the city or processed through the planning department shall be established by resolution of the city council unless required by law to be established by ordinance. In the event any fee established by resolution of the city council adopted subsequent to December 22, 1971, is different from, or contrary to, the fee established by any provision of this code contained in Titles 18 and 19, then the fee established by the resolution shall control. 
(Ord. 208 § 1, 1971.)  
Chapter 2.30 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
 
2.30.010 - Findings. 
The city council does find, determine and declare, as follows: 
A.  That there is a need for the Camarillo community development commission to function within the city; and 
B.  That the Camarillo community development commission shall function as a redevelopment agency and shall have all of the powers, duties and responsibilities of such an agency; and 
C.  That the public interest, convenience and necessity require the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter for the purpose of implementing development within the city in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Ord. 848 § 1, 1996.)  
2.30.020 - Authorization to exercise powers. 
On and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter the Camarillo community development commission shall be authorized to transact business and exercise powers pursuant to Section 34100 et seq., of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 848 § 2, 1996.)  
2.30.030 - City council to act as commission. 
Pursuant to Section 34120 et seq., of the Health and Safety Code, the city council does declare itself to be the commission and shall exercise all of the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested in the commission pursuant to Section 34100 et seq., of the Health and Safety Code and other applicable law. 
(Ord. 848 § 3, 1996.)  
2.30.040 - Successor in interest to agency. 
The Camarillo community development commission shall be deemed, for all purposes, to be the successor in interest to the Camarillo redevelopment agency created by Ordinance No. 322 of the city to which reference is hereby made. All acts taken by the Camarillo redevelopment agency shall be deemed to be ratified, approved and accepted by and on behalf of the Camarillo community development commission. 
(Ord. 848 § 4, 1996.)  
Chapter 2.32 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS* 
 
2.32.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the preparation for, response to, and recovery from emergencies in accordance with the California Emergency Services Act (Government Code Section 8550 and following) and its implementing regulations. 
(Ord. 970 § 2 (part), 2004.)  
2.32.020 - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter the definitions set forth in this section will apply. In the event of any conflict between these definitions and the provisions of the Emergency Services Act and its implementing regulations, the act and its regulations will control. 
"Action plan" or "EOC action plan" means the plan containing the emergency response objectives of the SEMS level reflecting overall priorities and supporting activities for a designated period. 
"Disaster" means a sudden calamitous emergency event resulting in loss of life, and great damage or destruction. 
"Emergency" means a condition of disaster or extreme peril to the safety of persons and property caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, hazardous material incident, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, an earthquake warning or conditions other than those resulting from a labor controversy. 
"Emergency operations center" (EOC) means the location from which centralized emergency management is performed. 
"Local emergency" means the duly proclaimed existence of emergency conditions or a disaster of the city, which conditions are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of the city and requires the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
"Master mutual aid agreement" means an agreement entered into by and between the state of California, its various departments and agencies, and the various political subdivision, municipal corporations, and other public agencies of the state of California to assist each other by providing resources during an emergency. Mutual aid occurs when two or more parties agree to furnish resources and facilities and to render services to each other to prevent and respond to any type of disaster or emergency. 
"Multi-hazard function plan" (MHFP) means the official plan of the city, as approved by the state office of emergency services, and adopted by the city council, which is organized pursuant to SEMS, and which details the city's organized planning for, response to, and recovery from emergency situations of local, regional, and statewide impact. 
"Office of emergency services" (OES) means the Governor's Office of Emergency Services, or regionally, the Ventura County sheriff's office of emergency services. 
"Standardized emergency management system" (SEMS) means a system required by the California Government Code for managing responses to multi-agency and multi-jurisdiction emergencies throughout California. 
"State of emergency" means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of a disaster or emergency. 
"State of war emergency" means the condition, which exists immediately, with or without a proclamation thereof by the governor, whenever the state or nation is directly attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon the receipt by the state of a warning from the federal government that such an enemy attack is probable or imminent. 
(Ord. 970 § 2 (part), 2004.)  
2.32.030 - EOC director—Powers and duties. 
A.  The city manager serves as the EOC director for the city. 
B.  The powers and duties of the EOC director include to: 
1.  Activate the EOC. 
2.  Develop an EOC action plan, and in doing so, indicate the probable timeframe for EOC and field operations. 
3.  Manage and coordinate the city's EOC action plan and ensure multi-agency or inter-agency coordination. 
4.  Develop and issue rules, regulations, proclamations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by the applicable disaster or emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council. 
5.  Obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other property found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people and bind the city for the fair value thereof, and if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
6.  Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of disaster or state of emergency by the governor in the region in which the city is located, or a proclamation of a local disaster or emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of the community as the director thinks necessary in the execution of the director's duties. All such persons who provide emergency services will be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered civil defense and emergency service volunteers. 
7.  Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency. 
8.  Execute all of the director's ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon the director by this chapter or by resolution adopted pursuant thereto, all powers conferred by statute, agreement approved by the city council, or by any other lawful authority, and in conformity with Government Code Section 38791, to exercise complete authority over the city and to exercise all police power vested in the city by the state constitution and general laws. 
(Ord. 970 § 2 (part), 2004.)  
2.32.040 - Succession of EOC director. 
Should the city manager be unavailable or unable to serve as EOC director, the individuals who hold permanent appointments to the following positions in the city will automatically serve as acting director, in the order indicated below. The individual who serves as acting director will have the authority and powers of the director throughout the existence of the declared local emergency, and will serve until the director is again able to serve, or until a successor has been appointed by the city council. 
A.  First alternate: assistant city manager; 
B.  Second alternate: director of public works; 
C.  Third alternate: director of finance. 
(Ord. 970 § 2 (part), 2004.)  
2.32.050 - Activation of the EOC. 
A.  The EOC will be activated under the following circumstances: 
1.  After a significant earthquake, which causes damage in the city or neighboring jurisdictions; 
2.  The uncontrolled release or failure of the Bard Reservoir in Simi Valley; 
3.  An impending or declared state of emergency or state of war emergency; 
4.  Any other emergency or disaster that has occurred or might occur of such a magnitude that it will require a large commitment of resources from two or more city departments over an extended period of time. 
B.  The following individuals, either acting as the EOC director or on behalf of the EOC director, are authorized to activate the EOC: 
1.  City manager; 
2.  Assistant city manager; 
3.  Director of public works. 
(Ord. 970 § 2 (part), 2004.)  
2.32.060 - Multi-hazard functional plan. 
The city council shall adopt by resolution a multi-hazard functional plan (MHFP) in accordance with the Emergency Services Act and the provisions of SEMS. The MHFP will provide for the effective mobilization of all available resources of the city, both public and private, to address any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and will provide for the organization, powers, duties, and services of the city's emergency response efforts. 
(Ord. 970 § 2 (part), 2004.)  
Chapter 2.34 - PURCHASING 
 
2.34.010 - Adoption of purchasing system. 
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, equipment and services at the lowest possible cost commensurate with the quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, the purchasing system for the city shall be as set forth in the purchasing policy adopted by the city council and set forth in Section 4.1 of the City of Camarillo Administrative Policies and Procedures. 
(Ord. 931 § 2, 1999.)  
Chapter 2.35 - PUBLIC PROJECT BIDDING 
 
2.35.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of implementing the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act ("Act") (Public Contract Code section 22000 and following) and the policies and procedures of the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission ("Commission"). 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 5-27-2009)  
2.35.020 - Public project bidding requirements. 
The cost limitations and circumstances for determining whether a public project may be performed by force account, negotiated contract, purchase order, informal bidding, or formal bidding are those set forth in Act. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 5-27-2009)  
2.35.030 - Informal bidding procedures. 
Public projects subject to informal bid procedures may be let to contract as follows: 
A.  Contractors List. The city will develop and maintain a list of contractors in accordance with the Act and the criteria established by the Commission. 
B.  Notice to Contractors. The city will solicit bids by written request to contractors licensed and experienced for the type of public work to be performed from the city's list of qualified contractors established pursuant to this section. Qualified contractors on the list for the category of work to be performed and all construction trade journals specified by the Commission will be mailed a notice inviting informal bids unless the product or service is proprietary. 
C.  Form of Notice. The notice inviting informal bids must describe (1) the project in general terms, (2) how to obtain more detailed information concerning the project, and (3) state the time and place for the submission of bids. 
D.  The mailing of notices to such qualified contractors and construction trade journals will be done in accordance with the procedures specified in the Act. 
E.  Award of Contract. The award of contract may be made to the lowest responsible bidder. 
F.  Rejection or Absence of Bids. The city reserves the right to reject any and all bids presented. If no bids are received, the public project may be performed by city employees by force account or by negotiated contract. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 5-27-2009)  
2.35.040 - Formal bidding procedures. 
Public projects that exceed the maximum permitted amount under the Act for informal bidding and are not otherwise exempt must be let to contract by formal bidding procedures in accordance with the Act and other applicable provisions of the Public Contracts Code. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 5-27-2009)  
2.35.050 - Delegation of authority to award contracts. 
The City Manager is authorized, without City Council approval, to award contracts pursuant to this chapter for a public project to performed by force account, negotiated contract, purchase order, or informal bidding. Contracts to be awarded based upon formal bidding procedures must be approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 5-27-2009)  
Chapter 2.36 - SURPLUS PROPERTY AUTHORITY 
 
2.36.010 - Finding of council. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 40520 et seq. of the Government Code, the city council finds and declares that there is need for the surplus property authority of the city to function within the city. 
(Ord. 284 § 1, 1975.)  
Chapter 2.44 - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
 
2.44.010 - Declaration of need. 
The city finds, determines and declares that there is a need for the authority to provide industry with an alternative method of financing for acquiring, constructing or rehabilitating facilities which will promote the public purpose of increasing employment opportunities or otherwise contributing to economic development of the city and/or the state. 
(Ord. 864 § 1, 1996.)  
2.44.020 - Activation of the authority. 
The city activates the authority, designated the "industrial development authority of the city of Camarillo," and the authority shall function pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of the Act.* 
(Ord. 864 § 2, 1996.) 
* Editor's Note: "Act" refers to the California Industrial Development Financing Act.  
2.44.030 - Jurisdiction. 
The territorial jurisdiction of the authority to undertake projects shall be coterminous with the boundaries of the city, as they exist from time to time. 
(Ord. 864 § 3, 1996.)  
2.44.040 - Powers. 
The authority shall have all of the powers of an industrial development authority enumerated in or permitted by the Act, to be exercised solely in the accomplishment of the purposes of industrial development authorities set forth in the Act. 
(Ord. 864 § 4, 1996.)  
2.44.050 - Authority to transact business. 
Pursuant to Section 91520(c) of the Act, the authority shall conclusively be deemed to have been established and authorized to transact business and exercise its powers upon proof of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 864 § 5, 1996.)  
Chapter 2.48 - PUBLIC LIBRARY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1061, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 2010, effective Jan. 1, 2011, amended Ch. 2.48 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 2.48, §§ 2.48.010, 2.48.020, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1057, § 2, adopted Sept. 8, 2010. Section 2 of Ord. No. 1061 states: "Staggered Terms of First Board. In accordance with Education Code section 18911, the terms of the members of the first board will expire as provided for in that section, which provides, in part, as follows: "The members of the first board appointed shall so classify themselves by lot that one of their number shall go out of office at the end of the current fiscal year, two at the end of one year thereafter, and two at the end of two years thereafter." Thereafter, each board member will have a three-year term as provided in Section 2.48.030." 
 
2.48.010 - Public library established. 
The Camarillo Public Library is hereby established under Chapter 5 of Title 1 of the California Education Code commencing at Section 18900, as it may be amended (the "Municipal Public Library Act"). 
(Ord. No. 1061, § 1, 11-17-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)  
2.48.020 - Governance and operation of library. 
The Camarillo Public Library will be governed and operated in accordance with the Municipal Public Library Act, and such additional rules and regulations as may be adopted by the board of library trustees pursuant to the Municipal Public Library Act. 
(Ord. No. 1061, § 1, 11-17-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)  
2.48.030 - Board of library trustees. 
The Camarillo Public Library will be managed by the Camarillo Board of Library Trustees ("board"), consisting of five members, to be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the city council. All board members must be residents of the city. Except as provided below, each trustee will hold office for a term of three years. If a city council member also sits on the board, the term of office for that board member will automatically expire upon the expiration or termination of their term of office as a city council member. Vacancies on the board will be filled by appointment for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointments are made. 
(Ord. No. 1061, § 1, 11-17-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)  
2.48.040 - Meetings. 
The board will meet at least once a month at such time and place as the board may fix by resolution. Meetings of the board are governed by the Ralph M. Brown Act (commencing with Government Code section 54950). A majority of the board will constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The board must cause a proper record of its proceedings to be kept. 
(Ord. No. 1061, § 1, 11-17-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)  
2.48.050 - President and president pro tem. 
The board will on an annual basis appoint one of its members to serve as president and another to serve as president pro-tem. The president and president pro-tem will each serve for one year and until a successor is appointed. The president pro-tem will preside over the board during any absence of the president. 
(Ord. No. 1061, § 1, 11-17-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)  
2.48.060 - Powers and duties. 
A.  The board may make and enforce all rules, regulations, and bylaws necessary for the administration, government, and protection of the library under its management, and all property belonging to the library. 
B.  The board may administer any trust declared or created for the library, and receive by gift, devise, or bequest and hold in trust or otherwise, property situated in this state or elsewhere, and where not otherwise provided, dispose of the property for the benefit of the library. 
C.  The board may prescribe the duties and powers of the librarian, and other officers and employees of the library; determine the number of and appoint all officers and employees, and fix their terms of employment and compensation. 
D.  The board may borrow books from, lend books to, and exchange books with other libraries, and may allow nonresidents to borrow books upon such conditions as the board may prescribe. 
E.  The board may do and perform any and all other acts and things necessary or proper to carry out the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the Municipal Public Library Act. 
(Ord. No. 1061, § 1, 11-17-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)  
2.48.070 - Annual report. 
The board must, on or before August 31, of each year, cause a report to be prepared on the condition of the library for the fiscal year ending the June 30. The reports must, in addition to other matters deemed expedient by the board, contain such statistical and other information as is deemed desirable by the state librarian. The board must provide a copy of the annual report to the state librarian. 
(Ord. No. 1061, § 1, 11-17-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)  
Chapter 2.52 - ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS AND STATEMENTS OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS 
Sections: 
 
2.52.010 - Electronic filing of campaign statements and statements of economic interest. 
A.  Any elected officer, candidate, political action committee or organization person required to file campaign statements required by Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 84100 of the Government Code), must file those statements online or electronically with the city clerk. 
B.  Any person holding a position listed in Government Code Section 87200 or designated in a local conflict of interest code adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 83700 who is required to file a Form 700 Statement of Economic Interests must file the statement online or electronically with the city clerk. 
C.  In any instance in which an original statement, report or other document must be filed with the California Secretary of State and a copy of that statement, report or other document is required to be filed with the city clerk, the filer may, but is not required to, file the copy electronically. 
D.  If the city clerk's electronic system is not capable of accepting a particular type of statement, report or other document, an elected officer, candidate, committee or other person must file that document with the city clerk in an alternative format. 
(Ord. No. 1154, § 2, 7-25-2018)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - TRANSFER OF TAX DUTIES 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - County assessor and tax collector. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51501 of the Government Code the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the city assessor and tax collector are transferred to the assessor and tax collector of the county of Ventura. 
(Prior code § 2300.)  
3.04.020 - Abolishment of city offices. 
The offices of the city assessor and tax collector are abolished, effective November 6, 1964. 
(Prior code § 2300.1.)  
3.04.030 - Transfer of duties. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51507 of the Government Code of the state, the duties of the tax assessor, other than the assessing of city property and the duties of the tax collector, other than the collection of taxes, are transferred to and shall be performed by the city clerk, or such officer of the county as may by contract with the city be designated and authorized to perform such duties. 
(Prior code § 2300.2.)  
3.04.040 - Adoption of tax procedure law. 
From and after November 6, 1964, the duties of assessing property and of collecting taxes, provided by law to be performed by the assessor and the tax collector of the city, shall be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 51500 through 51519 of the Government Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 2600.)  
Chapter 3.08 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the real property transfer tax ordinance. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7, commencing with Section 11901, of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Ord. 107 § 1 (part), 1967: prior code § 6340.)  
3.08.020 - Tax imposed. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city is granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. 
(Ord. 107 § 1 (part), 1967: prior code § 6341.)  
3.08.030 - Responsibility. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.08.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Ord. 107 § 1 (part), 1967: prior code § 6342.)  
3.08.040 - Security transaction. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Ord. 107 § 1 (part), 1967: prior code § 6363.)  
3.08.100 - Administration. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 107 § 1 (part), 1967: prior code § 6368.)  
3.08.110 - Refunds. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5, commencing with Section 5096, of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Ord. 107 § 1 (part), 1967: prior code § 6369.)  
3.08.120 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the county, pursuant to Part 6.7, commencing with Section 11901, of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, or upon the effective date of this chapter, December 13, 1967, whichever is the later. 
(Ord. 107 § 1 (part), 1967: prior code § 6370.)  
3.08.130 - Recordation. 
Upon its adoption the city clerk shall file two copies of the ordinance codified in this chapter with the county recorder. 
(Ord. 107 § 1 (part), 1967: prior code § 6371.)  
Chapter 3.12 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Short title. 
This chapter is known as the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance. 
(Ord. 252 § 1, 1973.)  
3.12.020 - Purpose. 
The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 252 § 4, 1973.)  
3.12.030 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be .967 percent. 
(Ord. 252 § 2, 1973.)  
3.12.040 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. 
(Ord. 252 § 3, 1973.)  
3.12.050 - Contract with state. 
Prior to January 1, 1974, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, that if the city has contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to January 1, 1974, it shall nevertheless so contract, and in such a case, the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 252 § 5, 1973.)  
3.12.060 - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city, at the rate stated in Section 3.12.030, of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after January 1, 1974. 
(Ord. 252 § 6, 1973.)  
3.12.070 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 252 § 7, 1973.)  
3.12.080 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.12.030 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 252 § 8, 1973.)  
3.12.090 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 252 § 9, 1973.)  
3.12.100 - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. The substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from the tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from the tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose the tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702, except in the last sentence thereof, 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 252 § 10, 1973.)  
3.12.110 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 252 § 11, 1973.)  
3.12.120 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in the state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
E.  This section shall be operative January 1, 1984, and until the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983 and on such date this section shall be deemed repealed. 
(Ord. 559 § 1, 1983: Ord. 252 § 13, 1973.)  
3.12.123 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in the state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
D.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
E.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
F.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
G.  This section shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. 
(Ord. 559 § 2, 1983.)  
3.12.130 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 252 § 15, 1973.)  
3.12.140 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 252 § 16, 1973.)  
3.12.150 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as set out in Section 1.12.020 of this code. 
(Ord. 252 § 17, 1973.)  
Chapter 3.16 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be referred to as the "Camarillo transient occupancy tax ordinance." 
(Ord. 877 § 1 (part), 1997: Ord. 12 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 6200.)  
3.16.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed and defined as set forth in this Section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Hotel" means a hotel, or a motel or any other lodging facility. Hotel and motel are defined as set forth in the city's zoning ordinance. 
B.  "Motel" has the same meaning as hotel. 
C.  "Occupancy" means the temporary use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in a hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
D.  "Operator" means a person or an entity owning, managing, or otherwise controlling a hotel. When an owner operates the hotel through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as the managing agent's principal. 
E.  "Rent" means the consideration charged by an operator, whether or not received, for the occupancy or right to occupy space in the hotel according to the then effective schedule of rates for such room or rooms on the date or dates of such occupancy, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash credits, property and services of any kind or nature, included in the price of the room, without any deduction or offset therefrom whatsoever. 
F.  "Tax" means the transient occupancy tax levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
G.  "Tax administrator" means the director of finance of the city who is charged with collection of the tax. 
H.  "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy of a room in a hotel by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less. Portions of calendar days shall be counted as full days. A person so occupying a room in a hotel for more than thirty consecutive calendar days shall not be deemed to be a transient for any part of the stay and shall not be obligated to pay the tax. 
(Ord. 953 § 1, 2002: Ord. 877 § 1 (part), 1997: Ord. 814 § 1, 1994; Ord. 12 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code §§ 6201—6201.6.)  
3.16.030 - Tax imposed. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of nine percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 659 § 1, 1988: Ord. 111 § 1, 1968: Ord. 12 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 6202.)  
3.16.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  No tax shall be imposed upon any person: 
1.  On whom, or on any occupancy on which, it is beyond the legal authority of the city to impose such as any member of the United States Armed Forces, including a member of the California National Guard, who is traveling on official business, if such person files with the operator a copy of orders or official travel authorization papers. 
2.  Who occupies a room in a hotel for more than thirty consecutive days. 
B.  Exemptions for Certain Occupancies. A tax shall not be levied upon either of the following occupancies of a room in a hotel: 
1.  If the occupancy is of one permitted living unit for the owner/manager; or 
2.  If the occupancy of a room in a hotel is by an employee of the operator and/or owner which room is utilized by such employee while visiting the premises for business purposes and for which no rent is charged. 
C.  Claims. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected. Each such claim shall be made under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 953 § 2, 2002: Ord. 877 § 1 (part), 1997: Ord. 814 § 2, 1994; Ord. 12 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 6203.)  
3.16.050 - Operator's duties—Generally. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from each transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from all other amounts on all receipts and books of record of the hotel, and each transient shall be tendered a receipt for payment from the operator with rent and tax separately stated thereon. No operator shall advertise that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that the tax will not be added to the rent or that, if added, any part of the tax will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the operator from paying the tax on behalf of the transient. 
(Ord. 953 § 3, 2002: Ord. 877 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 12 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 6204.)  
3.16.055 - Rules, regulations, and interpretations. 
The tax administrator may promulgate rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this code as needed to enforce and administer this chapter. Any such rules and regulations which may affect the amount of the tax or tax owed are subject to city council approval. The tax administrator shall file and maintain such rules and regulations. The burden to secure and comply with the rules and regulations shall be upon the operator. 
(Ord. 953 § 4, 2002)  
3.16.070 - Reporting and remitting. 
A.  On or before the fifteenth day of the month following the close of each calendar month, each operator shall mail a return postmarked by the fifteenth of the month with the tax administrator, on forms provided by the tax administrator, stating the total rent and the amount of tax due for the preceding month. At the time the return is mailed, the full amount of the tax due shall be remitted to the Tax administrator. Taxes are deemed paid upon the tax administrator receiving a tax return and tax payment and, if applicable, exemption forms. The tax administrator may require additional information to be included in returns. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
B.  Information filed with the city to comply with this chapter including, without limitation, amounts of gross receipts, adjustments, credits, overcollections, tax, penalty and interest, is confidential to the extent provided by California law. This section does not apply to disclosures made during the course of any administrative, criminal, or civil proceeding to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter prevents the city from disclosing statistical or cumulative information derived from tax returns where the identity of taxpayers is protected. 
C.  Should an operator fail to pay, or if the city finds that additional taxes are due, the tax administrator may order the operator to furnish additional information or provide adequate security as necessary to ensure collection of any taxes due or to become due, and to remit taxes an a daily or weekly basis. The operator shall thereafter report and remit all taxes due under the terms and conditions prescribed by the tax administrator. The tax administrator may amend or rescind such an order upon the operator's full compliance with this code. 
(Ord. 953 § 6, 2002: Ord. 877 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 12 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 6206.) 
(Ord. No. 1157, § 3, 10-24-2018)  
3.16.080 - Failure to collect and report tax—Decisions—Appeals. 
A.  Action by tax administrator. If any operator fails or refuses to collect and/or remit the tax due to the city and/or fails or refuses to file, within the time provided in this chapter any required report or return with the city, then the tax administrator shall investigate in an appropriate manner to determine an estimate of the tax due. The tax administrator shall make an estimate of all taxes due pursuant to this chapter and shall issue an order for the payment of tax ("order") determining and assessing against such operator the full amount of the taxes, including interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. The order shall briefly describe the basis for the estimate of taxes due. The tax administrator shall serve a copy of the order by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator at the operator's last known address. Within ten consecutive calendar days after the service of such order, the operator may file a written request for administrative review with the tax administrator. The tax administrator shall review the matters in the written request and render a decision within thirty days. If relief is denied, within ten consecutive calendar days, the operator may file an appeal in writing with city manager requesting a hearing on the order. The request for an appeal must be accompanied by an administrative fee in an amount determined by the city council resolution. If an appeal by an operator for a hearing is not made within the said ten-day period, the order shall be deemed, for all purposes, final and conclusive and all sums set forth therein shall be immediately due and payable. 
B.  Appeals. Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the city manager shall give not less than five days written notice to the operator and to any person requesting such notice, of the time and place of the appeal hearing, which shall be set by the city manager. At such hearing, the operator and any interested person may appear and offer relevant evidence as to why the tax, interest and penalties should not be imposed as set forth in the order. Based upon the evidence presented at that hearing, the city manager shall determine the total amount of tax due, together with interest and penalties, if any. The city manager shall affirm or modify the order based upon the evidence presented. The city manager shall serve a copy of the written decision upon the operator and any other person requesting the same. The city manager's action on an order shall be deemed final and conclusive and all sums set forth therein shall be immediately due and payable. The written notice of decision shall provide that an action may be filed with the Superior Court of the state pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 by filing said action within ninety days following the date of the city manager's written notice. 
(Ord. 953 § 7, 2002: Ord. 950 § 2, 2002: Ord. 877 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 12 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 6208.)  
3.16.090 - No exemption or deduction for complimentary occupancies or services. 
A.  Complimentary Occupancies. Except as provided in subdivision B of this section, a tax shall be imposed for the occupancy of a room in a hotel, where such occupancy is permitted by an operator on a complimentary basis, i.e., without charge, to any person. The amount of the tax imposed upon such complimentary occupancies shall be based upon the rent which would otherwise have been charged for a comparable room or rooms on the date or dates of such complimentary occupancy. 
B.  Complimentary Services. Unless otherwise required by state law, the value of complimentary services shall not be deducted from the rent for a room and the tax imposed shall be on the full amount of the rent, notwithstanding the value of the complimentary service such as a complimentary meal and/or beverage. 
(Ord. 877 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 12 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 6209.)  
3.16.100 - Recordkeeping requirements. 
A.  Registration Cards. The operator of each hotel shall, as each room in a hotel is rented to a transient, fill out and maintain on file registration cards which shall be printed with consecutive numbers, and which contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  The name of at least one person who will occupy, or who is entitled to occupy, the room; 
2.  The total number of people who will occupy, or who are entitled to occupy, the room; 
3.  The identification of each room by number; 
4.  The date the occupancy commences and the expected date of the departure of the transients; and 
5.  The daily rate charged and amount collected as and for rent for the room. 
B.  Daily Summary Sheets. The operator of each hotel shall maintain a dated daily summary sheet for each day the hotel is open for business containing, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  The name of at least one person entitled to occupancy of each room which is rented or occupied that day; 
2.  The room number; 
3.  The daily rate and amount paid for the rental of the room; and 
4.  The number of the registration card applicable to the rental of the room. 
C.  Maid Reports. Each operator shall maintain dated maid reports which shall contain a list of all rooms cleaned on each day during the calendar year. 
D.  Receipt Book. Each operator shall maintain receipt books with a carbon copy for each receipt issued, or if the operation is computerized, a printout of all charges made on a daily basis. 
E.  Bank Accounts. The operator shall maintain in a banking institution one or more accounts ("accounts") which shall be used exclusively for the deposit of the receipts of the hotel operation, including rentals and expenditures relating to the hotel. If a deposit is made to such an account, and no written record exists as to its source, the amount(s) shall be deemed to be rent. All receipts from the operation of the hotel shall be deposited in such accounts. 
F.  Telephone Charges. Each operator shall maintain records which show all telephone, facsimile and related charges for each call made for which a charge is made by the operator or automatic metering equipment. 
G.  Other Financial Records. After prior notification, each operator shall maintain other financial records as the tax administrator may require. 
All of the above records and any other records relevant to the subject matter of the operation of the hotel shall be made available for inspection by the tax administrator within ten calendar days written notice. All records shall be made available for inspection and copying by the city. Any hotel records disclosing the name of any guest or any personal information about a guest shall be treated as confidential by the city. 
All of the records referenced in this section, shall be maintained by each operator for a period not less than five years, unless the operator has received notice that the city will be auditing its records or the city is in the process of auditing the operator's records. If the operator has notice of an impending or ongoing audit, then the operator shall keep the required records for the time period specified in the notice until the audit has been completed and all obligations under this section are paid in full; however, under no circumstances shall the records be maintained for less than five years from the date the record was created. 
An operator may apply to the tax administrator for modification of the recordkeeping requirements of this section if the operator demonstrates that the operator has an alternate recordkeeping system which provides proper safeguards to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. However, the tax administrator shall not extend the length of time specified in this section that records shall be required to be kept. The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed to the city manager. The decision of the city manager shall be final and conclusive for all matters. 
The tax administrator, upon completion of a proceeding which involves the use of records copied from the original records in the possession or custody of an operator shall return all such copies, or, at the direction of such operator, destroy the same. No return or destruction of records shall occur without the written consent of the city attorney. 
(Ord. 953 § 8, 2002; Ord. 877 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 12 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 6210.)  
3.16.110 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B, C and D of this section; provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years after the date of payment. All such claims shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund for, or receive as a credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when the tax administrator reasonably determines such to be the case, provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently paid by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax and paid the same to the city. 
D.  An operator may claim a refund for, or receive as a credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid by the operator based on the operator's clerical or computation error. The operator shall not be entitled to such a refund or credit until the operator has established the existence of such clerical or computation error to the satisfaction of the tax administrator. 
E.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing such entitlement. 
(Ord. 877 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 12 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 6211.)  
3.16.120 - Tax as civil debt—Actions to collect. 
A.  Tax as Civil Debt. Any tax required to be paid pursuant to this chapter: 
1.  Which is collected by an operator and has not been paid to the city in the time prescribed by this chapter, shall be deemed to be a civil debt owed by the operator to the city; and 
2.  By a transient, which tax is not collected for any reason by the operator whether or not rent is collected by such operator from such transient, the amount of such tax shall be deemed to be a civil debt owed by the operator and the transient to the city. 
B.  Civil Actions. 
1.  If a civil action is required to enforce the collection of a tax from any person, and a recovery of such tax in any amount is granted in such a civil judicial proceeding, the city shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys fees, court costs, and its costs of the administrative process under this chapter, including, but not limited to other direct and indirect costs incurred by the city with reference to such litigation. 
2.  Recording of a Certificate of Lien. If any tax is not paid when due, the tax administrator may record in the office(s) of county recorder(s) of such counties as the tax administrator may determine, a certificate which specifies the amount of tax due and the name and address of the operator owing the tax. The certificate shall include a statement that the tax administrator has complied with all legal requirements in the determination of the tax owed and a legal description of the real property of the owner. Upon recording of the certificate, the tax constitutes a lien upon all real property owned or thereafter acquired by the operator. The lien has the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien. 
(Ord. 953 § 9, 2002: Ord. 877 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 814 § 3, 1994: Ord. 12 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 6212.)  
3.16.123 - Duty and liability of operator's successor. 
A.  Any operator liable for any tax who sells or otherwise disposes of a hotel, and the operator's successor, shall notify the tax administrator of the date of sale at least thirty days prior to the date of the sale or immediately if the agreement to sell or otherwise dispose of the hotel was made less than thirty days prior to the date of the sale. The successor shall withhold from the operator in trust for the city a portion of the purchase price sufficient to pay the amount of the tax owed to the city until the operator secures a written tax clearance notification from the tax administrator stating that no tax is due from the operator through the date of the sale. If no tax clearance notification is presented by the operator to the successor within thirty days after the successor commences operation of the hotel, the successor shall immediately deposit with the tax administrator the amount withheld from the purchase price to be applied to the amount of the tax owed by the prior operator. 
B.  If the successor fails to withhold the amount required by this chapter, the successor is liable to the city for payment of the tax owed by the operator. 
C.  The tax administrator shall, within thirty days of receipt of a written request for a tax clearance notification, either issue the notification or give written notice to the operator, with a copy to the successor, of the amount of tax which must be paid to secure issuance of the tax clearance notification. The tax clearance notification shall be a defense, available solely to the successor and not the operator, to any claim the city may assert against the successor for taxes owed by the operator. 
D.  Any operator from which the successor has withheld and paid to the city a portion of the purchase price may challenge the city's determination pursuant to Section 3.16.080, by making application in writing for a hearing on the amount determined by the city within ten days of mailing by the tax administrator. Following receipt of a timely request for hearing, the hearing provisions of Section 3.16.080 shall apply. 
(Ord. 953 § 10 (part), 2002)  
3.16.125 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies prescribed by this chapter or any other provisions of law and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 953 § 10 (part), 2002)  
3.16.130 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty in an amount equal to ten percent of the amount of the tax due, per month, in addition to the amount of the tax, until the tax is paid in full, or the total penalty equals one hundred percent of the tax due. 
B.  If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties referred to in Subsection A of this Section, 3.16.130. 
C.  Every penalty imposed upon a tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed for the purpose of collection merged in the tax to which it relates and the full amount thereof shall be due, payable and subject to collection as provided in this chapter. 
D.  Interest equal to one percent per month on the full amount of taxes, calculated from the first day immediately following the due date to the date of payment shall be added to the tax. 
(Ord. 953 § 11, 2002: Ord. 877 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 814 § 4, 1994; Ord. 12 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 6207.)  
3.16.140 - Statement of tax not conclusive on city. 
A.  No reports or statements of an operator shall be conclusive as to any matter affected by this chapter nor shall the city be precluded from collecting any sum actually due and payable. Each report or statement and each of the items therein are subject to audit and verification by an auditor appointed by the city. 
B.  The tax administrator may require any operator, upon reasonable written notice, to provide the tax administrator with access to all of the operator's books and records relating to the operator's operation of the hotel, including rents charged by such operator which are subject to a tax pursuant to this chapter. If, as a result of any such audit, it is determined that a return required to be filed by such operator pursuant to Section 3.16.070 hereof is inaccurate and did not include and report the correct amount of tax due pursuant to this chapter, the operator shall forthwith pay to the city all taxes which are shown to be due as a result of such audit, regardless of whether the operator collected such taxes. 
C.  Every operator shall keep and preserve for a period of not less than five years all records as may be necessary to determine the tax, which records shall be made available upon demand of the city at all reasonable times. Such operator shall permit an examination of such books and records at a location within the city's jurisdiction. 
D.  If an audit conducted pursuant to the provisions of this Section 3.16.140 reflects that in any calendar month there was under-reporting of taxes due by five percent or more, which under-reporting was not corrected by the operator prior to the commencement of the audit, all costs associated with the audit shall be borne by the operator and the cost thereof shall be subject to collection as a civil debt by the city. 
(Ord. 953 § 12, 2002: Ord. 814 § 5, 1994.)  
3.16.150 - Service charges. 
A.  If the operator determines that a transient is exempt from the payment of the tax pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the operator shall file a copy of each claim under Section 3.16.040(C) with the tax administrator not later than the date upon which the next return required by this chapter is required to be filed with the tax administrator. 
B.  Claims for exemptions shall be made on forms provided for that purpose by the tax administrator. All information required on the form shall be completed by the person who claims to be exempt from payment of the tax. Each operator is obligated to review each claim to ensure that it is fully completed. When an operator submits to the tax administrator a claim of exemption which is either not timely filed or is incomplete, the tax administrator shall reject such claim of exemption and give the operator a brief statement of reasons therefor. When the rejection is based upon the form not being properly completed, the operator may within ten consecutive calendar days from the date of return of the rejected claim for exemption refile the same with all information required to be placed thereon included in the refiled claim. 
C.  When a claim of exemption is defective, the operator: 
1.  Shall be responsible for all taxes due with respect to the purported exempt transient; and 
2.  Shall pay to the city a service charge of five dollars ("service charge") for each claim of exemption which is rejected by the tax administrator as incomplete or inappropriate; and 
3.  The tax administrator shall give notice to the operator of all taxes due as a result of rejection of the exemption claims and the amount of service charges imposed. The operator shall pay all sums due within ten working days of notification. 
D.  The amount of the service charge shall be increased on or after January 1st of each year in an amount equal to the increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers (Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County) during the preceding calendar year. For the purpose of this chapter, service charges imposed shall be deemed for all purposes to have merged into the tax due, and shall be subject to collection in the time and manner as set forth in this chapter. 
E.  If an operator consistently files claim forms which are either not timely filed, or are incomplete, the tax administrator may require the operator to place a cash deposit in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars with the tax administrator for the purpose of ensuring that taxes due and service charges imposed as a result of defective claims for exemption are timely paid. If such a deposit is required, the operator shall maintain the deposit in an amount not less than that set by the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 896 § 1, 1998: Ord. 877 § 2 (part), 1997.)  
3.16.160 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 877 § 2 (part), 1997.)  
Chapter 3.20 - CITY REVOLVING FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.20.010 - Established. 
There is established a revolving fund in the amount of five hundred dollars, to be established, maintained, and replenished out of the general fund of the city, and there shall be deposited in the revolving fund from the general fund the sum of five hundred dollars. 
(Prior code § 2500.)  
3.20.020 - Expenditures. 
All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for municipal purposes. 
(Prior code § 2500.1.)  
3.20.030 - Limit of expenditures. 
No single expenditure out of the fund shall exceed the sum of two hundred dollars, and expenditures therefrom may be made upon signature of the city manager. 
(Ord. 218 § 1 (part), 1972: prior code § 2500.2.)  
3.20.040 - Replenishment. 
Upon presentation to the city council by the city manager of an itemized statement of expenditures out of the fund, audited and approved by the city council, the council shall authorize the reimbursement to the fund of the amount so audited and approved. 
(Ord. 218 § 1 (part), 1972: prior code § 2500.3.)  
Chapter 3.24 - SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Established. 
There is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the special gas tax street improvement fund. 
(Prior code § 2501.)  
3.24.020 - Deposits. 
All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into the fund. 
(Prior code § 2501.1.)  
3.24.030 - Expenditure of special fund. 
All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Prior code § 2501.2.)  
Chapter 3.28 - CASH BOND FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Established. 
A special fund is created in the city treasury to be known as the cash bond fund into which fund shall be deposited all cash bonds accepted by the city council pursuant to the provisions of this code or any other ordinance or resolution of the city under the terms of which a cash bond is deposited with the city guaranteeing the faithful performance of any agreement with the city. Funds may be withdrawn from the cash bond fund only upon a warrant drawn and approved in the normal manner and upon certification by the proper officer having supervision of the performance of such agreement as to the partial completion or final completion and acceptance of the work to be performed under any such agreement. 
(Prior code § 2502.)  
Chapter 3.32 - CLAIMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1035, § 2, adopted May 27, 2009, amended Ch. 3.32, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 3.32 was entitled, "Claims, Demands and Warrants." See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
 
3.32.010. - Claims for money or damages. 
This chapter governs all claims against the city for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Tort Claims Act (California Government Code section 900 and following) or other state law (hereafter "claims"). 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 2, 5-27-2009)  
3.32.020. - Form of claim. 
All claims must be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by the claimant's guardian, conservator, executor, or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless it is verified by every member of that class of persons All claims must be made on a form provided by the city clerk, contain the information required by Government Code section 910, and must be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 2, 5-27-2009)  
3.32.030. - Time limitation. 
All claims must be presented in accordance with the time limitations set forth in Government Code section 911.2. In addition, pursuant to Government Code section 901, any claim against the city for equitable indemnity or partial equitable indemnity must be presented not later than six months after the date upon which a defendant is served with the complaint giving rise to the defendant's claim for a cause of action for equitable indemnity or partial equitable indemnity against the city. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 2, 5-27-2009)  
3.32.040. - Late filing. 
In accordance with Government Code section 935, the late filing of a claim pursuant to this chapter is subject to Government Code sections 911.4 and 911.6 through 912.2. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 2, 5-27-2009)  
3.32.050. - Delegation of claims authority to city manager. 
A.  Pursuant to Government Code section 935.4, the city manager is authorized and directed to perform on behalf of the city all functions relating to claims against the city. 
B.  The city manager is authorized to settle a claim against the city provided the settlement does not exceed $10,000.00. Upon written order by the city manager, the finance director of the city must cause a warrant to be issued upon the treasury of the city in the amount for which a claim has been settled. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 2, 5-27-2009)  
3.32.060. - Claim presentation required prior to initiating legal action. 
All claims must be presented as provided in this chapter and acted upon by the city prior to the filing of any lawsuit or action on such claim. No lawsuit or action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 2, 5-27-2009)  
3.32.070. - Legal action on claims. 
A.  Any legal action brought against the city upon any claim must conform to the requirements of Government Code sections 940—949. 
B.  Any legal action brought against any employee of the city must conform to the requirements of Government Code sections 950, 951. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 2, 5-27-2009)  
Chapter 3.35 - WATER CHARGES 
Sections: 
 
3.35.010 - Setting of water rates. 
The city council shall, from time to time, in the time and manner set forth in applicable law, including this code, set the rates for domestic water services ("water charges") for each service connection served with domestic water by the city. In each instance where the property owner resides within the property, the service account shall be in the name of the property owner. 
(Ord. 832 § 2 (part), 1995.)  
3.35.015 - Billing disputes. 
A.  The city manager, or designee, shall review the accounts of customers who dispute water charges within thirty days after receiving a written request for review. If an error is found after such review, the city will promptly correct the error and, if required and at the city's sole discretion, either credit the customer account or give the customer a refund. 
B.  The review conducted by the city manager, or designee, will include consideration of whether to establish a payment plan for the customer to pay any unpaid balance of delinquent account over a reasonable time not to exceed twelve months. Unless otherwise required by this code, the city will not terminate service for customer fully complying with such a payment plan. 
C.  If a customer fails to comply with a payment plan established pursuant to this section, the city shall give the customer a two business days' notice to comply in order to avoid termination of service. Such notice does not entitle the customer to further investigation or review by the city. 
D.  Water bills shall contain information regarding dispute resolution procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 958 § 6, 2002.)  
3.35.020 - Water charges—Manner of collection. 
A.  Water Charges When Due. 
1.  Payment of Water Charges. As to each service connection served with domestic water by the city, the owner or other person who has applied for domestic water service from the city for a service connection (collectively "customer") shall pay the water charges imposed pursuant to this code on a monthly basis. For purposes of this section a "monthly basis" means a billing period not exceeding thirty-three days. 
2.  Water Charges When Delinquent. If for any reason the customer, as to a service connection which is served by the city, fails to pay the water charges due for such service on or before the twenty-first day following billing of such water charges by the city, as of that date the water charges shall be deemed delinquent. 
3.  Upon the water charges becoming delinquent, the city manager, or designee, will cause a notice of delinquency and intent to discontinue service to be mailed to the customer of record and actual user. Every notice of termination of service shall include all of the information required in Public Utilities Code § 10010.1(d). 
4.  If payment is not received within fifteen days from the mailing of the notice of delinquency and impending termination, a shutoff notice must be delivered to the service address and posted in a conspicuous location at the premises. When the shutoff notice is delivered and posted, a fee will be applied to the customer's account in accordance with the water charges. Failure to make payment within two business days of notice will result in shutoff of the meter, and assessment of a shutoff fee in accordance with the water charges. 
5.  The restrictions on termination of service set forth in Public Utilities Code § 10010 are applicable to any shutoff proceedings. 
B.  Delinquent Water Charges—Penalties. Penalties shall be imposed upon all delinquent water charges as follows: 
1.  Basic Penalty. A basic penalty of ten percent of total delinquent charges applicable to each service connection shall be imposed as of the date of such delinquency; and 
2.  Additional Penalties. An additional penalty of ten percent shall be imposed on the total delinquent charges on each billing date upon which the charges remain unpaid; and 
3.  Limit of Penalty. The total penalty imposed shall not exceed one hundred percent of the total of any such delinquent account. 
C.  Interruption in Water Service—Penalties. 
1.  Service will be discontinued if payment has not been received or arrangements made to pay the delinquent bill. If payment is not made within the specified time as identified above or for any other reason relating to nonpayment of an outstanding bill or charge, including, without limitation, checks returned for insufficient funds, credit card denial, or other, similar type of payment problem, a service charge, in an amount determined by the water charges, shall be charged and due and payable with respect to each time service is discontinued. 
2.  Except as provided in Public Utilities Code § 10009, where water has been shut off, service shall not be restored until all required payments (including, without limitation, arrearage, penalties, deposits and service charges) have been paid in full. 
D.  If a meter is locked off for nonpayment, the delinquent balance plus all fees assessed as a result of the delinquency become immediately due and payable. Service will be reinstated only during regular working hours and only after payment has been received or special payment arrangements have been made with the finance director. 
E.  Collection of Certain Delinquent Charges. On June 1st of each calendar year, the city manager, or designee, shall prepare a complete list of delinquent charges applicable to the service connection where the owner is the customer for the period ending on April 30th of each calendar year. A notice shall be given, at least forty-five days before the public hearing, of such delinquencies to the owner of the service connection to which each such delinquency relates. The city council shall schedule a noticed public hearing for its second meeting in June of each calendar year at which time delinquent charges together with penalties, shall be placed on the equalized assessment roll for the fiscal year commencing on the July 1st following the conduct of such hearing for collection. Thereafter, the delinquent charges, together with penalties thereon, shall be collected in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same time as, together and not separately from, general taxes collected on behalf of the city and other taxing authorities. The provisions of this subsection shall only be applicable to delinquent charges where the customer is the land owner. 
F.  Civil Debt. All charges and penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to be civil debts owed to the city by the customer as to the service connection to which such charges and penalties apply. 
(Ord. 958 § 7, 2002: Ord. 832 § 2 (part), 1995.)  
3.35.025 - Supplemental billing for agricultural water. 
Customers supplied with water for agricultural purposes may be required to pay additional charges to the city in the event that overall use of agricultural water exceeds the city's Interim Agricultural Water Program allocation as determined by the Calleguas Municipal Water District and any successor agency. Should such overage occur, each customer using water for agricultural purposes shall pay the water charges imposed pursuant to this code on or before the thirtieth day following billing of such water charges by the city in the manner set forth in this code. 
(Ord. 958 § 8, 2002.)  
3.35.030 - Separate landscape meters. 
A.  Water customers may apply for a separate meter for landscaping systems. As a condition of obtaining the new meter, customers must agree that landscape irrigation may be restricted or curtailed in an emergency and in drought conditions. 
B.  If the city approves the installation of the separate landscape meter, the customer shall pay all costs for physical connection, including costs of new meter installations and incremental water capital connection fees. Credit will be given to a customer if a replaced meter is usable at another location. 
C.  Once a separate landscape meter is connected, the customer shall pay all applicable monthly fees associated with the meters. If a customer disconnects a landscape meter, a landscape meter may not be reconnected at that address for a period of twenty-four months from the date the meter is disconnected. 
(Ord. 900 § 1, 1998.)  
3.35.040 - Deposit. 
A.  Deposits are required on all new customer accounts at start of service, in accordance with water charges. The deposit shall be returned to the customer in the form of a credit to the customer's account provided the customers account has been in good standing for twelve consecutive months. 
B.  If it becomes necessary to disconnect the service of any present or future customer because of recurring nonpayment of bills within forty-five days after the same are due, then such customer shall be required to deposit cash in the amount of an estimated two-month billing for the classification of service applied for, as estimated by the utility billing section. No deposit shall be less than sixty dollars. After twelve months' consecutive timely payment of bills, said deposit shall be credited to the next bill. 
C.  Upon the discontinuance of any service, any balance of a deposit remaining in the hands of the city after all bills for utility services provided through said service have been deducted shall be, within sixty days, returned to the person by whom such deposit was made. 
(Ord. 958 § 9, 2002.)  
3.35.050 - Senior qualifying rate. 
A.  Senior citizens meeting the qualifications in this section shall pay a total monthly charge equal to the monthly service charge for a three-quarter inch meter as defined in the water charges; that is, they shall pay no commodity charge. 
B.  To qualify, a customer must meet all these criteria in a given billing period: 
1.  Be at least sixty-two years old. 
2.  Be in a low-income household as determined by federal guidelines. "Low-income household" means the "30% of Median" household income level as listed by the most current HUD Section 8 Income Limits for Ventura County, California. For example, the 2002 income level of a two person low-income household is seventeen thousand nine hundred fifty dollars. 
3.  Consume no more than one thousand cubic feet of water per billing cycle. 
C.  Claims for the special senior qualifying rate must be filed with the finance department. To make application for the senior qualifying rate, a customer is required to submit the following documents to the finance department: 
1.  A signed photocopy of California Citizens' Property Tax Assistance claim, Form (FTB-9000), or other competent acceptable evidence of qualification; 
2.  A completed Senior Citizens Water Bill Assistance Claim form, available from the city; and 
3.  A photocopy of proof of age. 
D.  All such allowances shall first be recognized on the next full billing cycle after the date of approval. The finance department may require such additional evidence as it deems necessary or appropriate in processing the claim. Only one claimant from each household shall be entitled to allowance. The finance department, at any time, may require a customer to provide proof of continuing eligibility. Any change in the qualification status of the claimant during the fiscal year of the allowance shall be immediately reported by the claimant to the finance department of the city and the appropriate adjustments shall be made accordingly. 
E.  Residents who would otherwise qualify, but are billed through a master meter serving multiple housing units, are not eligible for this program. 
(Ord. 958 § 10, 2002.)  
3.35.060 - Water meters. 
Tampering with or breaking a meter or lock will result in assessment of a penalty consisting of a fixed amount plus expenses and other costs, as provided in the water charges. 
(Ord. 958 § 11, 2002.)  
3.35.070 - Backflow device testing—Late penalty. 
A.  Backflow devices shall be tested annually to determine compliance with the state of California Department of Health Service (CDHS) Cross Connection regulations. Written proof that backflow devices meet CDHS regulations shall be submitted to the public works director, or designee, not later than thirty days from receipt of a backflow device testing reminder notice. 
B.  The public works director, or designee, shall cause a reminder notice to be mailed to the customer of record and actual user not less than thirty days before the test submission deadline. Failure of the public works director, or designee, to send or for the customer of record to receive a reminder notice shall not relieve the customer of record from the obligations imposed by this section. 
C.  If for any reason the customer fails to submit the test results on or before the thirty-first day after a reminder notice is, or should have been, sent by the public works director, or designee, the test results shall be deemed late. 
D.  Upon the test results becoming delinquent, the public works director, or designee, shall cause a late notice and intent to discontinue service to be mailed to the customer of record or actual user. 
E.  If test results are not received within eight business days from the mailing of the notice of delinquency and impending termination, an attempt will be made to contact an adult person at the premises of the customer by telephone or personal contact. 
F.  If telephone or personal contact is not made at least two business days before service is to be discontinued, a shutoff notice must be delivered to the service address and posted in a conspicuous location at the premises. When the shutoff notice is delivered and posted, a fee will be applied to the customer's account in accordance with the water charges. Failure to submit test results within two business days of notice will result in shutoff of the meter, and assessment of a shutoff fee in accordance with the water charges. 
G.  The restrictions on termination of service set forth in Public Utilities Code § 10010 are applicable to any shutoff proceedings. 
H.  Water service will be reinstated only during regular working hours and only after successful test results are submitted to the department of public works and all fees assessed have been paid to the customer service division or special payment arrangements have been made with the director of finance. 
(Ord. 958 § 13, 2002.)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATES AND PERMITTING PROCEDURES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATES GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
5.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this title, unless the context clearly otherwise requires, the enumerated words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
A.  "Anniversary month" means the month in which business first applied for a business license from the city. For those business in which the original anniversary month cannot be determined, the city shall assign an anniversary month and that date shall be the anniversary month for purposes of this title. 
B.  "Annual gross receipts" means the gross receipts for a business for the business tax year. 
C.  "Annual tax" means the tax which is payable by a business for the business tax year pursuant to this title. 
D.  "Business" means and includes all kinds of vocations, trades, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted, used or carried on for the purpose of earning in whole or in part a profit or livelihood whether or not a profit or livelihood actually is earned thereby and regardless of whether paid for in money, goods, labor or otherwise. Business, professions and trades shall include, without being limited thereto, trades and occupations of all and every kind of calling carried on within the city; salesmen, brokers, retailers, wholesalers, vendors, suppliers, peddlers, professions, the renting or supplying of living quarters or board, or both for guests, tenants or occupants. A business need not have a fixed place of business in the city. 
E.  "Business tax certificate" means the certificate issued upon payment of the tax imposed pursuant to this chapter and required to be in effect to operate a business. 
F.  "Business tax year" means the year, for purposes of determining the tax, which begins on the first day of the anniversary month and continues through the last day of the month immediately preceding the anniversary month in the following calendar year. 
G.  "Certificate holder" means the business and/or the owner thereof, who holds a current business tax certificate. 
H.  "Director" means the director of finance of the city or his/her designee. 
I.  "Disabled veteran" means an honorably discharged soldier, sailor, marine or air person of the United States who suffers from a service-connected disability and who has furnished to the city a certificate of physical disability executed by a qualified surgeon of the armed forces and proof of an honorable discharge. 
J.  "Employee," when used to determine the amount of a tax based, in whole or in part, upon the number of employees engaged in business, means and include all natural persons engaged, on a full-time or part-time basis, in the operation or conduct of any business, whether an owner, a member of an owner's family, proprietor, officer, director, partner, manager, operator, trustee, trustor, beneficiaries, associates, solicitors and/or a joint venturer. 
K.  "Event" means and includes an exhibition, a fair, a sales event, or other similar event: 
1.  To which members of the public are invited, with or without payment of an admission fee or charge; and 
2.  Where goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuff and/or services are available for sale; and 
3.  Which is conducted by a sponsor; and 
4.  Which is conducted on a periodic basis consisting of not more than fifty-two days in any calendar year. 
L.  "Gross receipts" means gross income, as defined in the Internal Revenue Code, and includes the total of amounts actually received or receivable from sales and the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in "gross receipts" are all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from "gross receipts" are all of the following: 
1.  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
2.  Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold; 
3.  Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
4.  Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sales as is refunded either in cash or by credit; 
5.  Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, provided, the agent or trustee has furnished the director with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them; 
6.  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded; 
7.  As to a real estate agent or broker, the sales price of real estate sold for the account of others except that portion which represents commission or other income to the agent or broker; 
8.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, that portion of his/her gross receipts derived from the sale of motor vehicle fuel, equal to the motor vehicle fuel tax imposed by and previously paid under the provisions of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State; 
9.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code if paid by the dealer or collected by him/her from the consumer or purchaser. 
M.  "Person" means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts trust, business, or common law trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than as an employee. 
N.  "Sale" means and includes the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. This definition shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law. 
O.  "Sponsor" means a person who sponsors an event in which one or more persons participate as vendors. 
P.  "Sworn statement" means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration made under penalty of perjury. 
Q.  "Tax" means a tax imposed pursuant to this chapter upon a business in order to obtain a business tax certificate. 
R.  "Vendor" means any person, operator or exhibitor who participates in an event, with the approval of the sponsor of the event, and who offers, for a consideration, goods, wares, foodstuff, merchandise or services at such event. 
(Ord. 857 § 1, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.015 - Director—Duties. 
It is the duty of the director to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The director may delegate any such duties to a designee. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.020 - Revenue measure. 
This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for general municipal purposes, and is not intended as a regulatory measure. Issuance of a business tax certificate is evidence only of the fact that such tax has been paid and does not constitute zoning or any other type of required approval. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.025 - Compliance with code. 
A.  No business shall be issued an initial business tax certificate unless the business complies with the provisions of the city's municipal code, including, without limitation, Title 19 thereof. 
B.  For purposes of this section only, for a business which is required to obtain a home occupation permit, compliance with Title 19 of this code shall only be required to the extent that there are no violations under Title 19 which relate to the business being conducted from the home. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.030 - Effect on other ordinances. 
Persons required pursuant to this chapter to pay a tax for the privilege of carrying on business in the city shall not be relieved from complying with all other provisions of this code or any other applicable law. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.040 - Business tax certificate and tax payment required. 
A.  Business Tax Certificate Required. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business in the city without having in effect a current business tax certificate therefor. 
B.  Payment of Tax. Taxes shall be imposed upon each business in the amounts prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.050 - Separate business tax certificate for each business and for each location. 
A.  A separate business tax certificate shall be obtained for each branch establishment or location of each business required to have a business tax certificate hereunder. 
B.  Separate business tax certificates shall be required for each business which share a common location. 
C.  A business tax certificate shall authorize the operator to transact and carry on only the business indicated thereon at the location or in the manner designated in such business tax certificate. Warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business certified under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an ancillary business and not a separate place of business nor a branch establishment. An ancillary business shall be required to obtain and post an ancillary business tax certificate and pay a fee therefor in an amount determined by resolution of the city council. 
D.  Any person who owns or conducts two or more different businesses under the same ownership and which use a single set or integrated set of books and records, may, at his/her option, pay only one tax calculated on the aggregate gross receipts of the businesses. Each business shall be required to obtain and post a business tax certificate for each separate business and pay a fee for the additional certificate(s) in an amount determined by resolution of the city council. 
E.  Any person who owns or conducts a business with multiple different locations, but which businesses are under the same ownership and which use a single set or integrated set of books and records, may, at his/her option, pay only one tax calculated on the aggregate gross receipts of the business. Each business shall be required to obtain and post a business tax certificate for each location and pay a fee for the additional certificate(s) in an amount determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.060 - Evidence of doing business. 
When any person by any means, including, without limitation, the use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone directories, trade publications, newspapers, advertisements, represents that he/she is in a business in the city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency which license reflects that he/she is in business in the city, such person shall be deemed to be conducting a business in the city. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.070 - Apportionment. 
A.  None of the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitutions of the United States and the state. 
B.  None of the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be applied to businesses operating both within and outside the city's jurisdiction as to not fairly reflect that proportion of the taxed activity actually carried on within the city. 
C.  In any case where a tax is believed by a certificate holder or applicant for a business tax certificate to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses or to not fairly reflect the proportion of the taxed activity actually carried on within the city, he/she may apply to the director for an adjustment of the tax. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed tax. The applicant shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, show his/her method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the director deems necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden or violation. The director shall then conduct an investigation, and after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the tax for the applicant, an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the tax so fixed. In fixing the tax to be charged, the director shall have the power to base the tax upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the tax as prescribed by this chapter. Should the director determine the gross receipts measure of tax to be the proper basis, the director may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant's business in the city, or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of tax therefore. The burden of proof is upon the owner of the business claiming an exemption or adjustment pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.080 - Exemptions. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state from the payment of such taxes as are prescribed in this chapter. 
B.  Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a sworn statement with the director stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed along with appropriate documentation, and in the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by this chapter. The director shall, upon a proper showing contained in the sworn statement, issue a business tax certificate, endorsed on its face "exempt", to such person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the city of the tax required by this chapter. 
C.  The director, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for a hearing to a certificate holder, may revoke the exempt status of any business tax certificate granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the certificate holder is not entitled to the exemption as provided in this section. 
D.  The provisions of this chapter shall not require the obtaining of a business tax certificate to commence or conduct any business or require the payment of any tax, by any bona fide institution or organization which is commenced and conducted wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or from any nonprofit organization not regularly or primarily engaged in business and from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any person, nor shall any business tax certificate or tax be required for the commencing and conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition, lecture or scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subject or subjects whenever the receipts or net proceeds of such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are appropriated or turned over to any bona fide church or school or to any bona fide religious or benevolent purposes. 
E.  The provisions of this chapter shall not require the payment of a tax for a nonprofit organization which conducts a fund raising activity; provided, that the nonprofit organization conducting such activity utilizes the receipts of such activity for the purposes and objects for which the nonprofit organization was formed and that the nonprofit organization complies with all other provisions of this code. If the nonprofit organization merely sponsors an event and only receives a percentage of the receipts, or receives a specified amount or fee, then each person conducting a business at the event must obtain a business tax certificate in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
F.  Notwithstanding subsection E of this section, in the case of periodic events, which occur more than once a year but which do not take place on a regular daily basis, the sponsor of the event may obtain a business tax certificate for all approved vendors included in the event and pay a tax based upon gross receipts pursuant to Section 5.04.230 of this Code. 
1.  The procedure set forth in this subsection may only be used for events in which the sales from all individual vendors are reported to and recorded by the sponsor of the event so that the sponsor may accurately account for the gross receipts upon which the tax is based. 
2.  When the business tax certificate is issued to a sponsor in accordance with this subsection, all individual vendors shall be conclusively presumed to be exempt from the requirement of obtaining a separate business tax certificate pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, for the purposes of the event. 
3.  If an individual vendor is exempt from the requirements pursuant to this chapter, the sponsor shall pay the tax based upon the gross receipts of those vendors who are not exempt. An individual vendor is not exempt from the provisions of this subsection, based on the fact that such vendor has a business tax certificate for a business elsewhere in the city. 
G.  Notwithstanding subsection E of this section, in the case of annual events, the sponsor of the event may obtain a business tax certificate in accordance with this code for all approved vendors included in the event. 
1.  This method of certification may only be used for events which take place once a year, regardless of the number of days in the event. 
2.  When the business tax certificate is issued to a sponsor in accordance with this subsection, all individual vendors shall be conclusively presumed to be exempt from the requirement of obtaining a separate business tax certificate pursuant to the provisions of this title for the purpose of conducting a business at the event. 
H.  Limited Gross Receipts. The provisions of this chapter shall not require minors, disabled veterans, or adults sixty-five years of age or older if such minors, disabled veterans, or adults are engaged in a business with gross receipts under two thousand five hundred dollars per year to obtain a business tax certificate or pay a tax. 
I.  Garage Sales. The provisions of this chapter shall not require obtaining a business tax certificate or payment of a tax from any natural person engaged in conducting garage sales or yard sales for which all property to be sold is a person's own personal property and has not been acquired or consigned or crafted for the purpose of resale, or for the benefit of other than the occupants of the premises, provided that such garage sales or yard sales do not exceed two in number in any business tax year. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.090 - Business tax certificate—Contents. 
Every person required to have a business tax certificate under the provisions of this chapter shall make application as prescribed in Section 5.04.100 for the same to the director of the city, and upon payment of the prescribed tax, the director shall issue to such person a business tax certificate which shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name of the person to whom the business tax certificate is to be issued; 
B.  The name of the business to be certified; 
C.  The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on; 
D.  The expiration date of such business tax certificate; 
E.  Such other information as may be determined necessary by the director for the purpose of enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.100 - Application—Tax certificate/ renewals. 
A.  A person making an application for an initial business tax certificate or a renewal shall furnish to the director a sworn statement, upon a form specified by the director, setting forth the following information: 
1.  The exact nature or kind of business for which the business tax certificate is requested; 
2.  The address where such business is to be conducted and the residence address of the owners, identified as such; 
3.  The address where the applicant shall consent to receive mail concerning the business tax certificate applied for; 
4.  Where any person contracts, sells, manufactures or delivers any goods, wares or merchandise in the city for which sales or use tax is payable, the application shall set forth the appropriate California State Board of Equalization Permit Number; 
5.  Where any person employs others in the course of such business the application shall set forth the appropriate federal and/or state employer identification number; 
6.  Where any person conducting any business is self-employed, the application shall set forth the applicant's Social Security Number and driver's license number; 
7.  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a business tax certificate to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of those owning said business or enterprise; 
8.  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a business tax certificate to a person doing business as a state licensed contractor, the application shall set forth the applicant's State Contractor's License Number and Specialty Classification; 
9.  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a business tax certificate to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall set forth the names and places of residences of the officers or partners thereof; 
10.  In all cases where the amount of tax to be paid is based upon the number of persons employed, or upon the number of vehicles used, or upon any amount or number which furnishes the basis for determination of the tax for the particular business referred to in the application, such items must be stated on the application; provided that a newly established business shall make a true estimate or statement of such information and the business tax shall be based upon said estimation and shall be paid at the time of application for a business tax certificate; 
11.  If the amount of the tax to be paid by the applicant is based upon the average number of employees, such application shall set forth the average number of employees for the applicable period; 
12.  Satisfactory proof of identification of the applicant, a copy of which shall be made for the city's records. The identification shall include a photograph unless the applicant does not have such identification; 
13.  Any further information which the director may require to enable her/him to issue the type of business tax certificate applied for; 
14.  A signed statement made under penalty of perjury that the statements therein are true and correct, which statement shall be required to be filed with the director upon submission of any original business tax certificate application, annual renewal statement, miscellaneous supplementary statement or other return or filing. Each such declaration of truth of application or statement shall have included therein, or attached thereto, a certification or declaration, which shall be substantially in the following form: 
I declare, under penalty of perjury; that this application, return or statement (including any accompanying schedules, statements, and supporting data) has been examined by me, and, to the best of my knowledge, information, and belief, is a full true and correct application, return, or statement and I accordingly so represent. 
_____
Signature of Owner, or Partner, 
or Officer of Corporation, or 
Other Authorized Agent or 
Representative of any of the above said same. 	_____
Date 
 
B.  All information specified to be set forth on any application form or renewal form prescribed by the director shall be submitted completely and accurately and the business tax certificate shall be issued based upon the information submitted and represented. The director shall not be required to receive or consider any application, return or statement unless the above quoted declaration, in substantially the form hereinabove set forth, is contained therein or attached thereto and properly executed by the applicant or the authorized agent or representative of the applicant. 
C.  It is unlawful and shall be deemed a misdemeanor in any such application, return or statement for such applicant or authorized agent or representative of the applicant to make any statement which is false or which is contrary to the declaration or representation made in the above quoted form. 
D.  Each business tax certificate issued shall be deemed issued solely based upon the application therefor on file, and if the information is found by the director to be incomplete or inaccurate, the business tax certificate shall be deemed void and of no effect. If information submitted in an application subsequently becomes incomplete or inaccurate by reason of a change in circumstances, the certificate holder shall promptly correct the same, in writing, filed with the director. 
E.  If the amount of the tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by gross receipts, he/she shall estimate the gross receipts for the period to be covered by the business tax certificate to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the director as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of the tax so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall, at the request of the director within thirty days after the expiration of the period for which such business tax certificate was issued, furnish the director with a sworn statement with appropriate documentation, showing the gross receipts during the period of such business tax certificate, and the tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this chapter for the ascertaining and paying of renewal taxes for other businesses, after deducting from the payment found to be due the amount paid at the time such first business tax certificate was issued. The director shall not issue to any such person another business tax certificate for the same or any other business, until such person shall have furnished to him/her the sworn statement and paid the tax as required in this chapter. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.105 - Statements, records and audits. 
A.  No statement contained in an application shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of an application preclude the director from collecting by appropriate action such tax as is actually due and payable pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Applications and each of the items contained in an application shall be subject to audit and verification by the director who is hereby authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant as may be necessary, in the director's judgment, to verify or ascertain the amount of business tax due. A certificate executed and delivered to the city by a certified public accountant licensed by the state shall establish a rebuttable presumption that the gross receipts of such certificate holder are as stated in the certificate. 
C.  All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall keep complete records of business transactions, including sales, receipts, purchases and other expenditures, and shall retain all such records for examination by the director. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years. No person required to keep records pursuant to the provisions of this section shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the director to examine such records at reasonable times and places. At the director's request, copies of the records shall be provided to the director by mail. 
D.  Where an audit conducted pursuant to this chapter reflects an understatement of gross receipts by more than ten percent, the cost of such audit shall be paid to the city by the applicant or certificate holder. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.110 - Information confidential. 
It is unlawful for the director or any other person having an administrative duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a license, or pay a tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount of source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent: 
A.  The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee, or agent for the purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of the code, and this chapter; 
B.  The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, authorized federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, or city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists; 
C.  The disclosure to any person of information and results of examination of records of particular taxpayers authorized by court order or subpoena; 
D.  The disclosure of information to any person after the filing of a written request to that effect, by the certificate holder; 
E.  The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom certificates have been issued, and the general type or nature of their business; 
F.  The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city; and 
G.  The disclosure of any information required by law. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.115 - Closure of business—Notification to city. 
For any business issued a business tax certificate by the city, the owner or authorized agent thereof shall notify the city in writing upon closure of such business. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.120 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the director with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue such business tax certificate may appeal to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk. Such a notice of appeal must be accompanied by an administrative fee in an amount set by city council resolution. If the notice of appeal is complete and the administrative fee paid, the city manager shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The city clerk shall give written notice to such person of the time and place of such hearing. The city manager shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be set forth in writing and shall be final and conclusive. The written notice of decision shall provide that an action may be filed with the Superior Court of the state pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 by filing said action within ninety days following the date of the city manager's written notice. 
(Ord. 950 § 3, 2002: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.130 - Filing extension. 
The director shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding thirty days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.140 - Change of name, location, or ownership. 
A.  No business tax certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable or assignable; provided, that where a business tax certificate is issued authorizing a person to conduct a business at a particular place, such certificate holder may upon application therefor and upon paying a charge in an amount set by resolution of the city council have the business tax certificate amended to authorize the conducting of such business at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved. 
B.  Where a person holding a business tax certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter changes the name of the business, such person shall make an application to the director and pay a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council to have said business tax certificate amended to reflect the change in name. 
C.  In the event that a business is transferred or sold either voluntarily or by operation of law the business tax paid by the original business may be applied to the new business upon written statement of the original owner, provided that the use remains the same. In such case a fee shall be paid in an amount set by resolution of the city council to have a business tax certificate amended to reflect the change in ownership. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.150 - Use of business tax certificate by unlicensed person. 
No person holding a business tax certificate required by this chapter shall permit any independent contractor, itinerant merchant, or other person to use the business tax certificate, the premises or the certificate holder's name for the purpose of evading payment of any tax or of evading any other provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.155 - Duplicates. 
A duplicate business tax certificate may be issued to replace any business tax certificate previously issued which has been lost or destroyed upon the certificate holder's filing a statement of such fact, and, at the time of filing such statement, paying a duplicate business tax certificate charge as established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.160 - Posting—Public display—Keeping on person. 
A.  Any certificate holder transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the business tax certificate prominently posted in a conspicuous public place, easily observable at the main public entrance to the business upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
B.  Any certificate holder transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city without an agent or employee on the premises shall post in a conspicuous place the name, address and telephone number of the person or persons to be contacted to verify the possession of a proper and valid business tax certificate. 
C.  Any certificate holder transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the business tax certificate within his or her possession at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. 
D.  Any person having a business tax certificate under the provisions of this chapter shall produce and exhibit the same whenever required to do so by any revenue officer or police officer, or by any other officer, official or employee authorized to inspect business tax certificates or by any person being solicited. 
E.  No person shall exhibit a revoked business tax certificate. 
F.  No person shall reproduce, duplicate, copy or alter an original business tax certificate for the purpose of circumventing the requirement of this section by giving a false or misleading impression that any duplication of an original city business tax certificate is valid and that the appropriate tax therefor has been paid. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.) 
G.  No person shall mutilate, modify, alter, shred or otherwise deface in any manner a business tax certificate in force for the current business tax year. 
(Ord. 939 § 1, 2001; Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.170 - Tax—Payable when. 
A.  The business tax year shall be from the first day of the anniversary month and continues through the last day of the month immediately preceding the anniversary month in the following calendar year. Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual taxes under the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of the anniversary month of each year. 
B.  Whenever provision is made in this chapter for taxes other than an annual tax, such taxes shall be due and payable as follows: 
1.  Semiannual taxes shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of the anniversary month and the first day of the month which is six months after the anniversary month. 
2.  Quarterly taxes shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of the anniversary month and the first day of the months which are three, six and nine months after the anniversary month. 
3.  Monthly taxes shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of each and every month. 
4.  Weekly taxes shall be due and payable in advance on Monday of each week. 
5.  Daily taxes shall be due and payable each day in advance. 
(Ord. 857 § 2, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.180 - Delinquent taxes, penalties, interest. 
A.  Penalties. For failure to pay a tax when due, the director shall add a penalty equaling twenty-five percent of the principal amount of the tax due, on the sixteenth day of each calendar month following the due date thereof, provided that the total amount of all penalties shall not exceed one hundred percent of the amount of the tax due. 
B.  Interest. From and after the date upon which the penalties imposed equal one hundred percent of the principal amount of the tax, the total of all such taxes and penalties shall accrue simple interest at the same rate as is applicable to judgments in civil proceedings. 
C.  Waiver. The director shall have the authority, for good cause shown, to waive part or all of the penalties and/or interest otherwise due under this section. 
(Ord. 939 § 2, 2001; Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.190 - Refunds of taxes based on gross receipts. 
A.  No refund of an overpayment of taxes imposed by this chapter shall be allowed in whole or in part unless a claim for refund is filed with the director within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the last day of the calendar month following the period for which the overpayment was made. All claims for refunds must be filed in writing with the director. If, upon filing of such a claim it is determined that an overpayment has been made, the director shall refund the amount overpaid. 
B.  Refunds of a tax by the director shall only be authorized upon termination of the business to which it relates if such tax is based on gross receipts. 
(Ord. 857 § 3, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.200 - Names and addresses required—When. 
A.  All businesses operating in the city, whether or not such business has a fixed location within the city, shall, upon request, provide the city with the names and addresses of all employees working for that business, as well as the names and addresses of all brokers, doctors or other independent contractors or agents working for, in conjunction with or out of the same location as the business. 
B.  Any business operating in the city that is exempt from obtaining a business tax certificate, whether or not that business has a fixed location within the city, shall, upon request, provide the city with the names and addresses of all brokers, doctors or other independent contractors or agents working for, in conjunction with, or out of the same location as the exempt business. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.210 - Tax a debt. 
The amount of any tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a civil debt due to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of any delinquent tax and penalties. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.220 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.230 - Tax—Gross receipts. 
Every person conducting, carrying on or managing any business consisting of selling at retail or wholesale, or manufacturing any goods, wares, merchandise or commodities, or conducting or carrying on any trade, occupation, calling or business not otherwise specifically covered by other sections of this chapter shall pay an annual gross receipts tax as per the schedule and rates for the fiscal year as set forth in this section: 
Gross Receipts From 	Gross Receipts To 	Tax 
0 	15,000 	$25.00 
15,001 	25,000 	30.00 
25,001 	35,000 	35.00 
35,001 	45,000 	40.00 
45,001 	55,000 	45.00 
55,001 	65,000 	50.00 
65,001 	75,000 	55.00 
75,001 	85,000 	60.00 
85,001 	95,000 	65.00 
95,001 	105,000 	70.00 
105,001 	125,000 	80.00 
125,001 	145,000 	90.00 
145,001 	165,000 	100.00 
165,001 	185,000 	110.00 
185,001 	205,000 	120.00 
205,001 	250,000 	135.00 
250,001 	295,000 	155.00 
295,001 	385,000 	175.00 
385,001 	475,000 	195.00 
475,001 	575,000 	220.00 
575,001 	675,000 	245.00 
675,001 	775,000 	270.00 
775,001 	875,000 	295.00 
875,001 	975,000 	320.00 
975,001 	2,000,000 	320.00 + 
		.30 per 1,000.* 
2,000,001 	4,000,000 	627.00 + 
		.25 per 1,000.* 
4,000,001 	5,000,000 	1,100.00 + 
		.15 per 1,000.* 
5,000,001 	and over 	1,250.00 + 
		.10 per 1,000.* 
 
* The millage assessment shall be based on the amount over the minimum of the applicable range, up to the maximum of the applicable range. 
(Ord. 857 § 4, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.240 - Classification of businesses. 
Types of businesses are set forth below, indicating the tax group or flat tax rate which applies to the particular business. Where none of the types of business listed describes the business conducted or where more than one of the types of business listed describes the business conducted, the director shall determine which description is most applicable to the business conducted. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.250 - Advertising. 
A.  For advertising by means of permanently constructed billboards, there shall be a tax of thirty cents per square foot of advertising space with a minimum of fifteen dollars per billboard. 
B.  For advertising by means of handbills, fliers, stickers, advertising samples or similar devices, there shall be a tax of five dollars per day or twenty-five dollars per month per person so engaged who does not otherwise hold a city business tax certificate. 
C.  For advertising by means of searchlight, moving picture or any similar device, there shall be a tax of five dollars per day or twenty-five dollars per month for each such device or one hundred dollars per business tax year for any number of such devices. 
(Ord. 857 § 5, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.260 - Bowling alley. 
The tax for a bowling alley shall be fifty dollars, plus seven dollars and fifty cents for each lane per business tax year. 
(Ord. 857 § 6, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.270 - Amusements and amusement devices. 
For any amusement center under one operation and one ownership and of a permanent character, the tax shall be based on annual gross receipts as provided for in Section 5.04.230. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.280 - Entertainment. 
For the business of conducting live entertainment and/or performances of entertainment, there shall be a tax of three hundred dollars per business tax year or twenty dollars per day. No business tax certificate shall be issued under this section until any required permit has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 5.12. 
(Ord. 857 § 7, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.300 - Commercial solicitation. 
A.  For each person engaged in commercial solicitation, as defined in Chapter 5.32, there is imposed a tax of twenty-five dollars for each month or fifty dollars for each quarter. No business tax certificate shall be issued unless and until a permit for commercial solicitation is granted in accordance with the provision of Chapter 5.32 and any such business tax certificate shall be subject to and limited by the provisions of Chapter 5.32. B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, real estate agents and brokers who obtain a business tax certificate under Section 5.04.400 shall not be required to obtain a business tax certificate for solicitation pursuant to this section, but shall be required to obtain a solicitation permit under Chapter 5.32. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.310 - Principal commercial solicitor business tax certificate. 
Notwithstanding Section 5.04.300, the director may issue a principal commercial solicitor's business tax certificate to every person either employing or contracting with one or more individuals for commercial solicitation services, as set forth in Section 5.04.300. If a principal solicitor should elect to use the provisions of this section, no principal commercial solicitor's business tax certificate shall be issued until the applicant files with the director a list of all solicitors employed or retained by the applicant with whom the applicant has a contract, and unless the applicant executes an agreement that he/she will notify the director in writing of every change in personnel of those soliciting for him/her within five days after such change is made. In such event, the principal commercial solicitor and each individual commercial solicitor must still obtain a permit in accordance with the terms and provisions of Chapter 5.32. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to grant to a principal commercial solicitor the privilege of commercial solicitation unless there is maintained in full force and effect for each individual commercial solicitor a permit in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and Chapter 5.32. The tax for a principal solicitor's business tax certificate shall be three hundred dollars per business tax year. 
(Ord. 857 § 9, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.320 - Telephone solicitation. 
For each business where initial contact or uninvited contacts are made with prospective customers by telephone solicitation in any form or manner and the solicitor is not employed by a holder of a current city business tax certificate, each telephone solicitor shall pay a tax in the sum of twenty-five dollars per month or fifty dollars per quarter. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.325 - Principal telephone solicitor business tax certificate. 
Notwithstanding Section 5.04.320, the director may issue a principal telephone solicitor's business tax certificate to every person either employing or contracting with one or more individuals for telephone solicitation services, as set forth in Section 5.04.320. The tax for a principal telephone solicitor's business tax certificate shall be three hundred dollars per business tax year. 
(Ord. 857 § 10, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.330 - Contractors. 
A.  For each general contractor there shall be an annual tax of one hundred dollars. 
B.  For each subcontractor there shall be an annual tax of seventy-five dollars. 
C.  The taxes specified in this section shall be payable by each contractor doing business within the city regardless of whether he/she maintains an office within the city. 
D.  The word "contractor" means one who in any capacity, other than as the employee of another with wages as the sole compensation, undertakes or offers to undertake or purports to have the capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to construct, alter, repave, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith, including the eradication of, or the processing against infestation by pests structurally injurious to buildings or structures, and shall include subcontracting; but shall not include one who merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating the same into, or consuming the same in the performance of, the work of the contractor as defined in this section. Any person holding a California state license as a contractor will be considered a contractor for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.340 - Nonresidential properties. 
For every person offering for lease or rent nonresidential properties, there shall be a tax based upon annual gross receipts as provided for in Section 5.04.230. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.350 - Apartments. 
For every person operating an apartment as defined in Section 19.04.065 of this code or any similar type of business offering living quarter rentals, there shall be a tax based as follows: thirty-five dollars per business tax year for the first five rental units and five dollars per business tax year for each additional unit. 
(Ord. 857 § 11, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.360 - Motel and hotel. 
For every person operating any motel or hotel, or any similar type of business offering living quarter rentals, there shall be a tax based as follows: twenty-five dollars per business tax year for the first five rental units and five dollars per business tax year for each additional unit. 
(Ord. 857 § 12, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.370 - Mobilehome parks. 
For every person operating any mobilehome park or any similar type of business offering space to rent for the parking of mobilehomes or manufactured homes, there shall be a tax based as follows: thirty-five dollars per business tax year for the first five units, plus five dollars per business tax year for each additional mobilehome or manufactured home placed in the park. 
(Ord. 857 § 13, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.380 - Home occupations. 
A.  Every person engaged in a home occupation as defined and permitted by the city shall pay a tax in the same amount as the tax for a like business in a nonresidential location. 
B.  No business tax certificate shall be issued pursuant to this section until a home occupation permit is issued by the department of planning and community development in accordance with Chapter 19.65 of this code. However, no home occupation permit shall be required for an individual meeting the requirements of Section 5.04.080 H. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.390 - Refuse collection. 
A.  Each refuse collector shall pay a tax of one hundred seventy-five dollars per business tax year for each truck used in the operation. 
B.  No person shall engage in the business of the collection of refuse unless a franchise therefor has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 857 § 14, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.400 - Personal and professional services. 
A.  Every person conducting, managing, carrying on or engaging in any business, profession, occupation or service enumerated in this section or similar thereto for which other provision is not made in this chapter, shall pay a tax based as follows: 
1.  Medical or dental: fifty dollars per business tax year for each professional person plus three dollars per business tax year for each nonprofessional employee. 
2.  All other professional persons: thirty-five dollars per business tax year for each person practicing the profession plus three dollars per business tax year for each nonprofessional employee. 
B.  Professional persons include, but are not limited to the following occupations: accountant or auditor, appraiser, architect, attorney, bacteriologist, certified public accountant, chemist, chiropodist, chiropractor, dentist, dental hygienist, dermatologist, draftsperson, drugless practitioner, nurse, registered nurse, licensed vocational nurse, licensed practical nurse, electrologist, engineers, entomologist, interpreter, landscape architect, mortician, naturopath, oculist, optician, optometrist, osteopath, pharmacist, physician, podiatrist, public stenographer, real estate broker or agent, roentgenologist, surgeon, surveyor, veterinarian. 
C.  Any person listed in this section having a business, profession, occupation or service with income measurable in gross receipts may on initial application for a business tax certificate or on annual renewal date apply in writing to the collector to report and pay a business tax measured by annual gross receipts at rates and under rules specified in Section 5.04.230, provided once such election is made it may not be reversed by the certificate holder. 
D.  In addition to obtaining a business tax certificate pursuant to this section, a real estate broker or agent, or any other person whose business also involves solicitation, must also obtain a solicitation permit before he or she may engage in commercial solicitation. 
(Ord. 857 § 15, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.410 - Oil well operator. 
Every person operating any oil well or carrying on the business of producing oil shall pay a tax based on annual gross receipts as provided for in Section 5.04.230. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.420 - Public utility. 
A.  Every person engaged as a public utility or otherwise in the distribution, transportation or transmission of electricity, gas or communications including telephone communications shall pay an annual tax of thirty-five dollars plus additional amounts for each employee physically located within the city according to the following schedule: 
From one to five employees 	$5.00 
Six to ten employees per employee 	3.00 
Next ninety employees per employee 	2.00 
Over one hundred one per employee 	1.00 
 
B.  Any person listed in this section may on initial application for a business tax certificate or on the annual renewal date apply in writing to the collector to report and pay a business tax measured by annual gross receipts at rates and under rules specified in Section 5.04.230. 
C.  This section shall not apply to those entities having a franchise issued by the city, the terms of which franchise expressly exempts the holder from the payment of a business tax. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.430 - Motor vehicles for hire. 
A.  For each passenger automobile or passenger motor-propelled vehicle for hire with a driver, including taxicabs and limousines, the annual tax shall be: for the first vehicle thirty-five dollars, plus ten dollars per additional vehicle. The number of vehicles which shall be subject to such business tax shall be based upon the average number of vehicles maintained within the city during the business tax year, such average number shall be determined by the business tax collector. 
B.  Taxicabs which are not otherwise permitted to operate in the county of Ventura or in one of the incorporated cities in the county of Ventura or which are domiciled or maintain a business office in the city must also comply with the provisions of Chapter 5.36. C. Limousines domiciled in or maintaining a business office in the city must also comply with the provisions of Chapter 5.40. 
(Ord. 857 § 16, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.440 - Fortunetelling, palmistry and unlicensed health practitioner. 
A.  Every person conducting, managing, carrying on or engaging in any business, profession, occupation or service enumerated in this section or similar thereto, shall pay an annual tax of one hundred dollars. 
B.  This section is a list of the types of businesses in this category; such list is illustrative and not inclusive: 
The business or art of astrology, phrenology, life-reading, fortunetelling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal-gazing, hypnotism unless under supervision of medical personnel currently licensed by the state of California, mediumship, oriental mysteries, spirit photography, spirit writing, spirit voices, spirit materialization, etherealization, numerology, physiognomy, psychometry, seership, prophecy, augury, divination, necromancy, palmistry or other similar art of business. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.450 - Carnivals, circuses, exhibitions, itinerant shows, parades. 
A.  For each carnival, circus, rodeo, tent show, sport exhibit, itinerant show, parade or annual exhibition the tax shall be as follows: two hundred dollars for the first day and one hundred dollars for each additional day; provided, that when such tax is paid, no additional tax shall be required pursuant to Section 5.04.270 for shows or devices within the carnival, circus, rodeo, tent show or annual exhibit. For the purpose of this section, "carnival" means a collection of shows, exhibitions, feats of strength, merchandise booths, games of skill, games of chance, wheels of fortune presented or offered upon the streets or vacant property within the city. 
B.  No business tax certificate shall be issued for any carnival, circus, tent show or annual exhibition until a permit has been issued pursuant to provisions of Chapter 19.63. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.460 - Dancehalls. 
A.  For the business of operating a public dancehall, there shall be a tax of three hundred dollars per business tax year, or twenty dollars per day. "Public dancehall" means any commercial establishment where dancing is participated in by one or more persons or place of business which is open to the public, regardless of whether there is an admission charge. 
B.  No person as a principal shall keep, conduct, maintain or knowingly permit any building, house, hall, room, apartment, tent or place under his or her control to be used in whole or in part as a public dancehall without first obtaining a permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.12, if applicable. 
(Ord. 857 § 17, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.470 - Taxes on vehicle usage. 
Every person not covered by another provision of this chapter who does not have a fixed place of business within the city and conducts business within the city through the use of a motor vehicle or vehicles shall pay an annual tax based on forty-five dollars per vehicle; provided, however, the owner of any such vehicles may elect to pay an annual fleet business tax of three hundred dollars per business tax year, licensing all of the vehicles not PUC licensed operated in the city by such owner. 
(Ord. 857 § 18, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.04.490 - Provisions for other business. 
Any business within the city for which another provision is not otherwise made in this chapter, and for which a gross receipts tax cannot be applied, shall pay an annual tax of thirty-five dollars plus three dollars per employee per business tax year. 
(Ord. 857 § 19, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
Chapter 5.08 - PERMIT PROCEDURES—GENERAL 
Sections: 
 
5.08.005 - Application of chapter. 
The procedures set forth in this chapter shall apply to all permits issued under Title 5 unless a more different procedure is specified for a specific type of permit. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.08.010 - Permit—Required. 
A.  Whenever in this title any person is required to obtain a permit for carrying on or conducting any business or other activity, such Title 5 permit shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the more specific provisions of any other applicable chapter. 
B.  Compliance with the provisions of this title and the issuance of a Title 5 permit shall not preclude the necessity of obtaining any other permit required by any other provisions of this code, or ordinance of the city or other applicable law, including, but not limited to, a business tax certificate. 
C.  All Title 5 permits are nontransferable. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.08.020 - Permits required before business tax certificate issuance. 
Whenever in this code any Title 5 permit or other permit or entitlement is required, the same shall be obtained before a business tax certificate is issued under the provisions of Chapter 5.04. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.08.030 - Application—Renewal. 
Before any Title 5 permit is issued or renewed where required, an application or renewal form shall be filed with the director, shall be signed and verified by the applicant and shall set forth the specific information required for the Title 5 permit. All application and renewal forms shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.08.040 - Permit—Approval or refusal. 
A.  Within three business days after the filing of an application for a Title 5 permit, the director shall forward a copy of the application to the head of each affected department within the city for investigation, review and comment. Where required, the director shall also cause a state and/or local background check to be conducted on the applicant. 
B.  Each affected department head, or his or her designee, shall investigate and review the Title 5 permit application to determine whether the applicant proposes to engage in the enterprise in compliance with the provisions of this code and in a manner which shall not be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or welfare of the city or its inhabitants. Each affected department head, or his or her designee, shall return any comments and conditions to be imposed to the director within fourteen business days after receiving the application. Department heads may coordinate among themselves as appropriate. 
C.  If no department head, or their designee, objects to the issuance of the Title 5 permit, the director shall issue the Title 5 permit subject to those reasonable conditions necessary to protect the public peace, health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants and to insure compliance with the provisions of this code. All conditions imposed on the Title 5 permit shall be set forth in writing. 
D.  If any department head, or his or her designee, objects to the issuance of the Title 5 permit, then the director shall deny the Title 5 permit. The reasons for such denial shall be set forth in writing. 
E.  Unless otherwise specified in this code, the director shall issue or deny all Title 5 permits within thirty business days from the date of application. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.08.050 - Revocation of permits. 
A.  Action of Director. Whenever the director is advised that a permittee is conducting operations under a Title 5 permit, in a manner which is contrary to the provisions of this code, in a manner which constitutes a public nuisance, in a manner which is detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or welfare of the city or its inhabitants, or whenever the director is advised that a permittee supplied false information on the permit application, the director shall give notice to such permittee of the violation(s) involved and set forth a period of time allowed for the correction of the violation(s) by the permittee if correction is possible. If the director finds that the violation(s) continue without correction, or if correction is not possible, then the director shall issue an order of revocation. 
B.  Orders of Revocation. An order or revocation issued by the director shall contain a statement of the violation(s) which constitute the basis for the order of revocation. The director shall serve the order of revocation on the permittee, as well as any other interested person requesting a copy of the same. The order of revocation issued by the director shall be final and conclusive in the absence of a timely appeal taken in the time and manner set forth in Section 5.08.060. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.08.060 - Appeals. 
A.  Appeals. 
1.  Right and Timing of Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director to deny, revoke or refuse to renew a Title 5 permit may appeal such decision to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk no later than fifteen days following the date the director gives notice of the decision. 
2.  Payment of Appeal Fee. The notice of appeal must be accompanied by the applicable administrative appeal fee established by city council resolution. 
3.  Setting Appeal Hearing. Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the city manager will fix a time and place for hearing the appeal. The appeal may be heard by the city manager or a hearing officer designated by the city manager. All references in this section to the city manager include a designated hearing officer. 
4.  Notice of Appeal Hearing. The city clerk must give written notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing to the appellant, and any other person requesting notice, at least five days prior to the hearing date. 
5.  Appeal Hearing Procedure. At the hearing, the city manager will review the records and files of the director relating to the decision. The city manager must permit any interested person, including the director and the appellant, to present any relevant evidence bearing on the issues involved in the matter. In conducting the hearing, the city manager is not bound by formal rules of evidence and may accept all reasonably reliable evidentiary material. 
6.  Decision Following Appeal Hearing. Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the city manager must determine whether the decision by the director should be affirmed, modified or reversed. The city manager's decision must be communicated in writing to the appellant within five business days after the hearing is completed and must state the reasons for the decision. 
7.  Judicial Review. The determination of the city manager will be final. The written notice of decision must be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, including a certificate of mailing. The notice must advise that any action challenging the decision of the city manager must be filed with the superior court of the state pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, and must further advise that the time period within which judicial review must be sought is ninety days following the date of the city manager's written notice under Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. 991 § 2, 2006: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
Chapter 5.12 - ENTERTAINMENT AND DANCEHALL PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
5.12.010 - Entertainment permit. 
A.  No person shall own, operate or manage any place having entertainment unless such owner, operator or manager has received a permit from the city authorizing entertainment in accordance with the provisions of this title. An entertainment permit is not required if the person is required to obtain a special event permit. 
B.  "Entertainment" means any live entertainment presented, furnished, allowed or permitted at any public place on a regular basis, including any place where food or beverage is sold, offered for sale, or given away. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.12.020 - Dancehall permit. 
A.  No person shall own, operate, or manage any dancehall, unless such owner, operator or manager has received a permit authorizing a dancehall in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
B.  Hours of Operation. No public dance shall be permitted to operate between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of any day; nothing herein restricts the ability of the city to impose more restrictive hours under the city's general police power. No person having charge of any public dancehall shall allow or permit any person except such person in charge thereof or the employees regularly employed therein to remain therein between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of any day. 
C.  Minors. No minor under the age of eighteen years shall be, and no person in charge of any public dancehall shall allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen years to be, remain in, enter, attend or visit any public dancehall, or the room or rooms in which such dance is being held or conducted, unless such minor is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. This section shall not apply to any public dancehall where the dance being conducted therein is exclusively for minors. 
D.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to places regularly and daily engaged in carrying on and conducting a hostelry, cafe, bar or restaurant where such business constitutes a material part or a portion of such enterprise. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.12.030 - Entertainment/dancehall permit—Application contents. 
An application for entertainment and dancehall permits shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant; 
B.  The name and address of the person by whom employed, if any; 
C.  The nature of the business for which a permit is requested; 
D.  The place where such business is to be conducted; 
E.  The name under which the business is to be conducted; 
F.  A personal description of the applicant; and 
G.  Evidence of the identity of the applicant, as may be required by the director. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.12.040 - Duration of entertainment and dancehall permits. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall remain in effect, unless revoked, so long as there is a valid business tax certificate in effect for the business. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.12.050 - Revocation of permit. 
Revocation of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as provided for in Section 5.08.050. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.12.060 - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the director are subject to the procedures provided in Section 5.08.060. 
(Ord. 991 § 3, 2006: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
Chapter 5.16 - MASSAGE BUSINESS AND ESTABLISHMENTS, MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS, AND MASSAGE THERAPISTS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1056, § 2, adopted June 23, 2010, amended Ch. 5.16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.16, §§ 5.16.010—5.16.180, pertained to massage establishments—permit procedures, and derived from Ord. 802, § 1(part), adopted 1994. Section 4 of Ord. No. 1056 states: "Penalty. In accordance with Camarillo Municipal Code Chapter 1.08, in addition to the availability of all other remedies and penalties provided in that chapter for code violations, a violation of the provisions of Chapter 5.16, if charged criminally, will be a misdemeanor." 
 
5.16.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases will have the meaning set forth in this section: 
"Employee" includes independent contractors. 
"Massage" or "massage therapy" means the application of various techniques to the muscular structure and soft tissues of the human body, including but not limited to, any method of pressure or friction against, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, compressing, pounding, vibrating, rocking or stimulating of external surfaces of the body with hands or the aid of any apparatus or other appliances or devices, with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment, or other similar preparations for any consideration or compensation. 
"Massage business or establishment" means a business or establishment, including a sole proprietor or independent contractor, that offers massage therapy within the city, whether at a fixed place of business or at a location designated by the patron, and also includes all businesses or establishments where massage therapy is provided as an ancillary service such as clubs, gyms, day spas and professional offices where such massage therapy is not otherwise exempt under this chapter. 
"Massage practitioner" means any person who has been certified as a massage practitioner and maintains a current and valid CAMTC certificate under the Massage Therapy Law. 
"Massage therapist" means any person who has been certified as a massage therapist and maintains a current and valid CAMTC certificate under the Massage Therapy Law. 
"Massage Therapy Law" means Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code (beginning at Section 4600). 
"CAMTC" means the "California Massage Therapy Council" created under the Massage Therapy Law. The CAMTC is referred to as the "Massage Therapy Organization" (MTO) in the Massage Therapy Law. 
"CAMTC certificate" means a current and valid certificate issued by the CAMTC to a massage practitioner or a massage therapist. 
"Owner" means (1) a sole proprietor of, (2) a general partner of, or (3) each individual person who holds a twenty percent or greater ownership interest in, a massage business or establishment. 
"Outcall massage therapy" means the performance of massage therapy at a location designated by the patron and not at a fixed location massage business or establishment. 
"Registered school" means an institution that provides massage therapy education and training as such term is defined in Section 4600 of the Massage Therapy Law. 
"Specified criminal offense" means: 
(a)  Within five years of the date of the filing of the application has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to, or been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of a misdemeanor or felony crime involving sexual misconduct, including but not limited to (1) Chapter 1 of Title 9 of the Penal Code (Sections 261 -269) relating to sexual crimes; (2) Chapter 8 of Title 9 of the Penal Code (Sections 314-318.6) relating to indecent exposure, obscenity and disorderly establishments; or (3) Penal Code Section 647(a) or (b) relating to prostitution; or 
(b)  Any similar offenses under the criminal code or penal of this state or any other states or countries; or 
(c)  Having permitted, through an act of omission or commission, an employee or agent to engage in any type of moral turpitude or sexual misconduct offense listed in (a) or (b) above (the conduct of the employee or agent, if such resulted in a conviction or a plea of nolo contendere or guilty, will be considered imputed to the principal). 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 2, 6-23-2010)  
5.16.020 - Required CAMTC certificate and business license. 
A.  Massage Businesses and Establishments. 
1.  No person may engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on in any location within the city, a massage business or establishment unless all persons providing massage therapy at or on behalf of the massage business or establishment have a CAMTC certificate. 
2.  Each massage business or establishment operating within the city must obtain and maintain a business license as provided in Section 5.16.040. 
B.  Massage Therapy. No person may engage in, conduct, carry on, or perform massage therapy within the city unless such person has a CAMTC certificate. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 2, 6-23-2010)  
5.16.030 - Exceptions. 
The requirements of this chapter do not apply to: 
A.  Any physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, naturopath, podiatrist, acupuncturist, physical therapist, registered nurse or vocational nurse duly licensed to practice their respective profession in the state. 
B.  Any treatment administered in good faith in the course of the practice of any healing art or profession by any person licensed to practice any such art or profession under the California Business and Professions Code or any other law of the state. 
C.  Barbers, cosmetologists, estheticians, and manicurists licensed to practice their respective profession under the laws of the state while performing activities within the scope of their license, provided that such massage is limited solely to the neck, face, scalp, feet, hands, arms, and lower limbs up to the knees, of their patrons. 
D.  State-licensed hospitals, nursing homes, and other state-licensed physical or mental health facilities and their employees. 
E.  Persons who provide massage therapy to athletes or athletic teams, facilities or events, so long as such persons do not practice massage therapy as their primary occupation within the city. 
F.  Registered schools and their employees that provide massage therapy education or training and their students in training, provided that such students perform massage therapy only under the direct personal supervision of an instructor. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 2, 6-23-2010)  
5.16.040 - Massage business license. 
A.  License Required. The owner of each massage business or establishment, and any massage practitioner or massage therapist that desires to work as an independent contractor at a fixed location massage business or establishment or who desires to provide outcall massage therapy as an independent contractor, must obtain a business license prior to commencing operation or providing any massage therapy and must thereafter maintain a valid business license. 
B.  License Application. The application for a business license will be made in conjunction with the application for a business tax certificate under Chapter 5.04 of this code. Each applicant for a massage business license must provide the following additional information with the application: 
1.  Business, occupation or employment history of the owner for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
2.  The business license history of the owner, including whether such person, in previously operating in this city or another city or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, and the reason for such action. 
3.  Whether the owner has been convicted of or permitted any specified criminal offense. If an owner does not have a CAMTC certificate, then the owner must obtain a Live Scan background check. 
4.  The names and addresses of each massage practitioner and massage therapist providing massage therapy at or on behalf of the business or establishment and proof that each such practitioner or therapist has a CAMTC certificate. 
5.  Such other reasonable identification and information as the director may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
C.  Issuance or Denial of License. 
1.  Upon receipt of a complete application, the director will cause: (a) the inspection of the proposed premises of any fixed location massage business or establishment, and (b) the business license to be issued if all applicable requirements of this chapter and this code are satisfied. 
2.  If the director finds that any of the applicable requirements of this chapter or this code are not satisfied, including any conviction for or the permitting of a specified criminal offense, or that the applicant has provided materially false information, the application will be denied. 
3.  The decision of the director denying the business license application may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 5.08.060 of this code. 
D.  License Renewal. 
1.  A massage business license will automatically renew with the renewal of the business' or establishment's annual business tax certificate provided that all applicable requirements of this chapter and this code remain satisfied, and the applicable business license renewal fee is paid. 
2.  For persons who are massage therapy sole practitioners or independent contractors, their business license will expire at the time of expiration of their CAMTC certificate unless they renew their business license by providing proof of the renewal of their CAMTC certificate and pay the applicable business license renewal fee. 
E.  Transfer of License Prohibited. Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage business or establishment, the business license will become void. The person acquiring the interest in a massage business or establishment must submit a new business license application and receive approval of such license in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
F.  Notification of Changes in Registered Massage Practitioners and Therapists. Each licensee must submit to the Finance Department the names and applicable CAMTC certificate of any new massage practitioners or massage therapists not previously included in the list required under subsection (B)(4) above who are hired or retained to provide massage therapy at or on behalf of the business or establishment prior to such person commencing the provision of any massage therapy services. In addition, any discharge or termination of the services of a massage practitioner or massage therapist must be reported to the Finance Department within five business days of such event. 
G.  Revocation of License. A massage business license may be revoked pursuant the procedures set forth in Sections 5.08.050 and 5.08.060 of this code. All references in those sections to a "Title 5 permit" will mean a "massage business license." 
H.  Effect of License Denial or Revocation. No person may apply for a license under this chapter within at least one year from the date of denial or revocation of such license. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 2, 6-23-2010)  
5.16.050 - Massage facilities and operational regulations. 
A.  Facility Requirements. Each fixed location massage business or establishment must comply with the following facility requirements: 
1.  A recognizable and legible sign complying with the requirements of this code posted at the main entrance identifying the location as a massage business or establishment. 
2.  In addition to the minimum lighting required by the provisions of Title 16 this code, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts must be provided in each room or enclosure where massage therapy is to be performed on patrons. 
3.  Closed cabinets must be provided and utilized for the storage of clean linen and towels. Appropriate receptacles must also be provided for the storage of all soiled linen and towels. 
4.  Adequate dressing, locker and toilet facilities must be provided for patrons. A minimum of one dressing room containing a separate locker for each patron to be served, which locker must be capable of being locked, and a minimum of one toilet and one wash basin must be provided by every massage establishment. Such basin must provide soap or detergent, hot and cold running water, and sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers at all times. 
5.  Massage table or chair. A massage table or chair must be provided in each massage room and the massage must be performed on this massage table or chair with the exception of "Thai," "Shiatsu" or similar forms of massage therapy, which may be provided on a padded mat on the floor. The massage tables must be positioned so that there is at least three feet from the nearest wall to each side to allow access to the table on all sides. Foam pads at least two inches thick with a minimum width of two feet and a maximum width of four feet may be used on a massage table or floor pad, as provided above, and must be covered with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material. Beds and floor mattresses are not permitted on the premises. 
B.  Operational Requirements. Each fixed location massage business or establishment and any massage business or establishment providing outcall massage therapy, must comply with the following operational requirements, as applicable: 
1.  General Cleaning. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet facilities must be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation . Bathtubs must be thoroughly cleaned after each use. (Not applicable to outcall massage therapy.) 
2.  Towels and Linen. Clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens must be provided in sufficient quantity. Towels, sheets and linens must not be used by more than one person. Reuse of such linen is prohibited unless such linen has first been laundered. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets; provided, that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. 
3.  Patron Garments. All bathrobes, bathing suits or other garments provided for the use of patrons must be either disposed of after any use or laundered as provided in subsection (B)(2) above. 
4.  Locked Doors. All exterior doors (except a rear entrance for staff only) and interior doors must remain unlocked during business hours, unless there is no massage business or establishment staff available to assure the security of patrons and massage practitioners or therapists who are behind closed doors. (Not applicable to outcall massage therapy.) 
5.  Service List and Prices. Each massage therapy service offered, the price of the service and the minimum length of time such service will be performed must be posted in a conspicuous public location in each massage business or establishment. The services must be described in readily understandable terms, all letters and numbers must be not less than one inch in height, and must be in English and such other languages as may be convenient to communicate such services. No services may be performed and no sums may be charged for such services other than those posted. All arrangements for services to be performed must be made in a room in the massage business or establishment that is not used for massage therapy unless no other room exists in the business or establishment. (Not applicable to outcall massage therapy.) 
6.  Register of Employees. Every massage business or establishment must maintain a register of all employees. The register must contain the names of all employees, their home address, age, birth date, gender, height, weight, color of hair, eyes, telephone number, social security number, date of employment and termination, if any, and the duties of each employee. All such information must be maintained in the register for a period of two years following such employee's termination. Such employee register must be available for inspection at the massage business or establishment to representatives of the city during regular business hours. 
7.  Practitioner and Therapist Attire and Hygiene. To protect patrons from potential health and sanitary hazards, all massage practitioners and therapists must be clean and must perform all services in full, clean outer garments. Clothing must be of non-transparent material and must provide complete covering from mid-thigh to three inches below the collarbone. 
8.  CAMTC Certificate. All massage practitioners and therapists must have on his or her person or maintain on the premises their CAMTC certificate identification card. Such identification card must be provided to city officials upon demand. At least one person who has a CAMTC certificate must be on the premises at all times while the business or establishment is open for business. 
9.  Patron Attire. The patron's genitals, pubic area, anus and a female patron's breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola must be fully draped at all times while any massage practitioner or therapist is in the massage therapy room or cubicle with the patron. 
10.  Improper Solicitation or Performance of Services. Except to the extent required, in writing, by a state licensed medical practitioner, no massage therapy may be provided to a patron that results in intentional contact, or occasional and repetitive contact with the genitals, anus or areola of any patron. No massage practitioner, therapist, or other person may offer to or perform any act of prostitution as such term is defined in the California Penal Code. No massage practitioner, therapist or other person may, after the commencement of any service for any patron, advise, suggest or otherwise indicate to such patron that any additional service is available or ask or inquire of such patron whether such patron desires any additional service to be performed at that time, except with respect to services that are publicly posted. (This regulation does not preclude the discussion with a patron in the lobby or public area of additional or alternative massage services that are not posted upon completion of the massage.) No massage practitioner or massage therapist may perform any service for any patron that was not ordered by such patron prior to the commencement of performance of any service requested. 
11.  Records of Treatments. Each massage business or establishment must keep a record of the date and hour of each treatment, the name and address of the patron, and the name of the massage practitioner or therapist administering such treatment. Such records must be available for inspection by city representatives for the purposes of law enforcement and for no other purpose. Identical records must be kept for outcall massage therapy services and, in addition, must describe the address where such services were rendered. The records must be maintained for a period of at least two years. 
12.  Access. The following persons may be allowed beyond the front lobby, located directly inside the front door entrance during hours of operation: (i) massage practitioners and massage therapists; (ii) patrons, who may be accompanied by no more than one family member; and (iii) visitors of massage practitioners and therapists; provided that such visitor's access is limited to the designated office of the massage business or establishment. Any other persons found beyond the first interior door leading to the inside of the premises including, but not limited to hallways, massage rooms, reception/business offices or lounge area will be a violation of this chapter. Nothing contained in this subsection prohibits any employee from being present in hallways, reception/business offices or other areas necessary or relating to such person's employment duties, nor prohibit any authorized repair, maintenance or service personnel from being present in areas necessary to the performance of such person's services, except that no such employee or service personnel may be permitted in any massage room or cubicle while a patron is present in such room or space. 
13.  General Prohibition on Massage Therapy in Personal Residences. No massage practitioner or massage therapist may provide massage therapy in his or her personal residence within the city unless such residence is located in a mixed use district that allows for the commercial use of a residence by right. 
14.  Licensee Responsibility. Each owner and holder of a massage business license is responsible for the conduct of all employees, agents, independent contractors or other representatives, while on the premises of the massage business or establishment and while providing any massage therapy on behalf of such business of establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 2, 6-23-2010)  
5.16.060 - Inspections. 
Representatives of the city's building department, community development department, fire department, and police department may, from time to time, make an inspection of each fixed location massage business or establishment in the city during regular business hours for the purpose of determining that all applicable laws are met. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 2, 6-23-2010)  
Chapter 5.24 - SECONDHAND, ANTIQUE DEALERS, RESALERS AND PAWNSHOP PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
5.24.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Pawnbroker" means any person who conducts or manages the business of loaning money upon personal property, pawns or pledges or who conducts or manages the business of purchasing articles of personal property or reselling or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendor or his or her assignee at prices agreed upon at or before the time of purchase. 
"Secondhand dealer," "antique dealer" or "resaler" means any person who buys, sells or deals in secondhand goods, wares, or merchandise, other than motor vehicles, including jewelry, clothing and precious and semiprecious stones and metals. A person who accepts secondhand goods, wares or merchandise in part payment coincidentally with the sale by him/her of new goods, wares or merchandise in the regular course of his or her business shall not, with respect to such goods, wares and merchandise so acquired, be deemed to be a secondhand dealer. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.015 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person conducting any activity regulated hereunder when such activity is being carried on for, or on behalf of, and for the exclusive benefit of any community chest, fund, foundation or corporation organized and operated for a religious or charitable purpose, and not conducted for profit where no part of the gross receipts or net earnings of such activity, whether in the form of a percentage thereof, or salary or otherwise inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or person participating in the organization and which are exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.020 - Permits—Required. 
No person may engage in the following businesses without first obtaining a permit: 
A.  Pawnbroker; 
B.  Secondhand dealer; 
C.  Antique dealers; and 
D.  Resaler. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.030 - Permits—Applications—Form. 
Any person desiring to obtain a permit under this chapter shall make a written application to the director which shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name, residence address and personal description of the applicant; 
B.  The nature of the business for which a permit is requested; 
C.  The address of the place where the business is to be conducted; 
D.  The name under which the business is to be conducted; 
E.  The names and addresses of all persons having an interest in the business; 
F.  A statement that none of the individuals listed in subsections A and C of this section have been convicted of any of the crimes listed in Section 5.24.040; and 
G.  Evidence of the identity of the applicant as may be required by the director, including fingerprints and thumbprints. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.040 - Permits—Approval/denial. 
A.  The director shall cause an investigation to be conducted by the appropriate departments within the city and a state and local background check as set forth in Section 5.08.040. 
B.  If the director finds that the application complies with all the requirements of this chapter, he/she shall approve the application. 
C.  The permit shall be denied if the applicant has been convicted of any of the following crimes: Penal Code Section 485 (theft of lost property); Penal Code Section 496 (receiving stolen goods); Penal Code Section 487 (grand theft); and Penal Code Section 495 (burglary). 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.050 - Permits—Duration. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall remain in effect, unless revoked, so long as there is a valid business tax certificate in effect for the business. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.060 - Permits—Revocation—Reissuance. 
If any permit required by the provisions of this chapter is revoked after issuance, no new permit may be granted to such permittee to carry on or conduct such business within nine months from the date of revocation. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.070 - Separate businesses. 
If any person shall engage in more than one of the businesses regulated by the provisions of this chapter, such person shall be deemed to be engaged in each such business separate and apart from the other such business. Such person shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter relating to each such business. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.080 - Separate locations. 
If any person shall engage in the business of secondhand dealer, antique dealer, pawnbroker, resaler or any such businesses at more than one location within the city, such person shall be deemed to be engaged in a separate and distinct business at each location and shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter relating to the business carried on at each separate location. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.090 - Reports of purchases and receipts—Generally. 
On each day before two p.m. every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, resaler and antique dealer shall make and deliver to the police department of the city a full, true and complete report of all goods, wares and merchandise purchased or received during the preceding day. The report shall contain such other information as the police commander may require to carry out the intent of this chapter. The blank forms for such reports shall be supplied by the office of the police commander. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.100 - Reports of purchases and receipts—Filing by police commander. 
The police commander shall maintain a file of all the reports of purchases and receipts. The files shall be open to inspection by any peace officer or law enforcement officer within the county or to other persons upon an order of a court of competent jurisdiction. All such reports shall be retained by the police commander for a period of three years from the date the same are filed. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.110 - Records of purchases and receipts—Responsibility. 
Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, resaler and antique dealer shall keep a complete record of all goods, wares, merchandise or things purchased or received by him/her, which record shall contain all the matters required by him/her to be shown in the reports described in Section 5.24.090 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.120 - Records of purchases and receipts—Inspections. 
The records required by the provisions of Section 5.24.110 of this chapter and all goods, wares and merchandise purchased or received by any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, resaler and antique dealer shall be open for inspection at all times during business hours to any peace officer or law enforcement officer within the county. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.130 - Retention of materials—Exception. 
A.  Required. A pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, resaler or antique dealer may not sell or dispose of any article or thing within seventy-two hours after such article or thing has been purchased or acquired other than to a person holding a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Exception. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to the disposition or sale of an article by a person who receives or purchases such article from a permittee who has made the required report to the police commander and who has held the article for the length of time provided in subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.140 - Retention of materials—Segregation of metals. 
Every person required to hold a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall retain all metals purchased by him/her in a separate place designated for that purpose. The entire purchase of each day shall be kept in such designated separate place. Each day's purchase shall be kept in its original condition for a period of seventy-two hours after purchase or receipt. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.150 - Hours of operation. 
It is unlawful for any person engaged in the business of pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, resaler or antique dealer, or for any agent or employee of any such person, to accept, purchase or receive any goods, wares or merchandise, or any article or thing, or in any manner whatsoever to engage in or conduct any such business between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.160 - Signs. 
Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, resaler and antique dealer, shall maintain on his premises a sign printed in the English language. Such sign shall be of a size sufficient to be read from the street in front of the place of business and shall state that such person is a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, resaler or antique dealer. Where the business is conducted in an office building, the sign shall be placed at the door to the office. Where the business is conducted in a portion of any building, a sign shall be placed at such location within the building. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.170 - Revocation. 
Revocation of a permit shall be governed by Section 5.08.050. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.180 - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the director shall be governed by Section 5.08.060. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.24.190 - State law. 
This chapter shall not be construed to apply to any person whose activities are regulated by state law as set forth in Division 8, Chapter 9, Article IV (Sections 21625 et seq.) of the Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
Chapter 5.28 - CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS SOLICITATION—PERMIT PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
5.28.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Applicant" means the person applying for a solicitation permit on behalf of the permit holder. 
"Charitable" means benevolent, civic, educational, patriotic, political, philanthropic or other similar purposes. 
"Contribution" means and includes: food, clothing, money, property, subscriptions or pledges and donations, including those under the guise of loans of money or property. 
"Permit holder" means the person who has been granted a permit pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of charitable and religious solicitation. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, society, organization, church, congregation, assembly or league, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof. 
"Religious" or "religion" shall have the meaning established by the Supreme Court of the state or the Supreme Court of the United States. 
"Solicit" and "solicitation" mean the request, directly or indirectly, of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value, on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value, or any portion thereof, will be used for a charitable or religious purpose, as those purposes are defined in this section, conducted door-to-door, in any place of public accommodation, in any place of business open to the public generally, on the city streets and sidewalks, in the public parks or in any public place. "Solicit" and "solicitation" also mean and include, but are not limited to, the following methods of securing such money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value, when conducted in the manner set forth in this subsection: 
1.  Any oral or written request; 
2.  The local distribution, circulation, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or other local publication; 
3.  The sale of any goods or services; and 
4.  The sale of any ticket or right to admission to any amusement, show, entertainment, lecture or other enterprise, where such solicitation is made to persons other than the bona fide members of the organization or institution causing the solicitation of, for or on whose behalf the solicitation is made, and where it is represented or made to appear that such solicitation, or any part of the proceeds therefrom, shall be used for charitable or religious purposes. 
"Solicitation," as defined in subsection G of this section, shall be deemed to have taken place when the request is made, whether or not the person making the request receives any contribution referred to in this section. 
"Solicitor" means a person who solicits or who engages in a solicitation as defined in this section. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.28.020 - Permits required for charitable and religious solicitations. 
No person shall, directly or indirectly, solicit contributions for any charitable or religious purpose unless a valid permit has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.28.030 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Solicitations conducted solely by means of radio, telephone, facsimile machines, television broadcasts, newspapers, magazines or through the United States mail; 
B.  Charitable or religious solicitations which are conducted among the members of the soliciting group by other members, whether at regular assemblies, services or otherwise; 
C.  Solicitation on premises owned or controlled by the solicitor; 
D.  Solicitation which is subject to disclosure under state or federal political disclosure laws. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.28.040 - Applications for permits. 
A.  Applications for charitable or religious solicitation permits shall be made to the city clerk upon forms prescribed by the city. The application shall be declared to under penalty of perjury and filed with the city clerk not less than three consecutive business days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective. 
B.  An application fee may be required in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council, based solely upon the administrative costs in processing the application and issuing the permits. 
C.  Such applications shall contain the following information and documentation: 
1.  The full name, mailing address, principal business or residential address, telephone number, date of birth and physical description of the applicant; 
2.  If the applicant is not an individual, or will be soliciting on behalf of an organization or institution, the names and addresses of the organization's or institution's principal officers and executives, and the address of the national, state and local headquarters, if any; 
3.  The nature of the relationship between the applicant and the permit holder, including whether the applicant is a volunteer, paid officer or employee, independent contractor or an agent of the permit holder; 
4.  The purpose for which the proceeds of the solicitations are to be used; 
5.  The full name and address of the person or persons who will be in charge of conducting the solicitation. The names and addresses of each solicitor who will actually be engaged in the solicitations shall be on file at the agency/organization conducting the solicitation and shall be made available to the city or Camarillo police department upon request at any time; 
6.  When door-to-door solicitations of residences are to be made, a statement to the best of the knowledge of the permit holder that none of the solicitors have been convicted of any of the crimes specified in Section 5.28.110; 
7.  A short outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitation; 
8.  The time when such solicitation will be made, including preferred dates and hours of the day for commencement and termination of solicitations; 
9.  A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or any department or officer thereof; and 
10.  If issued, documentation from the United States Internal Revenue Service or from the California Franchise Tax Board that the permit holder is tax exempt under federal or state income tax laws and Employers Identification Number. 
D.  If, while the application is pending or during the term of any permit granted, there is a change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information to be given on the application, the applicant shall notify the city manager in writing thereof within twenty-four hours after such change. 
E.  The application documents shall be available for public inspection. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.28.050 - Issuance and form of permits. 
A.  The city clerk shall issue the permit, unless he/she finds that: 
1.  Any statement made in the application is factually incorrect, and the applicant fails to correct the application after being requested to do so; 
2.  The applicant has not provided the information required by this chapter and fails to provide the missing information after being requested to do so; 
3.  The application indicates that the proposed solicitation will violate any of the requirements of this chapter and the applicant fails to amend the application to indicate compliance with said section after being requested to do so; or 
4.  An applicant proposing to conduct door-to-door solicitations has been convicted of any of the crimes set forth in Section 5.28.110. 
B.  Nothing set forth in this chapter shall be construed as granting to the city clerk or any other person the authority to grant, deny, suspend, revoke or renew any permit by reason of disapproval or agreement with the philosophy, opinion or belief of the applicant, permit holder or person soliciting therefor, or for any other reason not specifically provided for in this section. 
C.  The city clerk shall either issue or deny the requested permit within three consecutive business days after the date the application is made. In the event of denial, the city clerk shall give the applicant a written notice which states with specificity the reasons therefor. In the event the city clerk fails to act within the time prescribed, the permit shall be deemed issued. 
D.  The permit, if issued, shall include the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the permit holder; 
2.  The dates for which the permit is valid; 
3.  A statement of the charitable or religious purpose of the solicitation; 
4.  A statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city, or any of its departments, officers or employees, of the purpose of the solicitation; 
5.  A permit number; 
6.  A blank space for the individual solicitor to print or type his/her name prior to soliciting contributions; and 
7.  The signature of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.28.060 - Term of permits. 
Permits issued under this chapter shall be valid through December 31st following the date of issuance. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.28.070 - Renewal of permits. 
On or before the expiration of any permit, and if requested in writing to do so, the city clerk shall renew the permit within three consecutive business days after such request if the factual information upon which the original application was granted remains unchanged. On such request for renewal, the applicant shall state that no change has occurred since the issuance of the original permit. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.28.080 - Nontransferability of permits. 
No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned, and any attempt at assignment or transfer shall be void. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.28.090 - Manner of solicitation. 
A.  Solicitations pursuant to permits under this chapter: 
1.  Shall take place between the hours of eight a.m. and nine p.m.; 
2.  Shall not be conducted by any person under the age of sixteen years, unless supervised by an adult; and 
3.  Shall not be made at any house, apartment or other dwelling nor at any business to where a sign is posted indicating "no solicitors" or similar indication that no solicitation contact is desired by the occupants thereof. 
B.  No solicitor shall: 
1.  Affix any object to the person of any contributor or member of the public without first receiving express permission therefor; 
2.  Persistently and importunately request any donation from any member of the public after such member of the public expresses his or her desire not to make a donation; or 
3.  Intentionally and deliberately obstruct the free movement of any person on any street, sidewalk or other public place or any place open to the public generally. 
C.  Each solicitor shall carry a valid reproduction of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter and shall show the same to any person upon request. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.28.100 - Receipts. 
Any person receiving money or anything of value in excess of five dollars from any contributor by means of a solicitation made pursuant to a permit shall, upon request, give each contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing plainly the name of the permit holder and the solicitor, the permit number, the date and the amount received. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.28.110 - Door-to-door solicitation. 
No person shall conduct door-to-door solicitation of residences within the meaning of this chapter if that person has been convicted of any of the following crimes, or convicted of an attempt or conspiracy to commit any of the following crimes, as defined in the California Penal Code: murder, mayhem, kidnapping, robbery, assault with intent to commit a felony, assault, battery, rape, arson, burglary, possession of burglarious instruments or deadly weapons. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.28.120 - Revocation of permit. 
Revocation of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as provided for in Section 5.08.050. For purposes of revocation, the city clerk shall perform the functions of the director. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.28.130 - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the director are subject to the procedures provided in Section 5.08.060. 
(Ord. 991 § 5, 2006: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
Chapter 5.32 - COMMERCIAL SOLICITATIONS—PERMIT PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
5.32.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply. 
"Applicant" means the person applying for a solicitation permit on behalf of the permit holder. 
"Canvassing" means to the gathering of information that is then used in an attempt to sell a product or service. 
"Commercial solicitation" means the: 
1.  Selling, peddling or hawking of, or the soliciting, canvassing or taking orders for, goods, wares, newspapers, magazines, books, merchandise, services, including real estate, or any other items or exchanges of value; 
2.  Distribution of advertising material or samples where the person distributing the material or samples enters the property of another or makes or attempts to make contact or discuss the material or samples with the person to receive it; 
3.  "Commercial solicitation," as defined in this section does not include solicitations by telephone, solicitations through the United States mail, nor solicitations or sales by commercial travelers or selling agents selling their goods wholesale to dealers by sample for future delivery. 
"Commercial solicitor" means a person engaged in commercial solicitations. 
"Permit holder" means the organization or group on whose behalf solicitations will be made. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.32.020 - Permits required for commercial solicitations. 
No person shall directly or indirectly engage in commercial solicitations unless a valid permit has been issued to that person pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.32.030 - Applications for permits. 
A.  Applications for commercial solicitation permits shall be made to the director upon forms prescribed by the city. The application shall be declared to under penalty of perjury and filed with the director not less than ten working days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective; provided, however, the director, for good cause shown, may allow such filing less than ten days prior to the effective date of the permit applied for. 
B.  An application fee may be required in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council, based upon the administrative costs in processing the application and issuing the permit. 
C.  Such applications shall contain the following information and documentation: 
1.  The full name, mailing address, principal business and residential address, telephone number, date of birth and physical description of the person applying for the permit; 
2.  If the applicant will be engaged in commercial solicitations on behalf of a person, corporation, company or other such organization, the name, street address and telephone number of the organization's principal officers and executives; 
3.  The name, street address and telephone number of the person who will be in charge of conducting the solicitation; 
4.  When door-to-door solicitations of residences are to be made, a statement that the applicant has not been convicted of any of the crimes specified in Section 5.32.100; 
5.  A statement that the applicant is aware of the provisions of state law relating to home solicitation contracts; 
6.  A statement that the applicant has received and read a copy of this chapter; 
7.  A short outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitation; 
8.  The time when such solicitation will be made, including preferred dates and hours of the day for commencement and termination of solicitations; 
9.  A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or any department or officer thereof; and 
10.  A passport-sized photograph of the applicant no more than one year old. 
D.  If, while the application is pending or during the term of any permit granted, there is a change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information to be given on the application, the applicant shall notify the director in writing thereof within twenty-four hours after such change. 
E.  The director shall cause an investigation to be conducted by the appropriate departments within the city and a state and local background check as set forth in Section 5.08.040. 
F.  The application documents shall be available for public inspection. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.32.040 - Issuance and form of permits. 
A.  The director shall issue the permit, unless he/she finds that: 
1.  Any statement made in the application is factually incorrect, and the applicant fails to correct the application after being requested to do so; 
2.  The applicant has not provided the information required by this chapter and fails to provide the missing information after being requested to do so; 
3.  The application indicates that the proposed commercial solicitation will violate any of the requirements of this chapter and the applicant fails to amend the application to indicate compliance with said sections after being requested to do so; or 
4.  An applicant proposing to conduct door to door solicitation has been convicted of any of the crimes set forth in Section 5.32.100. 
B.  Nothing set forth in this chapter shall be construed as granting to the director or any other person the authority to grant, deny, suspend, revoke or renew any permit by reason of disapproval or agreement with the philosophy, opinion or belief of the applicant, permit holder or person soliciting therefor, or for any other reason not specifically provided for in this chapter. 
C.  The director shall either issue or deny the requested permit within ten working days after the date the application is made. In the event of denial, the director shall give the applicant a written notice which states with specificity the reasons therefor. In the event the director fails to act within the time prescribed, the permit shall be deemed issued. 
D.  The permit, if issued, shall be in a form prescribed by the city and shall include the following information in addition to such information as may be required by Chapter 5.08. 
1.  The name of the permit holder; 
2.  The dates for which the permit is valid; 
3.  A statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city, or any of its departments, officers, or employees, of the purpose of the solicitation; 
4.  A permit number; 
5.  The signature of the director; and 
6.  The photograph of the applicant which shall be affixed by the city to the backside of the permit. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.32.050 - Term of permits. 
Permits issued under this chapter shall be subject to renewal at the same time as the corresponding business tax certificate for the commercial solicitation business. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.32.060 - Renewal of permits. 
On or before the expiration of any permit, and if requested in writing to do so, the director shall renew the permit within ten days after such request, if the factual information upon which the original application was granted remains unchanged. On such request for renewal, the applicant shall state that no change has occurred since the issuance of the original permit. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.32.070 - Nontransferability of permits. 
No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned, and any attempt at assignment or transfer shall be void. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.32.080 - Manner of solicitation. 
A.  Commercial solicitations pursuant to permits under this chapter: 
1.  Shall take place only between the hours of eight a.m. and nine p.m.; 
2.  Shall not be conducted by any person under the age of sixteen years, unless supervised by an adult and in compliance with all laws of the state. In such case the supervising adult shall apply for the permit and notwithstanding subsection C of this section, each minor shall carry a valid reproduction of the permit; and 
3.  Shall not be made at any house, apartment or other dwelling unit, nor at any business where a sign is posted indicating "no solicitors" or similar indication that no solicitation contact is desired by the occupants thereof. 
B.  No solicitor shall: 
1.  Affix any object to the person of any member of the public without first receiving express permission therefor; 
2.  Persistently and importunely engage in commercial solicitation with the person being solicited after he or she has indicated that he or she is not interested in the commercial solicitation; 
3.  Intentionally and deliberately obstruct the free movement of any person on any street, sidewalk or other public place or any place open to the public generally. 
C.  Each solicitor shall carry the permit issued pursuant to this chapter and shall show the same to any person upon request. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.32.090 - Receipts. 
Upon request, the permit holder shall issue to the customer a written receipt for the sale or order of any goods, wares, newspapers, magazines, books, merchandise, services or any other item or exchange of value, which receipt shall be signed by the permit holder and shall plainly indicate his or her name, the permit number, the date, the items or services purchased and the amount received. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.32.100 - Door-to-door commercial solicitations. 
A.  No person shall conduct commercial solicitations at residences if that person has been convicted of or plead no contest to any of the following crimes, or convicted of an attempt or conspiracy to commit any of the following crimes, as defined in the California Penal Code: murder, mayhem, kidnapping, robbery, assault with intent to commit a felony, assault, battery, rape, arson, burglary or possession of a deadly weapon; or if that person has been convicted of or plead no contest to a serious crime involving moral turpitude. 
B.  No person shall conduct commercial solicitations at residences if that person has been convicted of or plead no contest to charges involving a controlled substance, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11057 or 11058. 
C.  No person shall conduct commercial solicitations at residences if that person is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to California Penal Code Section 290. 
(Ord. 861 § 4, 1996: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.32.110 - Revocation of permits. 
Revocation of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as provided for in Section 5.08.050. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.32.120 - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the director are subject to the procedures provided in Section 5.08.060. 
(Ord. 991 § 6, 2006: Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
Chapter 5.36 - TAXICAB PERMITS[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 9, 2019, repealed the former Ch. 5.36, §§ 5.36.005—5.36.270, and enacted a new Ch. 5.36 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.36.270 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994. 
 
5.36.010 - Application of chapter. 
The permit requirements of this chapter apply to: 
A.  Taxicab companies that are substantially located within the city. 
B.  Taxicab drivers of a taxicab company that is subject to the permit requirement under Subsection A above. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are as defined in this section: 
"Certificate of inspection" means a city provided form signed by an authorized agent of an automotive repair establishment that is certified by the National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence or a facility registered with the Bureau of Automotive Repair, dated no more than thirty days before the date the application is submitted to the director and which indicates whether a certain vehicle has met the criteria set forth on the form. Items to be inspected may include condition of exterior, interior and mechanical functions. 
"Controlled substance and alcohol certificate" means a city provided form signed by the employing taxicab company that attests that each taxicab driver has tested negative for each of the controlled substances specified in Part 40 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, before employment and as a condition of permit renewal; in the case of self-employed independent drivers, it means that such test results are directly reported to the police chief. 
"County" means the county of Ventura. 
"Drive a taxicab" means to drive a taxicab that picks up passengers within the city but does not include driving a taxicab that only discharges passengers picked up outside the city or that travels through the city without picking up or discharging passengers, provided the taxicab company's principal place of business is not within the city. 
"Police chief" means the chief of police of the city, or the police chief's designee. 
"Prearranged trip" means a trip using an online enabled application, dispatch, or Internet website. 
"Substantially located" means a taxicab company that meets either of the following criteria: (1) the primary business address is located within the city; or (2) the total number of prearranged and nonprearranged trips that originate in the city account for the largest share of the taxicab company's total number of trips within the county over the past calendar year as determined annually. 
"Taxicab" means every motor vehicle: (1) designed for carrying not more than eight persons, excluding the driver; (2) of a distinct color or commercial appearance used in the business of carrying passengers for hire; and (3) which is hired by the passenger and the destination and route of which are under the control of the passenger being carried. This definition excludes vehicles subject to regulation by the California Public Utilities Commission. 
"Taxicab company" means a person or entity that employs a taxicab driver to drive a taxicab, whether as an independent contractor or as an employee. A taxicab company includes a taxicab driver if a taxicab company consists of only one driver. 
"Taxicab driver" means every person that drives a taxicab, whether as an employee, an independent contractor, or a self-employed person. 
"Trip data documentation" means documentation as determined by the director that substantiates that the total number of prearranged and nonprearranged trips that originate within the city account for the largest share of the taxicab company's total number of trips in the county over the previous calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.030 - Business tax certificate required. 
Every taxicab company substantially located within the city must obtain a business tax certificate and pay the applicable tax under Chapter 5.04. The city will not issue a business tax certificate until the required permits have been obtained under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.040 - Taxicab company and taxicab driver permits required; notice of change in location. 
A.  A taxicab company that is substantially located in the city must obtain a taxicab company permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  A taxicab driver for a taxicab company that is substantially located in the city must obtain a taxicab driver permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  A taxicab company must notify the city no less than six months prior to changing its substantial location from another jurisdiction to the city in accordance with Government Code section 53075.52. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.050 - Taxicab company permit application. 
A.  A taxicab company desiring to obtain a permit must submit a permit application to the director. 
B.  The application must be under penalty of perjury and must include all of the following: 
1.  The name, age, business address, residence and citizenship of the applicant, if a natural person; or if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, address of its principal place of business and the names of its principal officers, with their respective addresses; or if a partnership, association or unincorporated company, the names of the partners, or the persons comprising the association or company, with the place of business and residence of each partner or person. 
2.  The make, type, vehicle identification number and license number of each taxicab owned or leased by the taxicab company to be used in the city. 
3.  A certificate of inspection for each taxicab to be used in the city. 
4.  The street number and exact location from which each vehicle is to be operated. 
5.  A schedule of the rates of fares to be charged for carrying passengers. Rates may not exceed the maximum amount, if any, set by resolution of the city council. 
6.  The applicant's experience in operating a taxicab company and the name, address and experience of the person to be in charge of the taxicab company. 
7.  Whether or not the applicant has had any similar permit revoked, and if so, the circumstances of the revocation. 
8.  The color scheme, name, monogram or insignia which the applicant proposes to use. The color scheme, name, monogram or insignia to be used upon the taxicab may not conflict with or imitate any color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used by another taxicab company in a manner so as to be misleading, or tend to deceive or defraud the public. 
9.  Trip data documentation. For a taxicab company receiving a permit in 2019 or a new taxicab company thereafter, a primary business address in the city will initially satisfy the trip data documentation requirement. A taxicab company must begin collection of trip data during its first year of operation. 
10.  A valid Department of Motor Vehicles registration for each taxicab to be used in the city showing that each vehicle is registered as a commercial vehicle. 
11.  A controlled substance and alcohol certificate for each taxicab driver; however, in the case of a self-employed, independent driver, the test results will be reported directly to the police chief. 
12.  Proof of insurance as required by Section 5.36.120.H. 
13.  Such further information as the director or police chief may require. 
14.  The permit fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.060 - Taxicab company permit—Issuance/denial. 
Upon receipt of any application for a taxicab company permit, the director will forward the application to the police chief. The police chief will investigate and advise the director whether a taxicab company permit may be issued if the police chief finds that the applicant has complied with all the terms and conditions of this chapter. If the police chief or director finds that all applicable requirements have not been satisfied, then the permit may be denied. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.070 - Taxicab company permit—Duration; no transfer. 
A.  A taxicab company permit issued pursuant to this chapter remains in effect for one calendar year, unless revoked or renewed. 
B.  A taxicab company permit may not be transferred. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.080 - Taxicab driver permit application. 
A.  No taxicab driver may operate or drive any taxicab unless the taxicab company has obtained a taxicab company permit and business tax certificate as required under this code, the driver has obtained a taxicab driver permit, and both the taxicab company permit and driver permit are in full force and effect. A taxicab company permit does not constitute a permit to drive a taxicab. Any person who wishes to drive a taxicab must also obtain a taxicab driver permit. 
B.  The application must be made under penalty of perjury and must include all of the following: 
1.  A letter from a prospective taxicab company employer substantially located in the city offering employment to the applicant as a taxicab driver, whether as an independent contractor or as an employee; a letter from a taxicab company stating that the applicant is employed as a taxicab driver, whether as an independent contractor or as an employee; or a written statement from the applicant that he/she seeks to be a self-employed taxicab driver substantially located in the city, not employed by another person, whether as an independent contractor or as an employee. 
2.  Proof of compliance with the requirements of the city's mandatory controlled substance and alcohol certification program. 
3.  The name, age, and address of the applicant. 
4.  The names and addresses of the applicant's employers during the preceding three years. 
5.  A statement or proof that the applicant has not been convicted of reckless driving, driving under the influence or a hit and run offense, within in the past five years. 
6.  Proof that the applicant holds a valid Class C or Class 3 driver's license, a copy of which will be made by the city. 
7.  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within four months preceding the date of the application. 
8.  The business license or permit history of the applicant, including whether such applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency or board, city, county or state revoked or suspended, or has had any professional or vocational license or permit revoked or suspended and the reason(s) for the revocation(s). 
9.  All criminal arrests and statement of the dates, places, and disposition of any convictions from such arrests. 
10.  Completed, city provided live scan request form signed by live scan operator. 
11.  Such additional information as the director or police chief may require. 
12.  The permit fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.090 - Controlled substance and alcohol testing program. 
A.  Every taxicab driver permit applicant must pass, with negative results, a controlled substance and alcohol test, in accordance with Government Code section 53075.5(b)(3), as may be amended from time to time. The results from a controlled substance and alcohol test for an applicant that is a self-employed independent driver must be reported directly to the police chief and made part of the application, and the police chief will notify the taxicab company of record of any positive results. All other results must be reported directly to the employing taxicab company, who must immediately notify the police chief of positive results. As used in this section, a negative test for alcohol means an alcohol screening test showing a breath alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 percent. 
B.  Testing procedures must be substantially as in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, except that the driver must show a valid California driver's license at the time and place of testing, and except as provided otherwise in Government Code section 53075.5(b)(3). 
C.  The controlled substance and alcohol test may be taken no more than thirty days before the date the application is filed for a new permit. As long as any taxicab driver permit is used or in effect, such tests must be retaken at least once a year. 
D.  If any taxicab driver permit holder or applicant has taken a controlled substance or alcohol test with positive results, the owner must immediately report such results to the director. 
E.  The taxicab company or self-employed independent driver will be responsible for all costs of the tests. 
F.  The test results are confidential and will not be released without the consent of the tested driver or applicant, except as authorized by state or federal law, or required by a court order. 
G.  No evidence derived from a positive test result under this section will be admissible in a criminal prosecution concerning unlawful possession, sale, or distribution of controlled substances. 
H.  The city will provide the applicant with a list of testing providers certified pursuant to Part 382 (commencing with Section 382.101) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations that are in or near the city and known to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.100 - Taxicab driver permit—Issuance/denial. 
After reviewing the taxicab driver permit application, the director will forward the application to the police chief. The police chief will investigate, conduct a state and local background check, and inform the director that a driver permit may be granted if the police chief finds that the applicant has complied with all the applicable terms and conditions of this chapter. If the police chief or director finds that any of the applicable terms and conditions of this chapter have not been satisfied by the applicant, the application may be denied. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.110 - Notice to applicants. 
A.  The director will give written notice to the applicant for a taxicab driver permit or a taxicab company permit that the application is granted or denied. If the application is denied, the director will include in such notice a statement of the grounds on which the application is denied. 
B.  A taxicab driver permit will include the name of the permittee, a photograph of the permittee, the name of the employer, a statement that the permit is subject to the conditions imposed by Section 5.36.130 and the requirement that the permittee return the permit to the director upon termination of the permittee's employment. 
C.  A taxicab company permit will include the name of the permittee and a statement that the permit is subject to the conditions imposed by Section 5.36.120. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.120 - Conditions of taxicab company permit. 
Every person or entity issued a taxicab company permit must comply with the following conditions: 
A.  Display on the exterior of each taxicab the name or trademark of the person under whose authority the taxicab is being operated or the name of the lessor or lessee of the vehicle. 
B.  Display on the left hand, bottom corner of the rear window, the city-issued decal for the current calendar year. 
C.  Display on both exterior sides, exterior front, and exterior rear of each vehicle the company assigned taxicab number. 
D.  Display on both exterior sides and exterior rear of each taxicab the dispatch phone number of the taxicab company. 
E.  Permanently affix to each vehicle a top light to identify the vehicle as a taxicab. 
F.  Display in the interior of each taxicab the sign required by California Vehicle Code section 27908. 
G.  Adhere to the conditions set forth below in regard to registration of taxicab service fares, fees and rates: 
1.  The taxicab company may set fares or charge a flat rate. The taxicab company may use any type of device or technology approved by the division of measurement standards to calculate fares, including the use of global positioning system metering, provided that the device or technology complies with Section 12500.5 of the Business and Professions Code and with all regulations established pursuant to Section 12107 of the Business and Professions Code. If fares are calculated by meter, the meter must be sealed, visible to passengers at all times, and currently registered and inspected by a county of Ventura Weights and Measures official. 
2.  The taxicab company must disclose fares, fees, or rates to the customer. A taxicab company may satisfy this requirement by disclosing fares, fees, or rates on its Internet website, mobile telephone application, or telephone orders upon request by the customer. 
3.  The taxicab company must notify the passenger of the applicable rate prior to the passenger accepting the ride for walkup rides and street hails. The rate may be provided on the exterior of the vehicle, within an application of a mobile telephone, device, or other Internet-connected device, or be clearly visible in either print or electronic form inside the taxicab. 
4.  A taxicab company may not prejudice, disadvantage, or require different rates or provide different service to a person because of race, national origin, religion, color, ancestry, physical disability, medical condition, occupation, marital status or change in marital status, sex, or any characteristic listed or defined in Section 11135 of the Government Code. 
5.  Collect from taxicab passengers only the amounts disclosed to the customer, plus any tip that the passenger offers. 
6.  Give a receipt to any passenger after the driver has received full payment for a fare. 
7.  Notify the director of any changes in rates or fares prior to such change taking effect. 
H.  Obtain for each taxicab and keep in force during the term of the permit, public liability and bodily injury insurance, issued by a California admitted insurance carrier or an insurance carrier with an A.M. Best rating of A-VII or better. The insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that coverage may not be suspended, voided, canceled or reduced in coverage or limits without fifteen days' prior written notice to the director. The insurance policy must insure the taxicab company and must name the city as an additional insured of such taxicab against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from the negligent operation or defective construction of such taxicab, or from violation of this chapter or of any other law of the state of California or the United States. The insurance policy must be in the sum of not less than five hundred thousand dollars combined single limit for personal injury and property damage for each taxicab in any one accident. The director may, upon advice from the city attorney or city risk manager, accept insurance that does not meet the foregoing criteria or require insurance that exceeds the foregoing criteria if the director determines that such insurance will provide adequate protection, based on, but not limited to, factors such as whether the applicant belongs to a satisfactory risk retention group; whether the applicant's operating risks are less than or more than standard risks; and whether the required insurance is reasonably available to a qualified applicant. 
I.  Obtain and keep in force during the term of the permit, worker's compensation insurance, covering all employees of the permittee. 
J.  Possess a valid city business tax certificate. 
K.  Maintain each taxicab in safe operating condition, good repair, clean and sanitary condition, and in compliance with the California Vehicle Code. 
L.  Participate in the pull-notice program pursuant to Section 1808.1 of the Vehicle Code to regularly check the driving records of all taxicab drivers. 
M.  Maintain a safety education and training program in effect for all taxicab drivers. 
N.  Maintain a disabled access education and training program to instruct its taxicab drivers on compliance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and amendments thereto, and state disability rights laws, including making clear that it is illegal to decline to serve a person with a disability or who has a service animal. 
O.  Obtain a report no less than every twelve months from the Department of Motor Vehicles for each employed taxicab driver. The taxicab company must verify that each employee's driver's license has not been suspended or revoked, the employee's traffic violation point count, and whether the employee has been convicted of a violation of California Vehicle Code section 23152 or 23153. 
P.  Obtain a report showing a prospective taxicab driver's current public record as recorded by the Department of Motor Vehicles. For purposes of this subsection, a report is current if it was issued less than thirty days prior to the date the company employs the taxicab driver. 
Q.  Notify the director immediately when any vehicle not described in the application for the permit is placed in service as a taxicab and submit the information about the vehicle and the certificate of inspection required by the application form. 
R.  Notify the director immediately on termination of a taxicab driver's employment. The taxicab driver permit will become void upon termination of the driver's employment. 
S.  Maintain reasonable financial responsibility to conduct taxicab transportation services. 
T.  Require that each taxicab driver have a valid California driver's license and a valid city-issued taxicab driver permit. 
U.  Comply with any other reasonable conditions imposed by the director or police chief. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.130 - Conditions of taxicab driver permit. 
Every person who is issued a taxicab driver permit must comply with the following conditions: 
A.  Display the driver's photo permit in the taxicab in a place conspicuous from the passenger area. 
B.  Take the most direct route possible which will carry the passenger safely and expeditiously to his/her destination. 
C.  Grant the person engaging the taxicab exclusive right to the full and complete use of the passenger compartment. 
D.  Immediately report a lost or stolen permit to the finance department. 
E.  Not allow any person to use or duplicate their permit. If a permit is found to be used by another individual, it will be considered a violation of this chapter unless the permit was previously reported as lost or stolen as provided in this section. 
F.  If the taxicab driver is self-employed, comply with all the conditions of the taxicab company permit set forth in Section 5.36.120. 
G.  Return the permit to the director immediately on termination of employment or self-employment. A taxicab driver permit will become void upon termination of employment or self-employment. 
H.  Comply with any other reasonable permit condition imposed by the director or the police chief. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.140 - Annual permit renewal. 
A.  Taxicab driver and taxicab company permits will continue in effect for the remainder of the calendar year in which they are issued, unless revoked or modified as provided in Section 5.36.150; provided, however, that taxicab driver permits will automatically become void on termination of employment or self-employment as a taxicab driver. A taxicab driver or taxicab company permit issued in the last quarter of a calendar year will continue in effect for the remainder of the calendar year in which it is issued, and for the next calendar year. 
B.  Permittees must submit to the director applications to renew taxicab driver and taxicab company permits for following calendar years, together with fees for the renewal and any changes in the information provided in the initial application or a previous renewal application. In addition, an applicant for renewal of a taxicab company permit must submit evidence that required insurance will be in effect for the new calendar year, a new certificate of inspection for each taxicab, and new trip data documentation for the prior calendar year. In addition, an applicant for renewal of a taxicab driver permit must submit proof of a negative test for controlled substances and alcohol as required by the city's controlled substance and alcohol certification program, a new photograph, and provide a document issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles, dated no more than ten days before the application is submitted, showing that the applicant holds a valid, current California driver's license. 
C.  The director will refer to the police chief completed applications for renewal of taxicab driver and taxicab company permits. The police chief and the director will process and grant or deny the applications for renewal as provided in Section 5.36.100. 
D.  Applications for renewal of taxicab driver and taxicab company permit must be submitted by December 1 of each year to allow sufficient time for processing before the current permit expires on December 31. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.150 - Permit—Suspension/modification/revocation. 
A.  A taxicab company permit or taxicab driver permit may be revoked or suspended or additional conditions imposed for failure of the permittee to comply with applicable laws, regulations and conditions, based on matters occurring after the permit is issued or on matters not considered at the time of issuance of the permit that would have authorized denial of the permit or the imposition of conditions on the permit. 
B.  The police chief may file with the director a written request for revocation, suspension or modification of a taxicab company permit or taxicab driver permit, stating facts showing that the permittee has not complied with applicable laws, regulations or permit conditions, has had a subsequent arrest, or poses a danger to public safety, and recommending that the permit be revoked or suspended or in what respect the permit should be conditioned. 
C.  On receiving the request, the director must mail to the permittee a notice that the permit is recommended for revocation, suspension or conditioning in a specific manner and stating the reasons for that recommendation. The notice must inform the permittee that the recommendation will be adopted, and the permittee will be deemed to concur with the recommendation if the permittee does not make a written request for a hearing in the manner provided in Section 5.08.060 of this code. 
D.  The procedures for appealing, rendering a decision and seeking judicial review of the decision are provided in Section 5.08.060 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.160 - Schedule of fares. 
A.  The city council may by resolution set the maximum amount of fares to be charged. 
B.  If the city council has adopted a maximum fare schedule, no taxicab company or taxicab driver may impose a charge for the use of such taxicab other than that specified in the schedule of fares on file with the city clerk. 
C.  A taxicab company may file a written application with the city clerk requesting a hearing before the city council to increase the maximum fares. Such hearing will be scheduled no less than ten days no more than thirty days from the date of the application. The application must contain the applicant's reasons and justification for the increase. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
5.36.170 - Investigation and fine for operation of a taxicab or taxicab company without a permit. 
A.  Pursuant to California Government Code section 53075.7, upon receipt of a complaint containing sufficient information to warrant conducting an investigation, either the director or the police chief will investigate any taxicab company that advertises or operates taxicab transportation service for hire. 
B.  To warrant investigation, a complaint must: 
1.  Be submitted to the director in writing; 
2.  Be signed by the complainant; 
3.  Specify the following information: 
(a)  The name of the taxicab company or taxicab driver that is operating without a permit; 
(b)  If no company name or driver name is provided, other information, such as an advertised telephone number or website or a vehicle plate number, that will allow the identification of the operator; 
(c)  The date, time and place where the violation occurred; and 
(d)  The nature of the unpermitted activity. 
C.  Once a complaint with the required criteria is reviewed by the director, the director may consider whether the complaint alleges the operation or existence of unpermitted taxi service. If so, the director may authorize an investigation and will either investigate or request the police chief to investigate. 
D.  If the investigation confirms that an unpermitted taxicab or taxicab company is being advertised or operated, the director or police chief will: 
1.  Inform the taxicab company or taxicab driver of the violation; and 
2.  Within sixty days of informing the company or driver, institute civil proceedings, criminal proceedings, or both. 
E.  Operation of a taxicab without a permit issued by the city is a violation of this chapter and a public nuisance, subject to all available remedies, including, but not limited to, remedies provided for in this code and civil and criminal prosecution. 
F.  The minimum fine for operating without a permit required under this chapter is five thousand dollars per violation. 
(Ord. No. 1160, § 3(Exh. A), 1-9-2019)  
Chapter 5.40 - LIMOUSINE PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
5.40.005 - Application of chapter. 
This chapter shall only apply to limousine companies domiciled or maintaining a business office within the city. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in this section shall be deemed and construed to have the meanings respectively ascribed to them, unless from the particular content, it clearly appears that some other meaning is intended: 
A.  "Driver" means and includes every person in actual charge and control of any limousine. 
B.  "Limousine" means and includes any luxury sedan of either standard or extended length, with a seating capacity of not more than nine passengers, including the driver, used in the transportation of passengers for hire on a prearranged basis. 
C.  "Owner" means and includes every person owning, operating or controlling any limousine. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.020 - Business tax certificate required. 
Every person carrying passengers for hire in a limousine shall obtain a business tax certificate and pay the tax provided for by Chapter 5.04. The business tax certificate shall not be issued until the required permits have been obtained as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.030 - Owners and driver—Permits required. 
A.  No limousine shall be operated in the city unless an owner's permit has been issued to the owner of the limousine and a driver's permit has been issued to the driver of the limousine. 
B.  Permit fees shall be submitted with each application for the above referenced permits in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. 
C.  No permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.040 - Owner's permit application. 
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this code to the contrary, any owner desiring to obtain an owner's permit shall make application therefor to the director. The application shall be under penalty of perjury and shall set forth and include the following: 
A.  The name, age, business address, residence and citizenship of the applicant, if a natural person; or if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, address of its principal place of business and the names of its principal officers, together with their respective addresses; or if a partnership, association or unincorporated company, the names of the partners, or the persons comprising the association or company, with the place of business and residence of each such partner or person; 
B.  A description of each vehicle which the applicant proposes to use, giving the type of each vehicle, the name of the manufacturer thereof, the horsepower and the seating capacity thereof, according to its trade or factory rating; 
C.  A certificate of inspection by a state licensed garage or service station indicating that each vehicle's brakes and lights are in safe condition and good working order; 
D.  The street number and exact location of the public or private garage from which each such vehicle is to be operated; 
E.  The past experience of the applicant in the matter to which the requested permit pertains; and the name, address and past experience of the person to be in charge of the premises or business; 
F.  Whether or not any similar permit has been revoked, and if so, the circumstances of such revocation; and 
G.  Such further information as the director may require. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.050 - Investigation by police commander—Permit issuance. 
Upon receipt of any applications for an owner's permit, the director shall forward the application to the police commander. The police commander shall make or cause to be made an investigation and shall direct that an owner's permit be issued if he finds that the applicant has complied with all the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.055 - Owner's permit—Duration. 
An owner's permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall remain in effect, unless revoked, so long as there is a valid business tax certificate for the business. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.060 - Operate only vehicles listed. 
No owner shall operate any limousine other than those listed on the owner's permit application. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.070 - Additional vehicles. 
A.  If an owner wishes to operate additional vehicles than those originally listed, inspected and approved with the original owner's applicant, the owner shall file an application therefore with the director who shall forward the same to the police commander. 
B.  The application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the same information as that required by Section 5.36.040 B and C. 
C.  A permit for additional vehicles shall be paid in an amount set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.080 - Insurance. 
No owner's permit shall be issued until there is on file with the director an insurance policy with a solvent and responsible company authorized to do business in the state of California. The city of Camarillo and its officers, agents and employees shall be named as additional insureds. Such policy shall be in amounts determined by the city manager or his designee and in a form approved by the director. If, at any time, such policy of insurance shall be cancelled by the company issuing the same, the director shall require the owner to replace such policy with another policy. Any time the insurance required by this section is not in effect, the director may revoke such owner's permit. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.090 - Driver's permit—Application. 
A.  No driver shall operate or drive any limousine unless the owner thereof has obtained a permit therefor as required under the provisions of this code, and such driver has obtained a driver's permit and both such permits are in full force and effect. 
B.  The application for such driver's permit shall be made to the director and shall be made under penalty of perjury. 
C.  The application shall set forth: 
1.  The name, age and address of the applicant; 
2.  The names and addresses of his employers during the preceding period of three years; 
3.  The name and address of the owner by whom he is employed as a driver. Such owner shall endorse the application; 
4.  A statement that the applicant has not been convicted of any offense set forth in Chapter 1 of Title 9 of the Penal Code (section 261 et seq.) relating to sexual crimes at any time, or that the applicant has not been convicted of reckless driving, driving under the influence, or a hit and run offense in the past five years; and 
5.  Such additional information as the police commander may require. Additionally, the applicant shall provide to the director a valid driver's license of Class C or Class 3, a copy of which shall be made by the city clerk. 
D.  An owner's permit shall not constitute a permit to drive a limousine. Any owner who wishes to drive a limousine must also obtain a driver's permit. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.100 - Driver's permit—Issuance/denial. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application for a driver's permit, the director shall forward the application to the police commander. The police commander shall make or cause to be made an investigation, including a state and local background check and shall inform the director that a driver's permit shall be granted if he finds that the applicant has complied with all the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
B.  A driver's permit may be denied upon any conviction of any offense set forth in Chapter 1 of Title 9 of the Penal Code (Section 261 et seq.) relating to sexual crimes at any time, or upon any conviction in the last five years of reckless driving, driving under the influence or a hit-and-run offense. 
C.  Every driver's permit shall set forth the name of the driver and the name of the owner by whom the driver is employed. If the driver terminates his employment with one owner and takes employment with another owner, the driver shall submit such information to the director in writing along with the endorsement of the new owner. A driver's permit shall be valid only so long as he continues in the employ of an owner licensed and permitted to do business in the city. Upon the termination of such employment, the driver shall forthwith surrender his driver's permit to the director. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.110 - Driver's permit—Suspension/ revocation. 
A.  A driver's permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall remain in effect unless suspended or revoked in accordance with subsection B of this section. 
B.  The police commander shall have the power to instruct the director to revoke or suspend any driver's permit issued under the provisions of this chapter in the event the holder thereof shall be found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or shall be found guilty of any crime set forth in Section 5.36.100 B, which violation, in the sound discretion of the police commander, shall be deemed sufficient evidence of the fact that such driver is not a competent person to operate the limousine for which the driver's permit was issued. In the event of such revocation or suspension of a driver's permit, such certificate issued in connection therewith shall be forthwith surrendered to the director. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.120 - Notice of driver termination. 
Upon the termination of the employment of any driver, the owner for whom such driver has been working shall immediately give the director written notice of such termination. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.130 - Permits represented by certificate. 
When an owner's permit or driver's permit is granted under the provisions of this chapter, the director shall issue to the grantee thereof a certificate giving the name and address of such permittee, the nature of the permit granted and the date when the same was granted. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.140 - Revocation. 
Revocation of an owner's permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as provided for in Section 5.08.050. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.150 - Appeals. 
Appeals from a decision of the director or police commander shall be as provided for in Section 5.08.060. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.40.160 - Vehicles subject to inspection. 
No owner or driver shall operate, or cause to be operated, any limousine while the same or any of the equipment used thereon or therewith shall be in a defective, unsafe or unsanitary condition. Every limousine shall at all times be subject to the inspection of any police officer of the city. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
Chapter 5.44 - REGISTRATION OF HOTEL AND MOTEL GUESTS 
Sections: 
 
5.44.010 - Register required. 
The proprietor of every establishment where sleeping facilities are made available to the public shall keep a register of all guests. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.44.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever any of the following words defined in this section are used in this chapter, they shall have the following meanings: 
"Establishment" means and includes a hotel, motel, lodginghouse, guesthouse, boardinghouse or other facility where sleeping accommodations are made available to the public. 
"Guest" means and includes a patron, lodger or roomer. 
"Proprietor" means and includes the owner, manager, operator, desk clerk or other employer whose duty it is to register patrons of the establishment. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.44.030 - Contents of register. 
The register shall contain for each guest: 
A.  His/her name and address; 
B.  The day, month and year when the person registered; 
C.  The number of rooms he/she occupied; and 
D.  If the registered person arrived by motor vehicle, the year, make and model of the vehicle as well as the license number and the state issuing the license for the vehicle. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.44.040 - Signature of guest. 
Before renting, furnishing or otherwise making available any room or accommodation to any guest, the proprietor of the establishment shall require the guest to sign the register. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.44.050 - Permanent record. 
The register shall be a permanent record which must be kept on the premises of the establishment for two full calendar years following the close of the establishment's fiscal year. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
5.44.060 - Display of register. 
The register shall be available to any peace officer, as defined in Penal Code Section 817, for inspection in the normal course of his or her duties. 
(Ord. 802 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
Chapter 5.48 - BINGO GAMES[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1051, § 2, adopted April 14, 2010, amended Ch. 5.48 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.48, §§ 5.48.010—5.48.220, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 802, § 1(part), adopted 1994; Ord. 861, § 5, adopted 1996; Ord. 950, § 4, adopted 2002; Ord. 991, § 7, adopted 2006. 
 
5.48.010 - Bingo defined. 
As used in this chapter, "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols that are marked or covered by the player on a card in the player's possession that conforms to numbers or symbols selected at random and announced by a live caller. The game of bingo also includes cards having numbers or symbols that are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. The winning cards may not be known prior to the game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo game. Only a covered or marked card possessed by a player and presented to an attendant may be used to claim a prize. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.020 - License—Eligible organizations. 
The following organizations are eligible to apply to the city for a license to conduct bingo games in the city under provisions of this chapter and Penal Code section 326.5, provided that the proceeds or profits of such games, as applicable, are used only for charitable purposes: 
A.  Organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701w, or 23701l of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  Mobilehome park associations; 
C.  Senior citizen organizations; and 
D.  Charitable organizations affiliated with a school district. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.030 - Application—Contents. 
A.  Eligible organizations desiring to obtain a bingo license must file an application in writing with the City Clerk's Office. The application must, at minimum, contain the following: 
1.  The name of the applicant organization and a statement that applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.48.020; 
2.  The name and signature of at least two officers of the applicant organization; 
3.  The particular property within the city including the street number, owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property all bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place; 
4.  Proposed days of week and hours of day for the conduct of bingo games; 
5.  A description of the type of bingo games to be conducted; 
6.  A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Penal Code section 326.5 and this chapter as it may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the city upon violation of any of such provisions. 
B.  The application must be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury. 
C.  The following items must be submitted with the application: 
1.  The license fee. 
2.  A diagram of the room to be used to conduct bingo showing the layout of tables and all exits. 
3.  If applicable, a certificate or determination of exemption or other proof of the organization's exemption under the Revenue Code sections referred to in Section 5.48.020.A. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.040 - License—Issuance and contents. 
Upon being satisfied that the applicant is eligible to conduct bingo games in the city, the city manager may issue a license to the applicant that, at minimum, contains the following information: 
A.  The name and nature of the organization issued the license. 
B.  The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted. 
C.  The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted. 
D.  The date of the expiration of such license, which will be: 
1.  For eligible organizations under Subsections A and D of Section 5.48.020, one year from the date of issuance. 
2.  For eligible organizations under Subsections B and C of Section 5.48.020, three years from the date of issuance. 
E.  Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.050 - License—Denial. 
If an application for a license is denied, one-half of any license fee paid will be refunded to the organization. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.060 - License—Revocation. 
A.  If a licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or Penal Code section 326.5, the license may be revoked in manner provided in Section 5.08.050 of this code. 
B.  Any organization whose license is revoked under this section may not conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the determination to revoke the license is overruled on appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.070 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision to deny, revoke or refuse to renew a bingo license may appeal such decision in the manner provided by Section 5.08.060 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.080 - Reapplication following license revocation. 
Any organization whose license is revoked may not reapply for a license to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under the appropriate Revenue and Taxation Code section set forth in Section 5.48.020.A, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of the exemption. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.090 - Maximum amount of prize. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games may not exceed five hundred dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.100 - Profits to be kept in separate fund or account. 
All profits or proceeds derived from a bingo game must be kept and used in the manner prescribed by Penal Code section 326.5. The licensee must keep full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games that are authorized by this chapter. The city, by and through its authorized officers or agents, has the right to examine and audit such record at any reasonable time and the licensee must fully cooperate with the city in making such record available. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.110 - Financial interest in licensee only. 
No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the licensee may hold a financial interest in the conduct of any bingo game. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.120 - Exclusive operation by licensee. 
A bingo game must be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Such members may not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. The licensee may, however, employ security personnel to provide security services at bingo games and pay for such personnel from game proceeds. Only the licensee may operate a bingo game and participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.130 - Open to public. 
All bingo games must be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensee organization. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.140 - Attendance limited to occupancy capacity. 
Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game is limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the fire department and building department of the city. A licensee may not reserve seats or space for any person. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.150 - Game only on licensee's property. 
A licensee may conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The license issued under this chapter authorizes the licensee to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. The license must be prominently displayed on the property where the bingo games are conducted and must be presented immediately upon demand by a law enforcement officer or other authorized agent of the city. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for performance of the purposes for which the licensee is organized, the license will automatically terminate and have no further force or effect. A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section will be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.160 - Minors prohibited. 
No person under the age of eighteen years may be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.170 - Intoxicated persons prohibited. 
No person who is obviously intoxicated may be allowed to participate in a bingo game. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.180 - Hours of operation. 
No licensee may conduct any bingo games more than six hours out of any twenty-four-hour period. In addition, no bingo game may be conducted before ten a.m. nor after two a.m. of any day. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.190 - Participant must be present. 
No person may be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.200 - Receipt of profit by unauthorized person unlawful. 
Except for security personnel as provided in Section 5.48.120, it is a misdemeanor under Penal Code section 326.5(b) for any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter. Such a violation is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which fine, upon payment, will be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.210 - City may enjoin violation. 
The city may bring an action to enjoin any violation of Penal Code section 326.5 or of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
5.48.220 - Applicability of city's gambling ordinance. 
The provisions of Chapter 10.38 of this code do not apply to any activities conducted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 4-14-2010)  
Chapter 5.49 - REMOTE CALLER BINGO GAMES 
 
5.49.010 - Legislative authorization of remote caller bingo games. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the California Constitution, Article IV, Section 19, as implemented by Penal Code Sections 326.3 and 326.4. 
(Ord. No. 1131, § 2, 11-16-2016)  
5.49.020 - Remote caller bingo authorized. 
Remote caller bingo may be lawfully played in the city pursuant to the provisions of Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1131, § 2, 11-16-2016)  
5.49.030 - Qualified applicants - applicants for licensure. 
A.  The following organizations are qualified to apply to the city for a license to operate a bingo game if the receipts of those games are used only for charitable purposes: 
1.  An organization exempt from the payment of the taxes imposed under the Corporation Tax Law by Section 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701l, or 23701w of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
2.  A mobile home park association of a mobile home park that is situated in the city. 
3.  Senior citizen organizations. 
4.  Charitable organizations affiliated with a school district. 
B.  The application must be in a form prescribed by the license official and must be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council. The following documentation must be attached to the application, as applicable: 
1.  A certificate issued by the Franchise Tax Board certifying that the applicant is exempt from the payment of the taxes imposed under the Corporation Tax Law pursuant to Section 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701l, or 23701w of the Revenue and Taxation Code. In lieu of a certificate issued by the Franchise Tax Board, the license official may refer to the Franchise Tax Board's Internet Web site to verify that the applicant is exempt from the payment of the taxes imposed under the Corporation Tax Law. 
2.  Other evidence as the license official determines is necessary to verify that the applicant is a duly organized mobile home park association of a mobile home park situated in the City. 
(Ord. No. 1131, § 2, 11-16-2016)  
5.49.040 - License application—Verification. 
The license may not be issued until the license official has verified the facts stated in the application and determined that the applicant is qualified. 
(Ord. No. 1131, § 2, 11-16-2016)  
5.49.050 - Annual licenses. 
A license issued pursuant to this chapter will be valid until the end of the calendar year, at which time the license will expire. A new license may only be obtained upon filing a new application and payment of the applicable license fee. The fact that a license has been issued to an applicant creates no vested right on the part of the licensee to continue to offer bingo for play. The city expressly reserves the right to amend or repeal this chapter at any time. If this chapter is repealed, all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter will cease to be effective for any purpose on the effective date of the repealing ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1131, § 2, 11-16-2016)  
5.49.060 - Conditions of licensure. 
A.  Any license issued pursuant to this chapter is subject to the conditions contained in Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code, and each licensee must comply with the requirements of those provisions. 
B.  Each license issued pursuant to this chapter is subject to the following additional conditions: 
1.  Bingo games may not be conducted by any licensee on more than two days during any week, except that a licensee may hold one additional game, at its election, in each calendar quarter. 
2.  The licensed organization is responsible for ensuring that the conditions of this chapter and Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code are complied with by the organization and its officers and members. 
3.  A violation of any conditions of the license or the applicable provisions of the Penal Code will constitute cause for the revocation of the organization's license. Upon notice to a licensed organization of a proposed license revocation, if requested by the licensee, the city council will hold a public hearing before revoking any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1131, § 2, 11-16-2016)  
Title 6 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS* 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this title, the following terms, phrases, and words will have the meanings set forth in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning: 
"Affiliate" means any person who, directly or indirectly owns, controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership with grantee. 
"Basic cable service" means any service tier which involves only the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and EG channels. 
"Cable channel" or "channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum, or any other means of transmission used by the system (including, without limitation, optical fibers or any other means now available or that may become available), which is capable of carrying one video signal and its accompanying audio signal, or carrying an equivalent amount of packet-based data. 
"Cable operator" means any person who: 
(a)  Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or 
(b)  Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such cable system. 
"Cable service" means: 
(a)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video or audio programming; and 
(b)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video or audio programming. 
"Cable system" or "system" means facilities, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that are designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. Such term includes, without limitation, multichannel video systems, but such term does not include: 
(a)  Facilities that serve only to retransmit television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(b)  Facilities that serve subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; 
(c)  Facilities of common carriers which are subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facilities will be considered a cable system (other than for the purposes of 47 U.S.C. 541) to the extent such facilities are used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
(d)  Open video systems that comply with Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 573) as amended; or 
(e)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
"City" means the city of Camarillo as represented by the city council or any authorized representative of the council. 
"Control" means the ability to exercise de facto or de jure control over day-to-day policies and operations or the management of corporate affairs. 
"Educational or government access facilities" or "EG access facilities" means all of the following: 
(a)  Channel capacity designated for noncommercial educational or government use; and 
(b)  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
"Franchise" means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, granted by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, will be nonexclusive and not supersede the requirement to obtain any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting business within the city as required by the other ordinances and laws of the city. 
"Franchise agreement" means a franchise grant ordinance or a contractual agreement containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters. 
"Franchise fee" means any fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city on a grantee as compensation for the grantee's use of the public rights-of-way. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
(a)  Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services); 
(b)  Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for all access facilities; 
(c)  Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
(d)  Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code. 
"Grantee" means any "person" receiving a franchise pursuant to this title to be a cable operator and/or its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
"Gross annual cable service revenues" means the annual gross revenues received directly or indirectly by a grantee from the provision of cable service within the city utilizing the public rights-of-way for which a franchise is required. Gross annual cable service revenues includes, but is not limited to, subscriber revenue, equipment charges, late fees, advertising revenue, home shopping revenue and franchise fee revenue. Gross annual cable service revenues do not include refundable deposits, rebates or credits. 
"Installation" means the connection of the system to subscribers' terminals and the provision of cable service. 
"Multichannel video system" includes all of the following: 
(a)  An "open video system," as such term is defined in Title VI of the Federal Communications Act of 1934 (as amended) and implementing regulations; 
(b)  A system which provides multiple channels of video programming where some or all of the video programming is generally considered comparable to programming provided by a television broadcast station; where such service is transmitted in whole or in part via wires or lines that are in or cross any streets. The preceding sentence applies whether the grantee owns, leases or otherwise obtains the right to use such wires or lines, including lines of a telecommunications provider used pursuant to tariff or otherwise for such purpose; and 
(c)  Any other system providing multiple channels of video programming where some or all of the video programming is generally considered comparable to programming provided by a television broadcast station where under applicable law a franchise or similar permission or approval from the city is authorized. 
"Noncable services" means all services that are not cable services, including, without limitation, information services and telecommunications services. 
"Normal operating conditions" means those service conditions which are within the control of a grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of a grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and scheduled maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
"Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, governmental entity or other legally-recognized entity. 
"Service area" or "franchise area" means the entire geographic area within the municipal boundaries of the city, unless otherwise specified in a franchise. 
"Service tier" means a category of cable service or other services provided by a cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged. 
"Street" or "public way" or "public rights-of-way" means each of the following which have been dedicated, in whole or in part, to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the service area: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and other public property. 
"Subscriber" means any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, cable service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system, and who pays the charges for such service. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
Chapter 6.08 - GRANT OF FRANCHISE 
Sections: 
 
6.08.010 - Franchise required. 
No person may construct, install or operate a cable system in the franchise area within any public way without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to this title and effectuated through a franchise agreement and the payment of the applicable franchise fees. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.08.020 - Application for franchise. 
Any person desiring an initial franchise must file an application with the city. A reasonable nonrefundable initial application fee as established by the city council resolution must accompany the initial franchise application to cover the city's reasonable costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. In the event such costs exceed the application fee, the applicant must pay the difference to the city within thirty days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. In the event such costs are less than the application fee, the unused portion of the application fee will be refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.08.030 - Application—Contents. 
An application for an initial franchise must contain, where applicable: 
A.  A statement as to the proposed service area; 
B.  A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise of applicant in the cable system field; 
C.  A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder having a five percent or greater interest, if a corporation; 
D.  A list of officers, directors and managing employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person; 
E.  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant; 
F.  A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a certified public accountant audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city; 
G.  A map and description of all existing facilities of the applicant within the city, a proposed construction schedule, and a proposed service schedule; 
H.  A detailed description including, without limitation, subscriber costs, basic cable service, service tiers, and channels proposed to be offered; and 
I.  Any reasonable additional information that the city deems applicable. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.08.040 - Consideration of initial application. 
A.  Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the city manager must prepare a report and make recommendations respecting such application to the city council. 
B.  The city must notice a public hearing prior to any initial franchise grant. Within sixty days after the close of the hearing, the city council must make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether the initial franchise should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.08.050 - Term of the franchise. 
Any franchise granted under this title will be for the term established in the franchise agreement, but in no event may the term exceed fifteen years from the effective date of the ordinance or resolution authorizing the franchise. A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and applicable state and federal law. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.08.060 - Franchise area. 
A franchise will be valid within all the municipal limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.08.070 - Nonexclusive franchise. 
Any franchise granted pursuant to this title will be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable system, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.08.080 - Multiple franchises. 
A.  The city may grant any number of franchises subject to applicable state or federal law. The city may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as: 
1.  The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables and lines in addition to the cables, lines, conduits and pipes of the utility systems. 
2.  The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service. 
3.  The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and the disruptions arising from numerous excavations of the public rights-of-way. 
B.  The city may require that any new entrant, nonincumbent grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith if, in the city's opinion, the public rights-of-way in any particular area cannot feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional facilities. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.08.090 - Franchise nontransferable. 
A.  A grantee may not sell, transfer, lease, assign or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise (collectively "transfer"), the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the city; provided, however, that the prior written consent of the city will not be required for an intracorporate or intracompany transfer from one subsidiary of the grantee's ultimate parent to another subsidiary in which the grantee's ultimate parent retains at least a seventy-five percent interest. The granting of a security interest in any of the grantee assets, or any mortgage or other hypothecation or by assignment of any right, title or interest in the cable system, or use of the cable system as collateral in order to secure indebtedness, will not be considered a transfer for the purposes of this section. 
B.  The requirements of subsection A will apply to any change in control of a grantee. The word "control" as used herein includes majority ownership, and actual working control in whatever manner exercised. In the event that a grantee is a corporation, prior consent of the city will be required where ownership or control of more than twenty-five percent of the voting stock of the grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom own or control the voting stock of the grantee as of the effective date of the franchise, singularly or collectively. 
C.  A grantee must notify city in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of the franchise property. Such notification will be considered by city as notice that a change in control or ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions under this section governing the consent of the city to such change in control or ownership will apply. 
D.  For the purpose of determining whether it will consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, city may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, in accordance with this section, and the grantee must assist the city in such inquiry. In seeking the city's consent to any change of ownership or control, the grantee has the responsibility of insuring that the grantee or the proposed transferee completes an application in accordance with Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or equivalent. An application must be submitted to the city not less than one hundred twenty days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee will be required to establish that it possesses the legal, technical and financial qualifications to operate and maintain the cable system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. If the franchisee is then in compliance with the requirements of the franchise, and the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the city will consent to the transfer of the franchise in accordance with federal regulations. 
E.  Any financial institution having a pledge of a grantee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction or operation of the franchise has the right to notify the city that it or its designee satisfactory to the city will take control of and operate the cable system, in the event of a grantee default of its financial obligations. Further, the financial institution must also agree in writing to continue cable service and comply with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the cable system. 
F.  Any submission of an application for transfer or change of control of a franchise must be accompanied by a deposit in the amount of four thousand dollars. Immediately upon transfer or change of control, the grantee must reimburse the city for the city's reasonable processing and review expenses over four thousand dollars in connection with the transfer or change of control of the franchise, including without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication costs and document preparation expenses, as specified in any franchise agreement. Any such reimbursement may not be charged against any franchise fee due to the city during the term of the franchise or identified as a pass through charge on subscribers' bills. If the city's processing expenses are less than four thousand dollars, any unused funds on deposit will be refunded to the applicant. 
G.  Approval by the city of a transfer or change of control application does not constitute a waiver or release of any rights of the city under this title or a franchise agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.08.100 - Franchise modification. 
A.  If a grantee desires to modify the franchise, the grantee must submit the request in writing to the city. The city will then provide to the grantee a summary of all costs that the city anticipates it will incur in processing the grantee's request. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, the administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposal, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. 
B.  If the grantee agrees to pay and does pay all of these costs in advance, then the city will process the proposed modification. The fact that the city agrees to process the requested modification does not mean that the city has any obligation or intent to accept the proposed modification. 
C.  If the grantee does not agree to pay these costs in advance, or fails to make such payment within thirty days of receipt of the city's summary of costs, and city does not later expressly waive the provisions of this subsection C, then the grantee's request for franchise modification will be deemed withdrawn. 
D.  No modification of the franchise will take effect or be binding on the city, unless and until such modification is approved by the city council. 
E.  Renegotiation, amendment, or other modification to the franchise agreement initiated due to changes in federal or state law are considered changes initiated by grantee. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.08.110 - Franchise renewal. 
Franchise renewals will be in accordance with applicable law. The city and a grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. A franchise will not be subject to renewal once it has expired or otherwise been terminated. A deposit of ten thousand dollars must be paid at the time the renewal is requested. Immediately upon renewal, the grantee must reimburse the city for reasonable processing and review expenses in excess of ten thousand dollars in connection with the renewal, including without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposed renewal, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication costs and document preparation expenses. Any such reimbursement may not be charged against any franchise fee due to the city during the term of the franchise or identified as a pass through charge on subscribers' bills. If the city's expenses are less than ten thousand dollars any unused funds on deposit will be refunded to the grantee. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
Chapter 6.12 - FRANCHISE AGREEMENT 
Sections: 
 
6.12.010 - Franchise agreement. 
In addition to the terms and conditions required by this title, all other terms, conditions, procedures, rights and obligations of the city and a grantee for any franchise granted pursuant to this title will be specified in the franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
Chapter 6.16 - MINIMUM CONSUMER PROTECTION AND SERVICE STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
6.16.010 - Operational standards. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, a grantee must meet or exceed the following consumer protection and service standards under normal operating conditions: 
1.  Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity between nine a.m. and five p.m., local time five days a week to assure that telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, will not exceed thirty seconds; and callers needing to be transferred will not be required to wait more than thirty seconds before being connected to a service representative. 
2.  Emergency toll free telephone line capacity on a twenty-four-hour basis, including weekends and holidays. After five p.m., the telephone calls may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine and calls received after normal business hours by such service or automated response system must be responded to by a trained company representative by the next business day. During periods when an answering device, including, but not limited to voicemail, is used, a grantee must provide personnel who will contact the answering device or machine, at a minimum, every five hours to check on requests for service or complaints. 
3.  An office in Ventura County which provides adequate staffing to accept subscriber payments and the return or exchange of subscriber equipment, and where, except for official state and national holidays, the office is open for at least forty hours a week and where, at minimum, the office is open according to the following schedule: 
a.  Thirty-three hours each week which hours are sometime between eight a.m. and six p.m. on the days of Monday through Friday, with a minimum of four hours on each day; 
b.  Three hours one weeknight sometime between five p.m. and ten p.m.; 
c.  Four hours on either Saturday or Sunday. If the hours are on Saturday, the hours are sometime between the hours of nine a.m. and five p.m. If the hours are on Sunday, the hours are sometime between eleven a.m. and five p.m. 
The grantee may petition the city to reduce its business hours if the extended hours are not justified by subscriber demand, and the city may not unreasonably deny the petition. 
4.  An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunctions on a twenty-four-hour per day basis. 
5.  An installation staff capable of installing service to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within seven calendar days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. "Standard installations" are those that are located up to two hundred fifty feet from the existing distribution system, unless otherwise defined in the franchise agreement. However, should such an installation require trenching, the installation must be completed within thirty calendar days after receipt of a request, provided that the grantee is able to obtain all necessary easements and permits. 
6.  When scheduling service calls, appointments with subscribers for installation of service, and other activities at the subscriber location, the grantee must specify a two-hour-time period sometime between eight a.m. and six p.m. for the appointment. The grantee may schedule installation and service calls outside of this time period for the express convenience of the customer. The grantee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a grantee representative does not keep the appointment within the specified two-hour-time period, (a) the customer must be contacted and the appointment rescheduled for a time which is mutually agreeable to the grantee and the customer; and (b) the grantee may not charge the customer for completing any of the work which was the subject of the original appointment. 
B.  Under normal operating conditions, the standards of subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) above must be met not less than ninety percent of the time when measured within any three-month period. The standards of subsections (A)(4) through (A)(6) above must be met not less than ninety-five percent of the time when measured within any three-month period. 
C.  The grantee will not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards of this section, unless a historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.16.020 - Service standards. 
A.  The grantee must render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, must be preceded by notice, and must only occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system which is generally between midnight and six a.m. local time. 
B.  The grantee must maintain a repair force of technicians capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames: 
1.  If at least ten percent of all subscribers are affected by an outage of video or audio on one or more channels, technicians must respond to all requests for service within two hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls or requests for service. 
2.  If at least five subscribers, but less than ten percent of all subscribers are affected by an outage of video or audio on one or more channels, then technicians must respond to a request for service within twenty-four hours of each of the requests, regardless of whether the request was made on weekends or on weekdays. 
3.  If less than five subscribers are affected by an outage of video or audio on one or more channels, the response to the request for service must be made within twenty-four hours of the request during the week, and no later than the next business day if the outage occurs during the weekend. 
4.  For inferior signal quality, within two business days of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality. 
C.  The grantee will be deemed to have responded to a request for service under this section when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. In the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, the technician must leave written notification of arrival. 
D.  Unless excused, the grantee must determine the nature of the problem resulting in a request for service within two business days of beginning work and resolve all cable system-related problems within five business days unless technically infeasible. 
E.  The grantee may not charge for the repair or replacement of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by the grantee to subscribers, unless the defect was caused by the subscriber, or the equipment owned by the subscriber requires repair or replacement. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.16.030 - Billing and information standards. 
A.  Subscriber bills must be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills must also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
B.  In case of a billing dispute, the grantee must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within fourteen calendar days of receipt of the written complaint. 
C.  The grantee must provide pro rata credits or refunds to requesting subscribers whose service has been interrupted for three or more hours, if the interruption was not caused by the subscriber and was caused by events beyond the control of grantee. The minimum credit must equal the charge for one day of cable service for each calendar day with outages of three or more hours. 
D.  Credits or refunds must automatically be provided by the grantee on a pro rata basis to any subscriber affected by an interruption of service for more than three hours due to events within the control of the grantee, exclusive of scheduled repairs, maintenance or franchise-required construction that the grantee has provided advance written notice to subscribers. In cases where advance written notice is provided to subscribers, the time period detailed in the notice may not exceed six hours in any twenty-four-hour period. In cases where such notice has been given to subscribers and the service interruption exceeds the period detailed in the notice, the provisions of this section will apply. 
E.  In the event the grantee has improperly or inadvertently disconnected cable services to a subscriber, the grantee must restore the cable service without charge to the subscriber as soon as possible, but in no event later than two days of discovery of the improper disconnection. The grantee must credit or provide a refund to any subscriber improperly or inadvertently disconnected from receiving cable service for the period of time without cable service. 
F.  All credits or refunds for service must be issued no later than the subscriber's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. For subscribers terminating service, refunds must be issued promptly, but not later than thirty days after the return of any grantee-supplied equipment. 
G.  The grantee must provide written information on each of the following areas (i) at the time of the installation of service, (ii) at least annually to all subscribers, and (iii) at any time upon request: 
1.  Products and services offered; 
2.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
3.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
4.  Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
5.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and 
6.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the city office designated for dealing with cable-related issues. 
H.  Subscribers must be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing and in accordance with state and federal law. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the grantee. In addition, the grantee must notify subscribers thirty days in advance of any significant changes in the information required in subsection 6.16.030(G). 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.16.040 - Verification of compliance with standards. 
A.  Upon ten calendar day's prior written notice, the grantee must respond to a request for information made by the city regarding grantee's compliance with any or all of the standards required in Sections 6.16.010, 6.16.020 and 6.16.030. The grantee must provide sufficient documentation to permit the city to verify the grantee's compliance. 
B.  Repeated noncompliance with the consumer protection standards of Sections 6.16.010, 6.16.020 or 6.16.030, after the grantee's receipt of notice and not less than a thirty-day opportunity to cure, may, in the city's sole discretion, be declared a material breach of the franchise agreement and violation of this title. 
C.  The city, pursuant to Section 6.16.010(C), may require the grantee to acquire equipment to determine compliance with the telephone answering standards of this chapter. Should the grantee have its own telephone equipment which can report on telephone line usage, the grantee, upon written request from the city, must submit such report from its own system in order to verify compliance with the telephone answering standards of this chapter. 
D.  The grantee must take necessary steps to ensure that adequate telephone lines and staffing are available to permit the grantee to satisfy its obligations under this title and the franchise. Consideration will be given for periods of promotional activities or outages. The monthly billing period will be considered as a normal, daily activity for purposes of determining the availability of adequate telephone lines and staffing. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.16.050 - Subscriber complaints, continuity of service, and resolution of disputes. 
A.  The grantee must establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the city. The written procedures must prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing specifying the subscriber's grounds for dissatisfaction. The grantee must file a copy of these procedures with the city. These procedures must meet the approval of the city, which approval may not be unreasonably withheld. 
B.  Upon prior written request, the city has the right to review the grantee's response to any subscriber complaint in order to determine the grantee's compliance with the franchise requirements, subject to the subscriber's right to privacy. 
C.  Subject to applicable law including, but not limited to, the terms of the franchise agreement, all subscribers have the right to continue receiving cable service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the city gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the grantee must ensure that all subscribers receive cable service as long as the franchise remains in force. 
D.  In the event of a change of control of the grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, the original grantee must cooperate with the city, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, the grantee will be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system. 
E.  The grantee's response to subscriber complaints, as well as complaints made by subscribers to the city and provided by the city to the grantee, must be initiated within one business day of receipt by the grantee. The grantee must resolve a subscriber's complaint not later than five business days after receipt of the complaint, or a longer period, if such complaint cannot reasonably be resolved within five business days. Should a grantee supervisor not be available when requested by a subscriber, a supervisor must respond to the subscriber's complaint at the earliest possible time, and in no event later than the end of the next business day. The grantee must promptly notify the city of the grantee's progress in responding to, and resolving, any complaints forwarded by the city to the grantee. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
6.16.060 - Other requirements. 
A.  In the event the grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive calendar days other than for reasons beyond the control of the grantee, without prior approval or subsequent excuse of the city, the city may, at its sole option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as the grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city or a permanent operator is selected. If the city should fulfill this obligation for the grantee, then during such period as the city fulfills this obligation, the city will be entitled to collect all revenues from the system, and the grantee must reimburse the city for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of the revenues collected by the city that are the result of the grantee's failure to perform. 
B.  All officers, agents or employees of the grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who, in the normal course of work come into contact with members of the public or who require entry onto the premises of any subscriber must carry a photo-identification card in a form approved by the city. The grantee must account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle of the grantee or its major subcontractors must be clearly and prominently identified as affiliated with or operated by the grantee. 
C.  Additional service standards and standards governing consumer protection and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this title may be established in the franchise agreement or by separate ordinance as permitted by federal or state law. If the city establishes such additional service standards which exceed any standards established by the federal communications commission or state law, the grantee may be permitted by law or regulation to recover the incremental cost associated with meeting the more stringent standard (i.e., the incremental cost differential between meeting the existing standard and that of the newly established standard). Repeated noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise, provided that the grantee must receive due process, including prior written notification and a reasonable opportunity to cure, prior to any sanction being imposed. 
(Ord. 985 § 4 (part), 2006.)  
Chapter 6.20 - STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES 
Sections: 
 
6.20.010 - Purpose and application. 
This chapter is designed to regulate video service providers holding state video franchises and operating within the city pursuant to that franchise. On January 1, 2007, the state of California became the sole authority with power to grant state video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 ("DIVCA"). Pursuant to DIVCA, the city of Camarillo shall receive a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and/or government (PEG) purposes from all state video franchise holders operating within the city. Additionally, the city acquired the responsibility to establish and enforce penalties, consistent with state law, against all state video franchise holders operating within the city for violations of customer service standards. DIVCA precludes the city from adopting its own standards and grants all authority to adopt customer service standards to the state. DIVCA leaves unchanged the city's authority to regulate the city's existing cable franchises until the expiration of any such franchises. 
(Ord. 1018 § 2 (part), 2007.) 
(Ord. No. 1149, § 4, 1-24-2018)  
6.20.020 - State video franchise and EG fees. 
(a)  Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city shall pay a fee to the city equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder. 
(b)  Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city shall also pay the city a fee equal to one percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder, which fee shall be used by the city for any Public, Education, and/or Government (PEG) purposes consistent with state and federal law. Pursuant to CMC Section 6.04.010, Camarillo's programming is defined as Education and Government (EG) only. 
(c)  In addition, any state franchisee that has held a locally issued franchise agreement shall, consistent with Public Utilities Code section 5870, continue to fully provide and support PEG channel facilities and institutional networks and to provide cable services to community buildings to the maximum extent permitted by law. 
(d)  Gross revenue, for the purposes of (a), (b) above, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code section 5860. 
(Ord. 1018 § 2 (part), 2007.) 
(Ord. No. 1149, §§ 3, 4, 1-24-2018)  
6.20.030 - Audit authority. 
Not more than once annually, the city manager or the manager's designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with Section 6.20.020. 
(Ord. 1018 § 2 (part), 2007.) 
(Ord. No. 1149, § 4, 1-24-2018)  
6.20.040 - Customer service penalties under state video franchises. 
(a)  The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service. 
(b)  The city manager or the manager's designee shall monitor the compliance of state video franchise holders with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city manager or the manager's designee will provide the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city: 
(1)  For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of up to five hundred dollars may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. 
(2)  For a second violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of up to one thousand dollars may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each violation. 
(3)  For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of up to two thousand five hundred dollars may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. 
(c)  A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the city manager to the city council within sixty days of the initial assessment. The city council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The city council's decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. 
(Ord. 1018 § 2 (part), 2007.) 
(Ord. No. 1149, § 4, 1-24-2018)  
6.20.050 - City response to state video franchise applications. 
(a)  Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the city must concurrently provide complete copies to the city of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities Commission (PUC). One complete copy must be provided to the city manager. 
(b)  Within thirty days of receipt, the city manager will provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. 
(Ord. 1018 § 2 (part), 2007.) 
(Ord. No. 1149, § 4, 1-24-2018)  
Title 7 - ANIMALS* 
Chapters:  
Chapter 7.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
7.02.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this title, the following words and phrases are defined as follows: 
"Code enforcement officer" means any person authorized to enforce the provisions of Title 7. 
"Maintain an animal" means owning, harboring or keeping an animal regulated under this title for more than thirty consecutive days. 
"Owner" means a person that maintains an animal regulated under this title. 
"Poundmaster" means any person or any duly authorized agent of any such person in charge at any time of the Ventura County Animal Regulation Department and includes any county officer administering the provisions of this chapter and the resolutions of the City Council adopted pursuant to this title. 
(Ord. 1019 § 2 (part), 2008.)  
7.02.020 - Fees. 
All fees and penalties provided for in this title will be the applicable amounts fixed by resolution of the Ventura County Board of Supervisors or the city council, as applicable. 
(Ord. 1019 § 2 (part), 2008.)  
7.02.030 - Duties of poundmaster. 
It is the duty of the poundmaster to administer and enforce the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 1019 § 2 (part), 2008.)  
7.02.040 - Interfering with duties of poundmaster. 
Any person that breaks open a dog pound, animal shelter, temporary pound, or pound vehicle, or who willfully resists, delays, or obstructs the poundmaster or a code enforcement officer in the discharge of, or attempt to discharge, any duty of such official under this title, will be charged with a misdemeanor/infraction. 
(Ord. 1019 § 2 (part), 2008.)  
7.02.050 - General maintenance of animal areas. 
All areas used for maintaining animals within the city must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and may not cause or be detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(Ord. 1019 § 2 (part), 2008.)  
7.02.060 - Violations. 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter constitutes an infraction, unless otherwise designated as a misdemeanor/infraction. 
(Ord. 1019 § 2 (part), 2008.)  
Chapter 7.04 - LICENSE TAGS 
Sections: 
 
7.04.010 - License tag requirements. 
Every person that maintains a dog over the age of four months for thirty days or longer must obtain a current license and license tag issued under the provisions of this chapter and stamped with the year in which license is issued. The license tag obtained must be attached to a substantial collar or harness that must be worn by the dog at all times except as provided in Section 7.04.020. Any dog found without a current license tag or for which there is no current license may be impounded by the poundmaster or any code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. 1019 § 3 (part), 2008.)  
7.04.020 - Exemption from wearing of license. 
A license tag need not be worn by a dog when the dog is: 
A.  Within an enclosure sufficient to securely confine the dog to the premises of an animal hospital, a licensed dog kennel, a state chartered benevolent organization for the care of animals, or of the person that maintains the dog; or 
B.  Participating in or training for sporting events, field trials, obedience classes, dog shows or herding livestock; provided such dog is not allowed to run at large. 
(Ord. 1019 § 3 (part), 2008.)  
7.04.030 - License—Application. 
The license and license tag required by this chapter may be obtained by submitting a complete application on the form established by the poundmaster, providing an acceptable rabies vaccination certificate, and paying the applicable fee. The rabies vaccination certificate must show that the vaccination has at least one year to run before its expiration date. The expiration date of the rabies vaccination will be recorded on the receipt. 
(Ord. 1019 § 3 (part), 2008.)  
7.04.040 - License—Period. 
The license period for any license issued under this chapter will be the period of time the poundmaster may select for that particular license application; provided, however, that such period may not be less than one year nor more than two years from the date the license is issued; and provided further that such period may not extend beyond the expiration date of the applicable rabies vaccination. The corresponding license tag will expire concurrent with the expiration of the applicable license period. 
(Ord. 1019 § 3 (part), 2008.)  
7.04.050 - License—Fee. 
The fee for a dog license will be the amount established by resolution. The license fee for a dog that has been spayed or neutered, as verified by a veterinarian's certificate, may not be more than fifty percent of the fee for a dog of the same sex that has not been spayed or neutered. 
(Ord. 1019 § 3 (part), 2008.)  
7.04.060 - Exemption from license fee. 
A dog license will be issued free of charge in the following instances: 
A.  When the license is for a dog that will be used as a guide dog for a blind person. An affidavit attesting to the fact that the dog will be used as a guide dog must be given to the official issuing the license; 
B.  When the license is for a dog that has been honorably discharged from the armed services of the United States, or from the police or fire departments. Such discharge may be established by providing the discharge papers issued for such dog; 
C.  When the license is for a dog belonging to and actively used by a governmental agency for law enforcement, search and rescue, or fire detection purposes. 
(Ord. 1019 § 3 (part), 2008.)  
7.04.070 - License application due date and late penalties. 
The license application and fee required by this chapter are due no later than thirty days after any of the following events: 
1.  The previous license, if any, expires; 
2.  The dog is acquired by the person that maintains it; 
3.  The dog is brought into the city; or 
4.  The dog attains the age of four months; whichever last occurs. 
Any person purchasing a license after the due date must pay, in addition to the license fee, a late license penalty in an amount equal to one hundred percent of the license fee that would be applicable if the license period were one year, regardless of the actual license period for which such license is issued. Such penalty will be in addition to any other penalty or sanction that may be imposed under this chapter for failure to have a license. 
(Ord. 1019 § 3 (part), 2008.)  
7.04.080 - Issuance of license tag. 
Upon receipt of a complete application form, accompanied by payment of the proper fee and rabies vaccination certificate, a license and receipt will be issued to the applicant, and a metal license tag mailed to the applicant's address. Each tag will be serially numbered and stamped with the words "Ventura County, CA" and the year in which it was issued. The poundmaster will maintain a record of all issued licenses. 
(Ord. 1019 § 3 (part), 2008.)  
7.04.090 - Lost license tag. 
If a license tag is lost, a duplicate tag may be obtained from the poundmaster upon payment of the applicable fee and by either surrendering the receipt obtained for the lost license tag, or certifying under penalty of perjury that a tag was obtained and that the receipt cannot be found. 
(Ord. 1019 § 3 (part), 2008.)  
7.04.100 - Transfer of license. 
In the event that there is a change in ownership of a dog licensed pursuant to this chapter during the license period, the new owner may have the current license transferred upon the payment of the applicable transfer fee and the surrender of the license receipt. 
(Ord. 1019 § 3 (part), 2008.)  
7.04.110 - License inspectors. 
The poundmaster may appoint animal license inspectors for the purpose of inspecting animals required to be licensed under this chapter to ascertain if such animals are properly licensed, to issue the licenses required under this chapter, and to collect the required license fees. 
(Ord. 1019 § 3 (part), 2008.)  
7.04.120 - License violations. 
It is a violation of this chapter for any person to counterfeit a dog license tag, or attach a license tag issued under this chapter to any dog other than the one for which such tag was issued, or obtain a dog license tag or dog kennel license and, in doing so, state as true any material matter which the applicant knows to be false. 
(Ord. 1019 § 3 (part), 2008.)  
Chapter 7.08 - ANIMAL POUND 
Sections: 
 
7.08.010 - Disposal of impounded animals other than livestock. 
The poundmaster must feed and care for any animal impounded until it is disposed of as provided by law. If such animal is a dog, that is not a diseased or injured animal as defined in this chapter, and is not being isolated pursuant to Chapter 7.12, the person that maintains such impounded dog may redeem it at any time after the dog is impounded by describing it, proving ownership to the satisfaction of the poundmaster, paying all applicable fees and obtaining, when necessary, the dog license required under Chapter 7.04. If the impounded dog bears a license tag issued under the provisions of this title, notice will be mailed to the address shown on the copy of the receipt for such license tag on file with the poundmaster. If any impounded dog is not redeemed, or if the owner of such dog is unknown to the poundmaster, or fails, or refuses to comply with any of the requirements of redemption as provided in this chapter, or if the owner has waived the redemption period in writing, such dog will be deemed to be abandoned, and the poundmaster must dispose of such dog according to the provisions of applicable state law. In disposing of an impounded animal, the poundmaster may, in the poundmaster's discretion, destroy the animal in a humane manner or the poundmaster may sell such animal. The price to be charged for any animal sold as a pet or to any state chartered humane society will be as prescribed by resolution. 
(Ord. 1019 § 4 (part), 2008.)  
7.08.020 - Temporary animal pound. 
The poundmaster is authorized to temporarily impound animals within an enclosure other than the county animal shelter, and such an enclosure will constitute a temporary animal pound. Notice that an enclosure is an animal pound must be given by placing a sign to that effect on the gate or other entrance to the property. 
(Ord. 1019 § 4 (part), 2008.)  
7.08.030 - Livestock running at large. 
No person that maintains any livestock may permit such livestock to run at large upon the private property of another without the permission of the person owning or occupying such private property, or upon the streets or public places of the city. The poundmaster is authorized to deputize individuals who are properly equipped to capture and transport any livestock that is running at large in violation of this title. Each animal captured or transported will be impounded at the risk of the owner, and the owner of such animal is liable for all fees set forth in Section 7.08.050. Any violation of the provisions of this section will constitute a misdemeanor/infraction. 
(Ord. 1019 § 4 (part), 2008.)  
7.08.040 - Maintaining stallions. 
Upon approval of the county veterinarian, a stallion may be maintained, when authorized under the city's land use regulations, in a substantial corral of wood or other construction six feet in height and under conditions to prevent escape and protect people or other animals. A minimum substantial corral is defined as being constructed of four-inch by four-inch posts, eight feet on center, anchored twenty-four inches in portland cement with two-inch by six-inch rails set two feet apart. 
(Ord. 1019 § 4 (part), 2008.)  
7.08.050 - Fees for redeeming livestock. 
If any impounded livestock is redeemed, the poundmaster must collect all applicable fees before delivering the animal to the person redeeming it. 
(Ord. 1019 § 4 (part), 2008.)  
7.08.060 - Liability. 
All animals specified in this title that may be impounded will be kept at the risk of the owner of such animal, and neither the city nor its officers, agents or employees will be liable to the owner, for the delivery in good faith of any such animal to a person claiming to be, but not in fact being, entitled to reclaim the same. Neither the city, nor its officers, agents or employees will be liable for injury or disease to any animal incurred while such animal is being captured, transported, or impounded. 
(Ord. 1019 § 4 (part), 2008.)  
Chapter 7.12 - KENNEL LICENSES 
Sections: 
 
7.12.010 - Kennel license required. 
No person may own, manage, or operate a kennel without having a current and valid license issued under the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, "kennel" means any place or premises where five or more dogs or cats over the age of four months are kept for commercial purposes. "Commercial purposes" means boarding, grooming, breeding, training, sale and related purposes. 
(Ord. 1019 § 5 (part), 2008.)  
7.12.020 - License procedures. 
The kennel license required by this chapter may be obtained by written application to the poundmaster on the form provided by the poundmaster. Such application must be accompanied by a certificate from the county health officer stating that such kennel was inspected and found to be in a sanitary and healthful condition. Such application must also be accompanied by the applicable annual fee set by resolution. Upon receipt of a complete application, certificate, and fee, the poundmaster will issue the kennel license. The license period for a kennel license will be one year, beginning January 1st and ending December 31st. Renewal will be made only upon application, proof of certification, and payment of the fee in the manner provided for the issuance of the original kennel license. 
(Ord. 1019 § 5 (part), 2008.)  
7.12.030 - License—Revocation. 
Any kennel license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the county health officer acting on behalf of the city whenever, in the officer's opinion, the kennel is not being maintained in a sanitary or healthful condition or is not provided with adequate care and supervision for the animals confined therein. The revocation will become effective thirty days after notice of such defective condition is deposited in the mail, postage prepaid, directed to the person(s) owning or operating such kennel at the address shown in the application, unless, within such thirty days, the noticed condition is corrected to the satisfaction of the county health officer. After such revocation becomes effective, the revoked license will be invalid and all kennel operations must cease. 
(Ord. 1019 § 5 (part), 2008.)  
7.12.040 - Consistency with zoning. 
The requirements of this chapter are in addition to, and not in limitation of, the requirements of any applicable zoning ordinances or land use regulations. A kennel license issued under this chapter will not be renewed if the operation of a kennel becomes a prohibited use for the zone in which it is located. 
(Ord. 1019 § 5 (part), 2008.)  
Chapter 7.16 - RABIES CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
7.16.010 - Rabies vaccination required. 
Every person that maintains a dog must, within thirty days after such dog attains the age of four months, cause it to be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with a vaccine approved by the State Department of Veterinary Public Health for use in Ventura County. 
(Ord. 1019 § 6 (part), 2008.)  
7.16.020 - Rabies vaccination. 
The poundmaster will provide facilities for the rabies vaccination of dogs or arrange for such vaccination at clinics operated by private veterinary groups or associations. Failure to display a valid vaccination certificate upon reasonable demand by the poundmaster is prima facie evidence of nonvaccination. No charge, in excess of the actual cost, will be made for vaccination at such facilities or clinics. The vaccination required in this chapter may be obtained either at such facilities or clinics or from a licensed veterinarian of the owner's choice. 
(Ord. 1019 § 6 (part), 2008.)  
7.16.030 - Isolation of suspected animals. 
The poundmaster must place in isolation any animal, licensed or not, which, in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian or the county health officer, displays symptoms suggestive of rabies. Such isolation must be at an animal pound unless the owner of such animal, with the approval of the county health officer, arranges with a licensed veterinarian for such isolation in a private animal hospital or clinic. Any animal placed in such isolation must be kept strictly confined and under such observation as may be required by the county health officer. Except as otherwise provided in Section 7.16.060, such isolation must continue for at least ten days from the date the symptoms suggestive of rabies are first observed. Such isolation may be continued for a period longer than ten days if, in the opinion of any licensed veterinarian or the county health officer, such longer period is necessary. At the expiration of such isolation period, any animal confined at an animal pound will be released upon payment of the applicable fee if, in the opinion of any licensed veterinarian or the county health officer, such animal does not have rabies. 
(Ord. 1019 § 6 (part), 2008.)  
7.16.040 - Responsibilities of veterinarians. 
A.  It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report immediately to the poundmaster any animal that is diagnosed by the veterinarian as having rabies or which the veterinarian has reason to suspect has rabies. 
B.  Every person practicing veterinary medicine in the city that vaccinates or directs to be vaccinated any dog or cat with rabies vaccine, must within ten days of the beginning of each month, deliver to the Ventura County Department of Animal Regulation a copy of every rabies immunization certificate issued by such veterinarian during the previous month. The certificate must be legible and contain the following: 
1.  Name, address, and telephone number of the animal's owner; 
2.  A description of the dog or cat, including breed, color, sex, age, and applicable microchip number; 
3.  The date of rabies immunization; 
4.  The type of rabies vaccine administered; 
5.  The name of the manufacturer and the lot number of the vaccine used; 
6.  The veterinarian's name, address, and telephone number stamped, printed or typed on the certificate; 
7.  The signature of the veterinarian who administered the vaccine or the signature of a person authorized by the veterinarian to sign the certificate. 
The poundmaster has the right to inspect records of rabies vaccinations during normal business hours. 
(Ord. 1019 § 6 (part), 2008.)  
7.16.050 - Reporting of bite cases. 
Every physician or other person that treats any person for a bite inflicted by any animal must report immediately to the county health officer the name and address of each person receiving such treatment, and, upon the request of the county health officer, report to the officer such additional information relating to the bite or treatment as such officer deems helpful in rabies control. 
(Ord. 1019 § 6 (part), 2008.)  
7.16.060 - Isolation fees. 
The poundmaster will collect from the owner of any animal isolated pursuant to this chapter the applicable isolation fee. In cases where the animal is to be isolated at some place other than the pound, the fee applicable to such isolation must be paid in advance prior to approval by the county health officer or the poundmaster of such isolation as an alternative to isolation in the pound. 
(Ord. 1019 § 6 (part), 2008.)  
7.16.070 - Violation of isolation requirements. 
Any person that, after requesting and obtaining approval for maintaining a biting animal confined and isolated upon such person's private premises, fails for any reason to maintain such animal continuously confined and isolated upon the premises, either inside or inside some enclosure, for the entire applicable period, will be charged with a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1019 § 6 (part), 2008.)  
Chapter 7.20 - ANIMAL CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
7.20.010 - Leash law. 
Except for parks which have been designated by the proper government agency as a dog park, no person may allow any dog owned by such person to be on any public street, alley, lane, park, or public place, unless such dog is securely fastened on a leash no longer than six feet and the leash is held continuously in the hands of a responsible person capable of controlling such dog, or unless the dog is securely confined in a vehicle. No person may allow any dog owned by such person to be on any private property in the city without the permission of the person owning or occupying such private property. 
(Ord. 1019 § 7 (part), 2008.)  
7.20.020 - Animals at large. 
No person owning or having possession of any animal may allow it to be at large without reasonable control or to be pastured or kept upon any street or other public place or upon any private property against the wishes of the owner or occupant of the property or in any manner or place to the injury of the owner or occupant of any other property. Any violation of this section constitutes a misdemeanor/infraction. 
(Ord. 1019 § 7 (part), 2008.)  
7.20.030 - Impounding animals. 
Any animal found under conditions or in areas prohibited by Sections 7.20.010 or 7.20.020 will be taken by the poundmaster and impounded, provided that no fowl at large upon private property will be impounded except upon complaint of the owner, occupant, or person in charge of such property who claims to be injured by the fowl. 
(Ord. 1019 § 7 (part), 2008.)  
7.20.040 - Notice of impoundment. 
The poundmaster must immediately personally notify the owner of such animal or fowl of any impounding, if known, or, if unknown, by posting a notice of impounding containing a description of the animal or fowl, and the time and place of apprehension, for three days at the pound. After the expiration of this period, any unredeemed animal or fowl mentioned in such notice may be disposed of as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1019 § 7 (part), 2008.)  
7.20.050 - Privileged entry. 
For the purpose of enforcing the duties imposed by this title, or other applicable law, the poundmaster or any code enforcement officer may enter on private property, except dwellings located thereon, as follows: 
A.  During daylight: 
1.  When in pursuit of any animal that such official has reasonable or probable cause to believe is subject to impoundment pursuant hereto or other applicable law; 
2.  To impound or place in isolation any animal which such official has any cause whatsoever to believe has rabies or is a biting animal; 
3.  To inspect or examine animals isolated; 
4.  To impound an animal pursuant to Section 7.32.040; 
5.  To seize an animal pursuant to Section 7.32.110. 
B.  At night: 
1.  When in pursuit of any animal which such official has reasonable or probable cause to believe is subject to impoundment; 
2.  To impound or place in isolation any animal which such official has any cause to believe has rabies or is a biting animal; 
3.  To impound an animal pursuant to Section 7.32.040. 
C.  As a condition of the authority set forth in this section, except where time does not permit in an emergency or when in fresh pursuit, before entering upon private property a reasonable effort must be made to locate the owner or possessor of such property to request permission to enter upon the property and to explain the purpose for such entry. 
(Ord. 1019 § 7 (part), 2008.)  
7.20.060 - Destruction of wild dogs. 
Any dog that is running at large and that is, by reason of its vicious disposition, dangerous to persons or property may be shot by any code enforcement officer or captured and destroyed in a humane manner by the poundmaster. 
(Ord. 1019 § 7 (part), 2008.)  
7.20.070 - Inspection of animals. 
The failure or refusal by an owner to exhibit any applicable animal or any applicable license for inspection upon demand by the poundmaster or code enforcement officer constitutes a misdemeanor/infraction. 
(Ord. 1019 § 7 (part), 2008.)  
Chapter 7.32 - ANIMAL NUISANCES 
Sections: 
 
7.32.010 - Dog defecation—Removal. 
A.  It is unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow such dog to defecate on any private property in the city without the consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of the property or on any public property in the city. 
B.  It is unlawful for the owner of any dog that defecates on any private property in the city without the consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of the property or on any public property in the city to fail to immediately remove the feces by placing it in a closed container or to thereafter fail to deposit the feces in a trash receptacle. 
C.  The provisions of this section do not apply to a legally blind person that is accompanied by a seeing-eye dog that has been trained by a person licensed under Section 7200 and following of the Business and Professions Code, and on-duty city police dogs. 
(Ord. 1019 § 9 (part), 2008.)  
7.32.020 - Animal nuisances. 
A.  Any animal, except an animal kept or controlled by a governmental agency, which has committed any one or more of any of the following acts is a public nuisance: 
1.  An unprovoked infliction of physical injury upon any person where such person is acting lawfully; 
2.  Unprovoked threatening behavior toward any person where such person is acting lawfully that occurs in such circumstances as to cause such person reasonably to fear for his or her physical safety; 
3.  The utterance of barks, cries or sounds that are so loud or so frequent or continue over so long a period of time as to: 
(a)  Deprive persons residing in two or more residences in the neighborhood of the comfortable enjoyment of their residence, or 
(b)  Deprive a person residing in one residence of the comfortable enjoyment of the residence where (i) due to special physical circumstances such as topography, distance between adjoining properties, placement of structures, general location of the animal being complained about, or other special physical circumstances that limit the effects of the barks, cries or sounds as to other residences or the persons in such other residences, and (ii) the poundmaster has caused an investigation to be performed in the manner described in Section 7.32.040 and such investigation confirms that sufficient evidence exists to support the special physical circumstances alleged; 
4.  An unprovoked infliction of physical injury upon any other animal which occurs off the property of the owner of the animal inflicting the injury; 
5.  The damaging of the real or personal property of some person other than the owner of the animal that occurs off the property of the owner of the animal; 
6.  The dumping of trash cans or the spreading of trash that occurs off the property of the owner of the animal; 
7.  The chasing of pedestrians, vehicles or horses that occurs off the property of the owner of the chasing animal. 
B.  Such public nuisances may be abated in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Such procedures are in addition to any other available remedies that may be available under this code and other law. 
(Ord. 1019 § 9 (part), 2008.)  
7.32.030 - Complaint. 
Any person aggrieved by one of the public nuisance conditions described in Section 7.32.020 may file a complaint with the poundmaster. Such complaint must be in writing, must be signed by and bear the address of the complainant, must state the place or places where such nuisance exists, must describe the animal and the conduct that renders it a nuisance, and must give the name and address of the animal's owner if known to the complainant. 
(Ord. 1019 § 9 (part), 2008.)  
7.32.040 - Investigation of complaint. 
Upon receipt of a complaint as described in Section 7.32.030, the poundmaster will review the matter to determine whether sufficient evidence exists to warrant an investigation to determine prima facie, whether a public nuisance exists. 
In the event that the poundmaster determines, based upon such review or based upon knowledge or information other than from the filing of a complaint, that potentially a public nuisance within the meaning of Section 7.32.020 exists, the poundmaster will conduct an investigation as described below. 
The poundmaster, for the purpose of such an investigation, must take all necessary steps in the poundmaster's discretion, including, but not limited to, observation of the animal, interviews with the animal's owner, the complainant, neighbors, and other interested persons. 
If the poundmaster concludes that sufficient evidence exists to warrant a hearing on the allegations, then the matter will be set for hearing before the poundmaster. 
(Ord. 1019 § 9 (part), 2008.)  
7.32.050 - Notice. 
If the poundmaster determines that a hearing on the allegations is warranted, then notice must be in writing and may be served either by personal delivery of a copy or depositing a copy in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person that filed the complaint and the animal's owner, with a copy of the notice to the city manager. The notice must: 
A.  Include a copy of the complaint; 
B.  State that a hearing will be held to determine whether the animal described in the complaint is a nuisance within the meaning of Section 7.32.020 and, if so, that the nuisance may be abated as provided in this chapter; 
C.  State that the animal owner may submit to the poundmaster a written response to the complaint and any other relevant written documents or other materials permitted as evidence under Section 7.32.090.C. in advance of the hearing as well as at the time of the hearing; 
D.  State the time, which may not be less than fifteen calendar days after the date of the notice, and the place of the hearing; and 
E.  Include a copy of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1019 § 9 (part), 2008.) 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 3-14-2012)  
7.32.060 - Impoundment pending hearing or final order. 
If it appears to the poundmaster from a complaint or an investigation that an animal is being maintained in a manner that poses an imminent threat to the safety of persons or property, the poundmaster may impound the animal immediately, and may hold the animal until a final order is issued under Sections 7.32.120, 7.32.130, or 7.32.140, as applicable. The owner of the animal will be liable for the costs of such impoundment in accordance with the poundmaster's current fee schedule except as provided in Sections 7.32.120.C. and 7.32.140.G. 
(Ord. 1019 § 9 (part), 2008.) 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 3, 3-14-2012)  
7.32.070 - Hearing. 
The hearing will be public and will be held before the poundmaster at the time and place noticed or at such other time or place as may be mutually agreed to by the poundmaster, the complainant, and the owner of the animal. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the poundmaster may continue the hearing to such time and place as may be reasonably necessary for the convenience of witnesses or other parties. Failure of the owner of the animal to appear at the hearing or any continuance will constitute a default. 
(Ord. 1019 § 9 (part), 2008.)  
7.32.080 - Oath. 
The poundmaster is authorized to administer oaths when necessary as part of the hearing. 
(Ord. 1019 § 9 (part), 2008.)  
7.32.090 - Evidence. 
A.  Oral evidence need not be taken under oath unless either the owner of the animal or the complainant so requests and it appears that the witness has a motive for being untruthful. Testimony may be given in an informal narrative style. 
B.  Complainant, the owner of the animal, and the poundmaster will have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though such matter was not covered on direct examination, and to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify. 
C.  Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law objection in a civil action. 
D.  Hearsay evidence may be admissible for any purpose but may not be sufficient itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in a civil action. 
(Ord. 1019 § 9 (part), 2008.)  
7.32.100 - Subpoena power. 
Before the hearing has commenced, the poundmaster may, at the request of the complainant or owner of the animal, issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum for attendance or production of documents at the hearing. Compliance with the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Section 1985 is a condition precedent to the issuance of a subpoena duces tecum. After the hearing has commenced, the poundmaster may issue such subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum as the poundmaster deems proper. Any person duly subpoenaed to appear and testify or to produce any books and papers before the poundmaster, who wrongfully neglects or refuses to appear or to testify or to produce such books and papers, may be charged with a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1019 § 9 (part), 2008.)  
7.32.110 - Record of proceedings. 
The poundmaster will record the hearing and will make such recording available to the complainant and to the owner of the animal upon request. The poundmaster will provide a copy of the recording or a transcript prepared from such recording to any party who requests it and pays the cost of making such copy or preparing such transcript. 
(Ord. 1019 § 9 (part), 2008.) 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 4, 3-14-2012)  
7.32.120 - Findings and order. 
At the conclusion of the hearing, or within a reasonable time thereafter, the poundmaster must make a written finding as to whether the animal is a public nuisance as defined in Section 7.32.020. Such finding must be supported by the weight of the evidence presented at the hearing provided that: 
A.  If no evidence is presented, the finding will be that the animal is not a public nuisance, unless the owner of the animal has defaulted by failing to appear, in which case the finding will be that the animal is a public nuisance. 
B.  If the finding is that the animal is a public nuisance, the poundmaster must determine what actions, up to and including humane destruction of the animal or removal of the animal from the possession and control of the owner, are reasonably necessary in order to abate the nuisance and will enter an order that the owner of the animal take all such actions within such time limits as the order may prescribe and abide by the terms and conditions of the order. Except as provided in Section 7.32.140, the findings and order will be final when issued and will be served promptly on the owner of the animal either by personal delivery of a copy or by depositing a copy in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner. 
C.  If the findings are that the animal is not a public nuisance and the animal has been impounded, the poundmaster will order the animal released to the owner without payment of any impound fees. If the order is that the animal be humanely destroyed or removed from the possession and control of the owner, the poundmaster must hold the animal for at least seven business days until the expiration of the appeal period provided in Section 7.32.140. 
(Ord. 1019 § 9 (part), 2008.) 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 5, 3-14-2012)  
7.32.130 - Failure to comply with poundmaster order. 
The failure of the owner of an animal to comply with an order of the poundmaster is a violation of this code and is subject to the following: 
A.  The imposition of any of the applicable penalties and remedies available under Chapters 1.12 and 1.13 of this code. 
B.  The modification of the prior order, up to and including humane destruction of the animal or removal of the animal from the possession and control of the owner, as the poundmaster may reasonably determine to be necessary in order to abate the nuisance and avoid further violations. Except as provided in Section 7.32.140, the modified order will be final when issued and will be served promptly on the owner of the animal either by personal delivery of a copy or by depositing a copy in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner. 
C.  If the modified order is that the animal be humanely destroyed or removed from the possession and control of the owner, the poundmaster must hold the animal for at least seven business days until the expiration of the appeal period provided in Section 7.32.140. 
(Ord. 1019 § 9 (part), 2008.) 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 6, 3-14-2012)  
7.32.140 - Appeal of poundmaster orders. 
A.  Appealable Orders. The owner of the animal may appeal an order of the poundmaster under Sections 7.32.120.B or 7.32.130.B for the humane destruction of the animal or the permanent removal of the animal from the possession and control of the owner if the underlying nuisance finding does not involve either (1) an unprovoked infliction of physical injury upon any person where such person is acting lawfully, or (2) an unprovoked infliction of physical injury upon any other animal which occurs off the property of the owner of the animal inflicting the injury. The poundmaster will notify the owner of such animal in writing at the time of the proposed order of humane destruction or the permanent removal of the animal from the possession and control of the owner regarding the right to appeal such determination in the manner provided in this section. 
B.  Timing of Appeal. The aggrieved owner may appeal such proposed order to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk no later than seven business days following the date the poundmaster gives notice of the order by personally serving the order or depositing it in the mail. The appeal must set forth with particularity the reasons the owner disagrees with the determination of the poundmaster. 
C.  Payment of Appeal Fee and Pound Charge. The notice of appeal must be accompanied by the applicable administrative appeal fee established by city council resolution. If the animal is impounded at the time of the filing of the appeal, the appeal must also include a deposit payable to the city equal to the impoundment charge for at least thirty days in order to defray the cost of maintaining the animal at the pound during the pendency of the administrative appeal. In the event the administrative appeal and any judicial appeal extends beyond such 30-day period, as provided in Section 7.32.060, the owner will be liable for all such additional impoundment charges unless the proposed order of the poundmaster or the decision of the city manager, as applicable, is reversed. 
D.  Setting Appeal Hearing. Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the city manager will fix a time and place for hearing the appeal. The appeal may be heard by the city manager or a hearing officer designated by the city manager. All references in this section to the city manager include a designated hearing officer. 
E.  Notice of Appeal Hearing. The city clerk must give written notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing to the appellant, and any other person requesting notice, at least five business days prior to the hearing date. The notice of the hearing may be served either by personal delivery or by depositing a copy in the United States mail, postage prepaid. 
F.  Appeal Hearing Procedure. At the hearing, the city manager will review the records and files of the poundmaster relating to the proposed order. The city manager must permit the appellant and the poundmaster to present any relevant evidence bearing on the issues involved in the matter. In conducting the hearing, the city manager is not bound by formal rules of evidence and may accept all reasonably reliable evidentiary material. 
G.  Decision. Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the city manager must determine whether the proposed order of the poundmaster should be affirmed, modified, or reversed. The city manager's decision must be communicated in writing to the appellant within five business days after the hearing is completed and must state the reasons for the decision. The notice of the decision may be served either by personal delivery or by depositing a copy in the United States mail, postage prepaid. If the proposed order of the poundmaster is reversed and the animal is ordered released to the owner, the city will promptly refund the owner's deposit for the impoundment charge and the appeal fee. 
H.  Judicial Review. The determination of the city manager will be final. The written notice of decision must be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid. The notice must advise that any action challenging the decision of the city manager must be filed with the superior court of the state pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, and must further advise that the time period within which judicial review must be sought is ninety days following the date of the city manager's written notice under Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6. If the order of the poundmaster is affirmed and the owner's animal has been impounded, the notice of determination must also advise the owner of the continuing liability for impoundment charges and request that the owner notify the city in writing within ten business days of the date of the notice whether such owner intends to pursue such judicial appeal or whether the owner consents to the humane destruction of the animal or the removal of the animal from the possession and control of the owner, as applicable. If the owner does not respond to this request, the poundmaster will continue to maintain the animal at the owner's expense at the pound and if no appeal is filed within the applicable 90-day period, upon the expiration of this appeal period, the poundmaster may proceed with the humane destruction of the animal or the removal of the animal from the possession and control of the owner, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 7, 3-14-2012)  
Title 9 - HEALTH AND SAFETY  
Chapter 9.04 - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION*  
Article I. - General Regulations 
 
9.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. Words and phrases not defined in this section have the meanings set forth in Division 30, Part 1, Chapter 2 of the Public Resources Code, Section 40105 and following, and the regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board or its successor agency. If not defined in the Public Resources Code or the board's regulations, then the applicable definitions found in the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA"), 42 U.S.C. Section 6901 and following, and the regulations implementing RCRA will apply. 
"Act" means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (sometimes referred to as "AB 939"), Public Resources Code Section 40000 and following. 
"Active composting" means that method of waste treatment in which organic solid wastes are biologically decomposed under controlled aerobic or anaerobic conditions. 
"Bulky goods" or "bulky waste" means and includes discarded large and small household appliances, furniture, carpets, mattresses, white goods, tires and oversized yard waste such as tree trunks and large branches if no larger than two feet in diameter and four feet in length and weighing not more than fifty pounds, which a solid waste collector has agreed to collect. 
"Charges" means the charges permitted to be made for solid waste collection, related services, equipment rental, and roll-off service, by a franchisee under a residential franchise, a commercial franchise, or a roll-off franchise issued under this chapter. 
"Collection" means the act of collecting solid waste. 
"Commercial bin" means a bin provided by a franchisee, approximately three cubic yards in capacity, designed for the temporary accumulation and collection of solid waste and placed by a franchisee at commercial premises. Commercial bins do not include construction bins placed at residential premises. 
"Commercial premises" means all lots or portions of a lot in the city, other than residential premises, where commercial solid wastes are generated or accumulated. 
"Commercial solid waste" means all types of solid waste, including green waste and recyclable solid waste, generated or accumulated at commercial premises and placed in commercial bins for accumulation and collection. 
"Composting" means the controlled and monitored process of converting organic waste into compost. 
"Construction bin" or "roll-off bin" means any container, commercial roll-off bin or other similar receptacle used for the accumulation, temporary storage and removal of construction and demolition waste or similar material, which is emptied by means of special collection equipment. 
"Construction and demolition waste" means used or discarded construction materials arising from the construction, renovation or demolition of a premises or structure. 
"Container" means the containers provided by or acceptable to a solid waste collector for the temporary accumulation, collection and removal of solid waste and includes any commercial bin, roll-off bin, construction bin, residential solid waste container, recycling container, green waste container, vessel, can or other receptacle. 
"Franchise" means either a commercial, residential or roll-off franchise. 
Franchise, Commercial. "Commercial franchise" means a franchise issued under this chapter that grants to a franchisee the exclusive right to collect and transport on a regular, recurring basis, solid waste from commercial premises located within the city, except as provided in Sections 9.04.040 and 9.04.050. 
Franchise, Residential. "Residential franchise" means a franchise issued under this chapter, which grants to a franchisee the exclusive right to collect and transport solid waste from residential premises, except as provided in Sections 9.04.040 and 9.04.050. 
Franchise, Roll-off. "Roll-off franchise" means a nonexclusive franchise issued under this chapter to a franchisee allowing such franchisee the right, on a nonexclusive basis, to provide roll-off bin services to responsible persons of commercial premises. 
"Franchisee" means a solid waste collector designated as a franchisee pursuant to a commercial franchise, a residential franchise, or a roll-off franchise approved by the city council authorizing the solid waste collector to provide solid waste services within the city. 
"Green waste" (also sometimes referred to as "yard waste") means a form of solid waste composed of leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches and other forms of organic matter generated from landscapes, farms and gardens, and scrap wood, separated from other forms of solid waste. Green waste does not include stumps or branches exceeding four inches in diameter or four feet in length, yucca or palm fronds, which are not suitable for composting. 
"Hazardous waste" means any waste materials or mixture of wastes defined as a "hazardous substance" or "hazardous waste" pursuant to RCRA, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act ("CERCLA"), 42 U.S.C. Sections 9601 and following or as defined by the California Integrated Waste Management Board. If there is a conflict in the definitions employed by two or more agencies having jurisdiction over hazardous or solid waste, the term hazardous waste will be construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition. 
"Proper collection location" means (1) the location that is behind but as close to the curbline or the street right-of-way as practicable for collection adjacent to a street or (2) the location that is on the lot as close to the right-of-way line of the alley as practicable for collection adjacent to an alley. 
"Recyclable material" means a material that has commercial value and that is sold for compensation or donated to an entity other than a solid waste collector. Recyclable materials are commodities and not part of the waste stream. Recyclable materials lose their character as recyclable materials upon being disposed of in the waste stream, and become solid waste subject to this chapter. 
"Recyclable solid waste" means a form of solid waste designated as a recyclable solid waste by the city, the California Integrated Waste Management Board, or any other agency with jurisdiction, and which has been separated by a solid waste service recipient from nonrecyclable solid waste. 
"Residential premises" means all residentially zoned lots used for residential purposes, excluding premises with multifamily structures consisting of five or more units. 
"Residential solid waste" means all types of solid waste, including green waste and recyclable solid waste, generated or accumulated at residential premises and placed in residential containers for accumulation and collection. 
"Residentially zoned lots" means all of those lots located within the city that are zoned for and allow a residential building or structure located on the lot, which generates, or which could generate, solid waste. 
"Responsible person" means the person responsible for the day to day operation of each commercial or residential premise in the city at which solid waste is generated or accumulated. 
"Roll-off service" means the occasional, not regularly recurring, service supplied by a franchisee, upon request of a responsible person, consisting of one or more roll-off solid waste containers, to be used for the temporary storage, accumulation and removal of solid waste resulting from a temporary lawful activity conducted upon a lot, such as the demolition or construction of a building or a structure. 
"Solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid waste generated or accumulated for collection or disposal within the city. Solid waste includes bulky waste, construction and demolition waste, and green waste. Solid waste does not include any of the following: (1) hazardous waste, (2) medical waste regulated under the Medical Waste Management Act (Part 14, commencing with Section 117600, of Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code) that has not been treated and may not be disposed of at a solid waste disposal facility, and (3) recyclable material. 
"Solid waste collector" means a solid waste enterprise that collects solid waste, or that places bins for the temporary accumulation and collection of solid waste, including construction and demolition waste, in the city, pursuant to a written franchise approved by the city council, authorizing the solid waste collector to provide solid waste services within the city. 
"Solid waste officer" means the city manager or other city officer designated to be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
In addition to these definitions, where applicable, the definitions contained in this code, including Title 19, apply to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.020 - Origin and storage of solid waste. 
No person may store, accumulate or maintain any solid waste on any commercial or residential premises, unless such solid waste was generated by a lawful use located on such premises. The storage and accumulation of solid waste on any premises permitted under this code may be temporary only, and only at such locations as are permitted by this code. Except as expressly provided in this chapter, solid waste must be stored in a container and must be placed for collection at the next regularly scheduled collection date for the premises, following the generation and accumulation of such solid waste, or otherwise removed lawfully from the premises prior to the next regularly scheduled collection date for the premises. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.030 - Collection arrangements required—Exemption. 
A.  The responsible person for each commercial and residential premise at which solid waste is generated or accumulated in the city must make arrangements with a solid waste collector for the collection of solid waste, or obtain a self-haul permit from the city, as provided for in Section 9.04.050. 
B.  Exemption Procedure. 
1.  A responsible person may apply to the solid waste officer for an exemption from this section if (a) the applicable premises has been vacant and has not generated or accumulated any solid waste for the previous sixty days, and (b) will continue to be vacant for the foreseeable future. 
2.  Application for a vacancy exemption must be made on the form provided by the city and submitted to the city's solid waste officer for review and a determination as to eligibility in accordance with the city's vacancy exemption policy. 
3.  An exemption and any extension of such exemption may be for a period of not more than one hundred eighty days. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.040 - Persons authorized to collect and transport solid waste. 
A.  Except as expressly provided in subsection (B), no person may collect or transport solid waste or green waste from any location within the city unless such person is a solid waste collector or has a self-haul permit from the city. It is unlawful for any person to permit or enter into any agreement for the collection or transportation of solid waste or green waste with any person who is not a solid waste collector. 
B.  The collection and transportation of the following types of solid waste under the circumstances indicated are exempt from the provisions of subsection (A): 
1.  Construction and demolition waste removed from the premises by a licensed contractor using its own employees and equipment as an incidental part of a total service offered by that contractor; 
2.  Green waste generated by an agricultural use on a lot where such use is permitted under this code; 
3.  Hazardous waste or medical waste; 
4.  Recyclable materials generated on a commercial or residential premise that are separated or caused to be separated from solid waste by the responsible person for such premise, and sold or donated; 
5.  Solid waste removed by a city officer, employee, or agent in the course of official duty; 
6.  Solid waste generated on a commercial or residential premise removed by the responsible person for such premise on an occasional, nonregular basis; 
7.  Waste that is the by-product of sewage treatment; 
8.  Yard waste removed from the premises by a gardening, landscaping, or tree trimming contractor as an incidental part of the total service offered by the contractor. 
C.  All solid waste collected in the city under subsection (B) must be transported to a materials handling, recovery, transfer, or disposal facility, or other site permitted by the California Integrated Waste Management Board in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.050 - Self-haul permits. 
A.  A responsible person may apply to the city for a self-haul permit to transport solid waste to a city-designated facility. 
B.  Application Form. Application for a self-haul permit must be made on the form provided by the city and submitted to the city's solid waste officer for review and a determination as to eligibility. The applicant must also pay any applicable self-haul permit fee established by city council resolution. 
C.  Reporting Requirements. Each responsible person issued a self-haul permit must submit disposal reports to the city containing such information and at a frequency as may be determined by the city's solid waste officer. Such report must include the type, quantity, volume, weight and destination of solid waste, including green waste, collected in the city and transported from the city, as well as gate tickets or receipts that substantiate the information contained in the report. 
D.  Persons issued a self-haul permit may not: (1) dispose of the solid waste generated on their premises in the container of another premises or in any public street or park container; or (2) otherwise dispose of their solid waste in violation of this chapter. 
E.  Revocation. If the solid waste officer believes that the holder of a self-haul permit is not complying with the conditions of the permit or requirements of this chapter or code, including the failure to submit a disposal report that contains all required information, then the solid waste officer must give written notice to the permit holder of the violation involved and a reasonable period of time to correct the violation before issuing an order of revocation. If the solid waste officer finds that the violation has continued without correction, then the officer may issue and serve a written order of revocation that sets forth the basis for the permit revocation. This order of revocation will be final unless timely appealed in the manner set forth in Chapter 1.14. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.060 - Containers. 
A.  Franchisee Provided. Each franchisee must provide and maintain containers for the temporary storage and disposal of solid waste for the customers of the franchisee. 
B.  General Requirements. Containers utilized for the temporary storage of solid waste generated on any lot must be capable of holding without spilling, leaking or emitting excessive odors, all solid waste, which would ordinarily accumulate on the premises between the time of two successive collections. The size of the container must be consistent with city regulations or the provisions of the applicable franchise agreement. 
C.  Maintenance. The responsible person for each residential or commercial premises must maintain all containers on the premises in a sanitary condition. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.070 - Placement of containers. 
A.  General. No person may place or cause to be placed for collection solid waste or any container containing solid waste, at any place or in any manner other than as provided in this chapter. Solid waste that does not need to be placed in a container for collection may be placed at the same locations as solid waste required to be placed for collection within a container. 
B.  Time of Placement. No person may place a container adjacent to a street or public right-of-way before twelve noon on the day before the regularly scheduled collection day, nor may any person place any bulky goods adjacent to a street or public right-of-way before six p.m. on the day before the collection day set by the solid waste collector. All containers or bulky goods must be placed in a proper collection location by six-thirty a.m. on the day of collection. 
C.  Location of Placement. Any such container or solid waste permitted to be placed for collection adjacent to a street, must be placed behind but as close to the curbline or the street right-of-way line as practicable. Any such container or solid waste permitted to be placed for collection adjacent to an alley, must be placed on the lot, as close to the right-of-way line of the alley as practicable. 
D.  Return to Storage Location. After the collection of solid waste, each container must be promptly removed by no later than twelve midnight on the regular collection day, and returned to a location on the lot where the container cannot be viewed from the street. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.080 - Removal of containers. 
No person, other than a responsible person or a solid waste collector, may remove or move any container from the location where the container was placed for storage or collection without the prior written approval of the responsible person. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.090 - Anti-scavenging. 
No person other than a responsible person or such person's authorized employees or agents may remove, interfere with, or disturb any solid waste, green waste, or recyclable materials once placed in the applicable container for temporary storage and collection or any bulky goods placed in a proper collection location. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.100 - Clean up of solid waste spills. 
Any person transporting solid waste within the city must clean up immediately, or arrange for the immediate cleanup, of any solid waste released, spilled or dumped during collection, removal or transport. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.110 - Burning of solid waste. 
No person may cause or permit the burning of any solid waste within the city. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.120 - Commingling of green waste with other forms of solid waste prohibited. 
No person may place or cause to be placed for collection green waste in any container designated for the collection of any other form of solid waste. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.130 - Composting. 
The provisions of this chapter do not prohibit active composting in containers, unless such composting is otherwise expressly prohibited under other provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.140 - Additional regulations and policies. 
In addition to the requirements of this chapter and the provisions of a franchise agreement, the city manager may issue written regulations and policies to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
Article II. - Franchise Regulations 
 
9.04.150 - Residential solid waste franchise. 
The city council periodically may award an exclusive residential solid waste franchise to a qualified solid waste collector that authorizes such franchisee to collect, transport, and dispose of all solid waste generated from all residential premises except as provided under Sections 9.04.040 and 9.04.050. The franchisee under a residential franchise must also provide residential roll-off service upon the request of any responsible person. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.160 - Commercial solid waste franchises. 
A.  Commercial Franchise. The city council may periodically award an exclusive commercial solid waste franchise to a qualified solid waste collector authorizing such franchisee to collect, transport, and dispose of all commercial solid waste generated from all commercial premises except: (1) as authorized under Sections 9.04.040 and 9.04.050; (2) a franchise under a roll-off franchise; and (3) as permitted by other applicable law. 
B.  Roll-off Franchises. The city council may periodically award a nonexclusive roll-off franchise to a qualified solid waste collector authorizing such franchisee to collect, transport, and dispose of commercial solid waste generated from any commercial premises, at the request of a responsible person, on a temporary basis of not more than thirty consecutive days, and not more than sixty total days in any calendar year, for each such commercial premise. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.170 - Form of franchise. 
Each franchise awarded under this chapter must be in the form of a written franchise agreement that is approved by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.180 - Contents of franchises. 
Each franchise awarded under this chapter must contain, among other matters, the following provisions: 
A.  A provision for a franchise fee in an amount to be determined by the city council. 
B.  A provision requiring compliance with all city recycling plans and programs as may be adopted, amended or implemented in the future by the city council including a provision requiring the payment of additional fees by the franchisee to the city to be utilized for the purpose of the implementation of such recycling plans and programs. 
C.  A provision requiring compliance with all applicable provisions of this code, including this chapter. 
D.  A provision restricting assignment except as approved by the city council. 
E.  A provision requiring that all fees and charges billed or collected by each franchisee, except a franchisee under a roll-off franchise, for its franchised services must not exceed the maximum schedule of fees and charges approved by the city council. 
F.  A provision securing whatever rights, if any, the city may have to designate the site or sites for disposal or processing of solid waste. 
G.  A provision granting to the city the right to provide for substitute collection services upon the default of a franchisee under an exclusive franchise, at the cost of the franchisee, including a liquidated damages provision. 
H.  Each franchisee, at all times during the term of its franchise, must maintain liability insurance with companies and in such reasonable amounts and coverages as approved by the city manager. In addition, each such franchisee must maintain during the term of its franchise workers' compensation insurance coverage as required by law, or have in place a legally approved qualified self-insurance plan for such workers' compensation coverage. 
I.  Each franchisee must at all times during the term of its franchise maintain on file with the city clerk proof of insurance evidencing the existence of all required insurance coverage in such reasonable form as approved by the city attorney. 
J.  Such other provisions as the city council may require in order to comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.190 - Franchisee collection equipment. 
A.  Any truck or vehicle used for the collection or transportation of solid waste within the city must: 
1.  Be leak proof and equipped with a close-fitting cover which must be affixed in a manner that will prevent spilling, dropping or blowing of any solid waste upon the public right-of-way during collection or transportation; 
2.  Be identified with the franchisee's name and have a unique vehicle number displayed in a prominent location; 
3.  Be kept clean and in good repair at all times. 
B.  Any container provided by a franchisee to a customer for the collection of solid waste within the city must: 
1.  Be labeled with the name of the franchisee, the franchisee's telephone number, and a unique identifier; 
2.  Be posted with a sign stating that the container is not to be used for the disposal of hazardous waste; 
3.  Be maintained in a manner that protects public health and safety and prevents the spread of vectors; 
4.  Be maintained free from any exterior paint or markings commonly referred to as "graffiti" or "tagging." Upon notice by the city of any graffiti or tagging on a container identified by address or unique identifier, such graffiti or tagging must be removed or painted over within seventy-two hours, weekends and holidays excepted. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.200 - Restrictions on transfer. 
A franchise may not be transferred except as follows: 
For purposes of this section, "transfer" means any sale, lease, assignment or transfer, either in whole or in part, to any person, either by act of the holder of the franchise or by operation of law. 
A.  A franchise may not be transferred without the prior written consent of the city. For purposes of this section, any sale, dissolution, merger, consolidation or other reorganization of the holder of a franchise or the sale or other transfer of an accumulative ten percent or more of the voting stock of a corporate franchisee by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, who already own less than fifty percent of the voting stock of the holder of the franchise will be deemed a change in control. Any attempt of the holder of the franchise to assign the franchise without the prior written consent of the city will be void. 
B.  An application for a transfer of a franchise must be made in the manner prescribed by the city manager. The application must include a franchise transfer application fee in an amount to be set by city council resolution, to cover the anticipated cost of all reasonable and customary direct and indirect administrative expenses including, but not limited to, consultants and attorneys fees and costs, necessary to analyze the application and to reimburse city for direct and indirect expenses. In addition, the franchisee must reimburse the city for all reasonable consultants, attorneys and staff costs not covered by the franchise transfer application fee, whether or not the city approves the application for transfer. The city's demand for reimbursement must be supported by evidence of the expenses and costs incurred. The franchisee and the applicant for transfer will be jointly and severally liable for the payment of any reasonable consultants', attorneys' and staff costs not covered by the franchise transfer application fee. 
C.  The applicant for a transfer of a franchise will have the burden of demonstrating that it has the operational and financial ability to meet all obligations of the franchise. 
D.  The city may withhold its consent to a transfer of the franchise and may require amendment of any franchise as a condition of approval of the transfer of any franchise. 
E.  Notwithstanding the above, the franchisee may pledge, encumber, or grant any security interest in the franchise provided that the franchisee first notifies and obtains city consent to such transaction, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Any consent granted will not be deemed a consent to the exercise by such pledgee, encumbrancer, or secured party of any rights of the franchisee under the franchise unless approved by the city; 
2.  Any consent granted will not be deemed a consent to any subsequent transfer or assignment; 
3.  The pledgee, encumbrancer or secured party must execute and deliver to the city a written instrument, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, expressing agreement to be bound by the provisions of the franchise. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.210 - Termination of franchise. 
A franchise may be subject to termination as provided in this section. 
A.  Investigation. If the city manager has reason to believe that a franchisee is operating in a manner contrary to the provisions of the franchise, or any applicable law, including this chapter, the city manager may investigate such facts and circumstances. If the city manager's investigation demonstrates that the franchisee is operating in a manner contrary to such franchise or any applicable law, the city manager must advise the franchisee in writing of the results of such preliminary investigation. 
B.  Hearing. If significant potential violations are found, the city manager may set the matter for a hearing and must give the franchisee, and any other person who has requested notice, not less than ten days written notice of the time and place of such hearing. The city manager will act as the hearing officer and will permit any interested person, including the franchisee, to offer any reliable evidentiary material to show that the franchisee either did, or did not, conduct its operations in accordance with its franchise or any applicable law. If the city manager determines, based upon the evidence presented, that the franchisee has not operated in accordance with its franchise or the provisions of any applicable law, the city manager will issue an order terminating the franchise ("order"). Such order must contain a statement of findings and conclusions upon which such order is based, and the effective date of such termination. If the city manager finds that the evidence is not sufficient to establish a failure to comply with the franchise, the city manager will terminate the proceedings. The decision of the city manager will be final in the absence of a timely appeal. 
C.  Appeals. Any franchisee aggrieved by the issuance of a termination order has the right to appeal such order in the manner provided in Chapter 1.14. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
Article III. - Rate Setting and Liability for Charges and Fees 
 
9.04.220 - Liability for collection charges and fees. 
The responsible person for each residential and commercial premise is liable for all applicable fees and charges pertaining to the applicable collection service. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.230 - Setting of maximum residential collection charges. 
A.  At a noticed public hearing, the city council may establish, by resolution, a ceiling on the amounts of charges that a franchisee may charge for residential solid waste collection in addition to any required fees. Except as provided in subsection (B), the city council may consider adjustments to the maximum permitted charges once per calendar year. The ceiling on residential rate charges may not be increased without prior approval of the city council. 
B.  The franchisee may petition the city council for an increase in a rate ceiling to offset unusual changes in the franchisee's costs of doing business, such as revised federal, state or county laws, ordinances or regulations, significant changes in disposal charges, or change of disposal sites or materials recovery facilities. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
9.04.240 - Delinquent charges and fees—Penalties. 
A.  Delinquent Charges and Fees for Residential Service. If the responsible person fails to pay the solid waste collection charges and fees due for any residential collection service that is billed by the city on behalf of the franchisee on or before the 21st day following the date of the billing, the charges and fees will be deemed delinquent. 
B.  Residential Service Penalties. Penalties will be imposed upon all delinquent residential service charges and fees as follows: 
1.  Basic Penalty. A basic penalty of ten percent of the total delinquent charges and fees applicable will be imposed as of the date of any such delinquency. 
2.  Additional Penalties. An additional penalty of ten percent will be imposed on the total delinquent charges and fees on each billing date upon which the charges and fees remain unpaid. 
3.  Limit of Penalty. The total penalty imposed may not exceed one hundred percent of the total of any such delinquent account. 
C.  Cessation of Residential Service for Delinquent Accounts. If residential service charges and fees remain delinquent for two months, following written notice to the responsible person, collection services may be halted and any containers provided by the franchisee removed from the premises. The city, on behalf of the franchisee, may impose a fee for the costs associated with the removal and storage of any container from a residential premise due to nonpayment. If the responsible person causes or permits the interference with the franchisee's ability to remove any container from the premises, charges will continue to accrue for service until the franchisee is able to remove the applicable containers. Upon payment of the delinquent fees and charges, containers will be returned to the premises and the franchisee will resume collection. Payment of any delinquent account by check will generally result in a delay of twelve business days to resume collection service or such time as it takes for the check to clear. 
(Ord. 1028 § 1 (part), 2008.)  
Chapter 9.06 - RECYCLING PROGRAMS 
 
9.06.010 - Multifamily recycling facilities. 
To protect public health, safety and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, the person in charge of day-to-day operations at each lot located in the city which has thereon five or more residential dwellings or condominium units, or a mobilehome park, shall provide a recycling program, including recyclable material, as defined in Section 9.04.020, and, if applicable, green waste, as defined in Section 9.04.020, for such residential units, condominium units and mobilehomes, in accordance with each of the following: 
A.  The person in charge of day-to-day operations of each lot located in the city which has thereon five or more residential dwellings or condominium units, or a mobilehome park, shall provide containers for the temporary accumulation and storage of recyclable material at each area or place on the lot at which the person in charge of day-to-day activities provides containers for the temporary accumulation and storage of solid waste or, in the alternative, participate in a city-approved recycling program. 
B.  The containers for the temporary accumulation and storage of recyclable materials shall be placed adjacent to the place where containers for the collection of other forms of solid waste are located. 
C.  The person in charge of day-to-day operations of each lot located in the city which has thereon five or more residential dwellings or condominium units, or a mobilehome park, shall provide for the collection of recyclable materials not less often than once per week. 
(Ord. 903 § 2, 1998: Ord. 873 § 1 (part), 1997.)  
9.06.020 - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in Chapter 9.04 shall be applicable to this chapter. 
(Ord. 873 § 1 (part), 1997.)  
9.06.030 - Recycling reporting requirements. 
To enable the city to meet its obligations to meet solid waste recycling goals and to report its progress in meeting such goals, each person who collects recyclable material and source-separated recyclable solid waste shall submit reports to the city manager on the types and quantities of recyclable materials and recyclable solid wastes which are disposed of, sold to end users, or which are sold to exporters or transporters for sale outside of the city. The city manager may adopt regulations pursuant to this section that are reasonable and necessary for the city to meet its reporting requirements. The regulations shall not impose an unreasonable burden on the handling, processing and marketing of recyclable materials or recyclable solid waste. 
(Ord. 904 § 2, 1998.)  
Chapter 9.07 - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION—RECYCLING ACTIVITIES—CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS 
 
9.07.010 - Temporary storage—Solid waste—Recyclables—Construction. 
Each owner of a lot, or person in possession of a lot, who is engaged in or who causes any construction or reconstruction activity on such lot located within the city, shall provide: 
A.  Containers for the temporary accumulation and storage of solid waste and recyclable material at each such location; and 
B.  For the collection of solid waste and recyclable materials in accordance with the provisions of this code; and 
C.  To the extent possible, for the separation of the following materials from the waste stream at the construction site for recovery and/or recycling and/or reuse: asphalt; concrete; wood, brush, and lumber; dirt, earth, gravel, and rocks; masonry; metal; and cardboard. 
(Ord. 932 § 1 (part), 1999.)  
9.07.020 - Construction cleanup activities. 
Each person who is employed or engaged for the purpose of providing construction or reconstruction debris cleanup services on any lot located within the city shall: 
A.  Provide for the collection of solid waste and recyclable materials in accordance with the provisions of this code; and/or 
B.  To the extent possible, separate the following materials from the waste stream at the construction site for recovery and/or recycling and/or reuse: asphalt; concrete; wood, brush, and lumber; dirt, earth, gravel, and rocks; masonry; metal; and cardboard. 
(Ord. 932 § 1 (part), 1999.)  
Chapter 9.08 - STORAGE OF REFUSE COLLECTION VEHICLES 
 
9.08.010 - Storing refuse vehicle unlawful—Exception. 
No person shall store, park or otherwise keep any vehicle, including trailer or portable container used in conjunction with any vehicle for collection, transporting, depositing or disposal of garbage, refuse or human or animal waste except as permitted by this chapter. 
(Ord. 87 § 1, 1967.)  
9.08.020 - Permit required. 
Any person desiring to store or park any such vehicle shall first apply for and obtain a permit from the planning department. No such permit shall be required for the parking of any such vehicle while actually engaged in the collection of any garbage, refuse or human or animal waste, nor for the keeping of any container at a point of collection by one receiving collection service. 
(Ord. 87 § 2, 1967.)  
9.08.030 - Application. 
Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing the proposed use of the property for such storage or parking and shall contain a statement of the following information: 
A.  The location of the property; 
B.  A description of the improvements, including the uses thereof, located within one hundred fifty feet of the boundary lines of the property for which the permit is sought; 
C.  Use of the vehicles or containers which will be stored or parked; 
D.  The time of day during which such vehicles or containers will be kept on the premises; 
E.  The number of vehicles or containers which will be kept on the premises; 
F.  Such other information as the planning department may require. 
(Ord. 87 § 3, 1967.)  
9.08.040 - Issuance when. 
The planning commission may grant a permit in accordance with any such application for the parking or storage of any such vehicle or container within any "M" zone, as defined in Title 19 of this code, if it finds that the granting of such permit will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare and will not be contrary to or in conflict with the general purposes and intent of Title 19. Any permit so issued shall provide the following: 
A.  No such vehicle or container shall be stored or parked closer than one hundred fifty feet to any residence or restaurant. 
B.  The storage area shall be surrounded by a six-foot solid wall with no opening for the passage of vehicles in excess of twelve feet in width. Any such opening shall be fitted with self-closing gates of solid material. 
C.  There shall be no cleaning or maintenance of such vehicle or container. 
D.  There shall be no transfer of garbage, refuse or human or animal waste from one vehicle or container to another. 
(Ord. 87 § 4, 1967.)  
Chapter 9.12 - PUBLIC NUISANCES—REAL PROPERTY* 
 
9.12.010 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions shall govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter: 
"Building" has the same meaning as set forth in the zoning regulations of this code. 
"Controlled substances" means any substance that is declared or defined by state or federal law to be a controlled substance. 
"Director" means the director of community development or designee. 
"Hazardous materials" means any material or substance of any kind that is declared by any federal, state, or local law, ordinance, or regulation to be composed, in whole or in part, of hazardous material or hazardous substances. 
"Lot" has the same meaning as set forth in the zoning regulations of this code. 
"Occupant," when used in connection with a lot, building, or structure, means any person, including an owner, who has the legal or equitable right to use, occupy, or possess the same, on either an exclusive or nonexclusive basis. 
"Owner," when used in reference to a lot, building, or structure, means any person who holds a legal or equitable interest therein. 
"Structure" has the same meaning as set forth in the zoning regulations of this code. 
"Use" has the same meaning as set forth in the zoning regulation of this code. 
The definitions set forth in other chapters of this code shall apply to this chapter. 
(Ord. 947 § 3, 2002: Ord. 841 § 1 (part), 1995.)  
9.12.020 - Maintenance of property—Public nuisance. 
It is declared to be a public nuisance for the owner and/or occupant of any lot located in this city to maintain or permit the maintenance on any such lot: 
A.  Any building or structure which: 
1.  Is structurally unsafe; and/or 
2.  Is not provided with adequate ingress and egress; and/or 
3.  Which constitutes a fire hazard; and/or 
4.  Which constitutes a health hazard; and/or 
5.  Is otherwise dangerous to human life; and/or 
B.  Topography which, whether in natural state or as a result of erosion or grading operations, causes, or is likely to cause, erosion, subsidence or surface water run-off which will, or may be, injurious to persons and/or to adjacent public or private properties; and/or 
C.  Any condition which constitutes a fire or health hazard including, but not limited to, overgrowth of vegetation or the accumulation of debris; and/or 
D.  Any building or structure in such condition so that the same is defective, unsightly or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes, or may be reasonably expected to cause, any diminution of the property values of buildings and/or structures located on adjacent lots or to the city as a whole and/or its residents, and/or interferes with the peaceful use, possession and/or enjoyment of such adjacent lots and/or improvements on such adjacent lots; and/or 
E.  Any building, structure or use which has been constructed and/or is maintained in violation of any applicable law, as such laws now exist or may hereafter be lawfully amended or otherwise made applicable to such building or structure including, but not limited to, the provisions of this code; and/or 
F.  Any building, use or structure which does not comply with all of the regulations and provisions of this code, including, but not limited to, the city's official zoning ordinance, as it now exists, or as it may hereafter lawfully be amended or otherwise made applicable to such building, use or structure; and/or 
G.  Any material the existence of which constitutes, or may constitute, a danger to persons or property, including, but not limited to, hazardous materials; and/or 
H.  Any building, use or structure wherein one or more persons engages in two or more acts which are prohibited pursuant to the laws of the state of California, the provisions of this code or any other penal ordinance of this city, including, but not limited to the following acts: 
1.  Unlawful possession and/or use of Controlled Substances; and/or 
2.  Prostitution; and/or 
3.  Gambling; and/or 
4.  Solicitation for any unlawful conduct. 
As used in this subsection (H), "one or more" includes employees, partners, principals, joint venturers, corporate officers, agents and/or other persons, acting at the direction of, and/or with the knowledge and/or consent of the owner and/or occupant of the lot or the building, structure or use located thereon, who commits conduct of all or any of the acts described in this subsection (H), in the utilization of such building, structure or use. 
I.  Any animal, reptile or insect in such a manner as to pose a threat, disturbance, danger or menace to persons or property of another; or 
J.  Any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery such that the operation or maintenance causes noise, vibrations, dust, exhaust or fumes which cause or may cause discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of the residents in the area; or 
K.  Underground or aboveground storage vessels or tanks if the use of the same has ceased for a period in excess of six months or more; or 
L.  Refuse, rubbish, garbage, offal, animal excrement or other waste materials which are not stored and disposed of in accordance with provisions of this code or other applicable law; or 
M.  A method of disposing of animal excrement in such a manner as to expose the excrement to fly and/or maggot infestation or resultant odor; or 
N.  Animal excrement so as to permit the same to run off onto any adjacent property; or 
O.  The accumulation or storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative trailers, campers, boats, airplanes, automobiles, vehicles or other mobile equipment, or parts thereof, on any portion of a lot which is visible from the public right-of-way or any adjoining properties unless such is stored or parked in a lawful manner on the lots; or 
P.  An attractive nuisance which is or may be dangerous to children, including but not limited to: 
1.  Abandoned or broken equipment or machinery, or 
2.  Unfenced or otherwise unprotected swimming pools, spas, ponds or excavations, or 
3.  Refrigerators, iceboxes or deepfreeze lockers having a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more which is not being used, without removing the door or such portion of the latch, magnetic gasket or locking mechanism as will prevent the latching or locking of the door, or 
4.  Uncapped or otherwise dangerous wells; or 
Q.  Broken or discarded furniture or household furnishings and/or equipment; or 
R.  Garbage or trash containers which are stored contrary to the provisions of this code, except when lawfully placed for collection at the times permitted therefore; or 
S.  Packing boxes, lumber, junk, trash or other materials and debris maintained outside of a building; or 
T.  Any building, fence, landscaping or structure, and/or the access thereto, so that the same is subjected to the repeated placement of graffiti thereon. For the purpose of this subsection (T), the words "building," "fence," "landscaping," "structure," and "graffiti" shall be defined as is set forth in Chapter 10.48, commencing with Section 10.48.010 et seq., of this code; or 
U.  An area equalling fifty percent or more of the lot containing weeds or grasses in excess of twelve inches in height; or 
V.  Weeds, rubbish or other material in such a manner as to constitute a source of wingy or downy seeds when mature. 
W.  Any violation of Chapter 9.32 of this code. 
(Ord. 892 § 4, 1998; Ord. 841 § 1 (part), 1995.)  
9.12.150 - Spill on private property. 
Where a spill, as defined in Section 9.14.010 et seq., occurs on private property, the same shall be deemed to be a public nuisance within the meaning of this code, and shall be subject to the nuisance abatement process in this code. 
(Ord. 947 § 4, 2002: Ord. 870 § 2, 1997.)  
Chapter 9.14 - PUBLIC PROPERTY—NUISANCE ABATEMENT 
 
9.14.010 - Materials spill—Cleanup costs. 
Whenever a spill of any materials or substances, including, but not limited to, hazardous substances declared to be such by applicable state or federal laws or regulations ("spill"), occurs on any public property, including, but not limited to, public streets, alleys, rights-of-way, sewers and storm drains, the same shall be deemed to be a public nuisance. The person or persons who caused such spill shall be responsible to the city, as a civil debt, for all costs, direct and indirect, incurred by the city in the cleanup or elimination of such spill (collectively "cleanup") and for all damages proximately caused by such spill ("damages"). 
Where a spill occurs, the director of public services ("director") shall give notice to the person causing the spill that if the same is not remedied in a timely manner, that the cleanup will be done by city forces and a charge will be made therefor against the person or persons causing the spill. If the nature and extent of the spill permits, the director shall give a reasonable time to such person(s) to effect the cleanup. If the person(s) responsible for the spill does not respond in a timely manner to the director and commence the cleanup, or if the spill is such as to constitute an immediate threat to persons or to property in the vicinity and/or the nature of the spill is such that it must be subject to an immediate cleanup, the director shall cause the cleanup to be accomplished. 
Upon completion of the necessary cleanup of the spill by the city, the city manager shall conduct a hearing in the time and manner set forth in Section 9.12.100 et seq., of this code and shall determine the cost to the city of the abatement of the nuisance, including, but not limited to, staff salaries, administrative costs, including overhead, and attorneys' fees, which amount, together with the amount of damages, if any, shall be deemed to be a civil debt to the city owed by the person or persons who caused this spill. 
When the city manager has made a final determination on the amount of the civil debt, the city clerk shall give notice thereof to the person(s) who are liable to the city for the payment thereof. Such sum shall be due and payable immediately upon the giving of notice by the city clerk of the city manager's determination with respect to costs and damages. Interest shall be due upon the amount of the civil debt owed to the city and shall be paid to the city by the responsible person(s), from the date of the issuance of the order by the city manager to the date that the same is paid in full. The interest rate thereon shall be the interest rate which is applicable to judgments issued by court of record in the state of California. 
The city manager may direct the filing of a civil action to recover a civil debt as described in this chapter. In the event that the court awards a judgment to the city as and for all or any part of such civil debt, the court shall also award reasonable attorneys' fees to the city necessarily incurred in collection of the said civil debt. 
(Ord. 870 § 1, 1997.)  
Chapter 9.16 - ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS 
 
9.16.010 - Refrigerators, iceboxes and deepfreeze lockers. 
No person shall leave or allow to remain in any place accessible to children any refrigerator, icebox or deepfreeze locker having a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more which is temporarily not being used without removing the door or such portion of the latch or locking mechanism as will prevent the latching or locking of the door, or without taking reasonable precautions to effectively secure the door to prevent children from entering into such refrigerator, icebox or deepfreeze locker. 
(Ord. 37 § 1, 1965: prior code § 4303.)  
Chapter 9.17 - NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURES 
 
9.17.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and Government Code §§ 38771-38773.7, including any successor statutes, for the purpose of establishing nuisance abatement procedures. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to, nor shall it, preclude the city from pursuing any other available civil or criminal remedies concurrently or in addition to the proceedings established by this chapter to enforce this code. 
(Ord. 947 § 5 (part), 2002.)  
9.17.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions shall govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter: 
"Director" means the director of community development or designee. 
"Hearing officer" means city manager or designee. 
"Incidental expenses" include, without limitation, actual expenses, city administrative costs and other costs of the city of all previous code enforcement efforts, the preparation of the abatement work specifications, contracts, and staff time in inspecting the work, as well as the costs of printing, posting and mailings required by this chapter. 
"Responsible person" means any person or persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining a public nuisance as defined by this code including, without limitation, any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of real property. 
(Ord. 947 § 5 (part), 2002.)  
9.17.030 - Abatement of nuisance. 
All or any part of a use or the condition of any lot, including, without limitation, any use, or improvement, found to constitute a public nuisance, shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition, repair, cessation of use or a combination thereof, or in such other manner as designated in a nuisance abatement order, which is reasonably required to abate the public nuisance, pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 947 § 5 (part), 2002.)  
9.17.040 - Responsibility for abatement. 
Whenever a director reasonably believes a public nuisance exists, the director may commence abatement proceedings under this chapter. 
(Ord. 947 § 5 (part), 2002)  
9.17.050 - Notice of hearings for nuisance abatement. 
A.  Notices. To initiate abatement proceedings, the department director shall cause written notice to be mailed and conspicuously posted on the property containing a nuisance. The posted notice shall be titled in letters at least one inch in height and read substantially as follows: 
Notice of Public Nuisance Hearing 
On _______ 20___, the City of Camarillo shall determine whether this property known and designated as _______, constitutes a public nuisance. If this property is found to constitute a public nuisance as defined by the Camarillo Municipal Code ("CMC"), and if the public nuisance is not promptly abated by the responsible person as ordered by the hearing officer, then the city shall abate the nuisance. If the city abates the nuisance, the cost of these proceedings, all previous code enforcement efforts concerning this condition of the property, and the cleaning, clearing, rehabilitation, repair, or demolition by the city shall constitute a special assessment and a Nuisance Abatement Lien upon such land until paid. The city may foreclose on any such lien in order to reimburse the city for these costs. 
The alleged violations consist of the following: 
The methods of abatement available are: 
All persons having any objection to, or interest in, said matters should attend a hearing to be conducted by the city manager or designee, to be held at _______ on _______, _______ at the hour of ___.m., when their testimony and evidence shall be heard and given due consideration. 
Dated: 
___________ 
Department Officer 
B.  Mailing/posting. Notice of the hearing shall be served by posting the subject property and by registered or certified mail (postage fully prepaid) addressed to the owner of the property at the address appearing on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current before the hearing notice is mailed. The notice shall be posted on the property and mailed at least ten days before the hearing date. Proof of posting and mailing shall be by declaration. Failure of any person to receive the notice shall not affect the validity of any [notice] set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 947 § 5 (part), 2002.)  
9.17.060 - Hearing procedure. 
A.  The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer. At the time set for such hearing, the hearing officer shall conduct a hearing to determine based upon the evidence presented whether a public nuisance exists on the subject property. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall accept reliable evidence from any person if such evidence bears on the issue of whether a public nuisance exists on the subject property. The hearing officer is authorized to take testimony and is authorized to administer oaths or affirmations under the Code of Civil Procedure § 2093(a). Based upon the evidence submitted including, without limitation, any written staff reports regarding the alleged nuisance, the hearing officer shall determine whether or not a public nuisance exists on the subject property. 
B.  As soon as is practicable following the close of such hearing, the hearing officer shall render a decision on the matter. If a public nuisance is found to exist, the hearing officer shall issue an order requiring the abatement of the public nuisance in a reasonable time and manner as set forth in the order. The hearing officer shall promptly give written notice to the responsible person and any other interested person who requests, in writing, notice of such decision, including a copy of the order. The order issued by the hearing officer shall be deemed a final order and may be judicially reviewed pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6. There is no right to a city council appeal. 
(Ord. 947 § 5 (part), 2002.)  
9.17.070 - Compliance with abatement order. 
At no cost to the city, the responsible person shall comply with all of the provisions of an abatement order. If the responsible person fails, for any reason, to comply with an abatement order within the time required in the order, the city manager, or designee, shall cause the nuisance described in the abatement order to be abated by city forces or by private contractor. The city attorney is authorized to take such action as needed to gain entry upon the property where the public nuisance exists for purposes of abating a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 947 § 5 (part), 2002.)  
9.17.080 - City expenses—Record of costs. 
The director shall keep an account of the costs, including incidental expenses, of abating [the] nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done. 
(Ord. 947 § 5 (part), 2002.)  
9.17.090 - Hearing on the cost of abatement. 
A.  The director shall give notice of the cost of abatement by registered or certified mail (postage fully prepaid) addressed to the owner of the property at the address appearing on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current before mailing of the cost notice. The cost notice shall include a statement of the hearing rights of the property owner concerning the cost of abatement. Upon written request for a hearing by the property owner received by the city manager within ten days after mailing the cost notice, a hearing shall be held by the city manager, or designee, on the question of the cost of the abatement. 
B.  Notice of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten days before the hearing by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land. The city manager or designee shall either confirm the cost of abatement or modify such amount. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final. The city manager or designee shall give notice of the decision on the cost of abatement by registered or certified mail to the property owner. 
(Ord. 947 § 5 (part), 2002.)  
9.17.100 - Nuisance abatement lien and special assessment procedures. 
A.  Lien and/or Assessment. Any person failing to abate a public nuisance as ordered pursuant to this chapter will be liable for the all city costs and expenses associated with abating the nuisance. A nuisance abatement lien in favor of the city for such costs and expenses may be recorded against the property on which the nuisance is maintained pursuant to this section and/or the city may place a special assessment against the property for such costs and expenses. 
B.  Notice of Proposed Lien and/or Assessment. Prior to filing the lien, the city clerk must give ten day's notice to the property owner by first-class and certified mail, addressed to the property owner's address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of the county of Ventura, whichever is more current. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the proposed lien in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and by publishing notice of the lien in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in the manner provided by Government Code Section 6062. If the city intends to make the lien an assessment against the subject property, the notice must specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. 
C.  Recording. Upon recordation, the lien will have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien and may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law. 
D.  Special Assessment. In addition to, or as an alternative to recordation of a lien, the city may collect the amount owed as a special assessment against the property owner's parcel. To do so, the city must present a copy of the lien to the county auditor controller to add the amount of the lien to the next regular property tax bill levied against the parcel for municipal purposes. This amount will be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected, and will be subject to the same penalties and procedures under foreclosure and sale as provided for with ordinary municipal taxes. 
E.  Satisfaction of Lien. Once the city receives full payment for the outstanding principal, penalties, and costs related to a recorded lien, the city clerk will cause to be recorded a notice of satisfaction at the county recorder's office. This notice of satisfaction will cancel the city's lien. 
(Ord. 1017 § 3, 2007: Ord. 947 § 5 (part), 2002.)  
9.17.110 - Order for treble costs of abatement. 
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with this article, except conditions abated pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 17980, the court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. 
(Ord. 947 § 5 (part), 2002.)  
9.17.120 - Judicial remedies. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city attorney from: 
1.  Commencing a civil action in the superior court to enforce all or any of the provisions of any abatement order; 
2.  Commencing a civil action to abate a public nuisance as an alternative, to or in conjunction with, an administrative proceeding pursuant to this chapter; 
3.  Filing a civil action to recover the amount of a confirmed accounting from an owner or occupant of the lot to which it relates; or 
4.  Filing a criminal action to enforce this code. 
B.  Where a civil action is filed, if the court issues an order or a judgment which finds a public nuisance to exist, and orders or approves the abatement of the public nuisance, or where the court validates an accounting, the court may also award the city its actual costs of abatement, including, without limitation, reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in such judicial proceeding. 
(Ord. 947 § 5 (part), 2002.)  
9.17.130 - Emergency abatement. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, whenever the city manager, or designee, determines that a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, or in any other applicable law, exists upon a lot, and that such public nuisance constitutes an immediate threat or hazard or danger to persons or property, the city manager, without observing procedures set forth in this chapter with reference to public nuisance abatement, may forthwith immediately cause the abatement of such public nuisance in such manner as the city manager, or designee, determines is reasonably required. If the city manager, or designee, deems it feasible, the city manager, or designee, shall attempt to give the owner and occupant, verbal notice of the existence of the public nuisance, and the proposed timing and method of abatement thereof. The city manager shall, forthwith, report such circumstances to the city council. Where such abatement is ordered by the city manager, the person abating such nuisance shall, after completing the abatement of the public nuisance, comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 947 § 5 (part), 2002.)  
Chapter 9.20 - PUBLIC HEALTH PERMITS AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
9.20.010 - Purposes and authority. 
The purposes of this chapter are to establish a permit system for activities subject to state statutes, orders, quarantines, rules or regulations and city ordinances relating to environmental health; and to provide for the collection of fees necessary to pay reasonable expenses resulting from the enforcement thereof as authorized by Sections 480, 481,482 and 1155.6(d) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.020 - Appointment of health officer. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Health and Safety Code Sections 476, 477 and 1155.6, the director of environmental health of the county is directed to enforce and observe in the city all orders, quarantine regulations and rules prescribed by the State Department of Public Health, all other rules and regulations issued under the provisions of the Health and Safety Code, the provisions of this chapter and all statutes now or hereafter enacted relating to environmental health and sanitation services. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases should be construed as set forth in this section unless it is apparent that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Bakery," "organized camp," "retail food production and marketing establishment," "public water system," "itinerant restaurant," "restaurant," "vending machine location," "ice plant," "self-contained ice plant," "ice distributor," and "ice distribution vehicle" have the meanings assigned for each in the California Health and Safety Code. 
B.  "Commissary" means any food processing establishment as defined in Section 28280.1 of the California Health and Safety Code which purveys food exclusively for sales or distribution from vehicles required to have a permit under the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  "Director," as used in this chapter, means the director of environmental health of the county and his duly authorized agents. 
D.  "Food vehicle" means any vehicle from which packaged, perishable foods are sold or otherwise offered to the public. 
E.  "Food vendor" means any person who sells or distributes food to the public by means other than those defined in this section. 
F.  "Frozen food vehicle" means any vehicle upon which predominantly frozen foods are sold or otherwise offered to the public. 
G.  "Mobile food preparation unit," "food establishment open to the outside air," "retail dairy," "retail sales area of grower-seller premises," and "roadside stand" have the meanings assigned for each in Title 17 of the California Administrative Code. 
H.  "Perishable food" means any food or beverage capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of microorganisms which can cause food infections or food intoxications. 
I.  "Person," as used in this chapter, means individual, partnership, joint venture, association, trust, corporation, or municipal corporation. 
J.  "Public swimming pool" includes "swimming pools," "pools," "wading pools," "special use pools," and "temporary training pools" as defined in Section 7774 of Title 17, California Administrative Code. This definition shall not include private pools which are maintained by an individual exclusively for the use of his family and friends. 
K.  The term "retail delivery vehicle" means any vehicle from which exclusively non-perishable foods are carried, sold or otherwise offered to the public. 
L.  The term "tax collector" means the Ventura County Treasurer-Tax Collector, Public Administrator. 
M.  The terms "vending machine," "septic tank pumper," "food demonstrator," and "medical research institution" shall have the meaning assigned for each in Division 4, Chapter 6 of the Ventura County Ordinance Code. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.040 - Permit to construct required. 
No person shall engage in the construction or remodeling of a restaurant, bakery, commissary, food establishment open to the outside air, retail dairy, roadside stand, retail food production and marketing establishment, public swimming pool, or public water system, without having first obtained a permit to construct. A retail sales area of a grower-seller premises may be constructed without a permit to construct if no permits for the structure are required by the building department. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.050 - Plans required for permit to construct. 
Two sets of plans shall be submitted to the director for new construction or remodeling of restaurants, bakeries, commissaries, retail sales areas of grower-seller premises, retail dairies, roadside stands, food establishments open to the outside air, retail food production and marketing establishments, and public swimming pools. Upon approval of the plans, a permit to construct will be issued and will be valid for twelve months, or until completion of construction or remodeling, whichever comes first. Upon written request therefor, the director may, for good cause, extend the twelve-month period for an additional period not to exceed twelve months. A permit to construct may be denied unless it appears, upon review of the plans, that applicable state, county and city environmental health requirements will be met, otherwise the permit shall be granted. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.060 - Health permit required. 
No person shall conduct any business, occupation or activity listed in subsections A, B, D, E, F, G, J, K and M of Section 9.20.030 within the city, whether or not at a fixed location, without having first obtained a health permit. The health permit shall be in addition to the permit to construct and to any other license or permit required by the city or any other public jurisdiction. A health permit may be denied if it appears, upon inspection of the premises or otherwise, that applicable state, county and city environmental health requirements will not be met, otherwise the permit shall be granted. Such permit shall be valid for a period of twelve months from date of issuance and shall be renewable from year to year upon payment, on or before the delinquency date of each such year, of the fee required, or upon payment of such fee plus penalties. The paid period of a health permit shall not be affected by any period of suspension imposed by the director pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.20.220, 9.20.230 or 9.20.240. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.070 - Vehicle permits and exemptions. 
Either the lessor or the lessee of all vehicles defined in subsections A, C, D, F, G and M of Section 9.20.030 shall obtain a health permit to operate. If the lessor obtains a permit and there is a change in the lessee, the lessor shall notify the director and obtain a new health permit. The director may exempt from permit requirements vehicles operated by owners of restaurants and retail food production and marketing establishments if said vehicles are used exclusively for deliveries of packaged foods. No such exemptions may be granted for food vehicles which hold or transport perishable foods for periods longer than one hour. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.080 - Separate activities. 
A.  If a permittee engages in, conducts, manages or carries on at the same time more than one of the activities for which a permit is required by this chapter, he shall be deemed to be engaging in, conducting, managing, or carrying on each such activity separately and apart from each other activity, whether located on the same premises or not. 
B.  A restaurant, retail food production and marketing establishment, or other establishment having a valid health permit shall not be required to obtain an ice distributor's permit for ice distribution activities conducted on the premises. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.090 - Application for health permit. 
Application for any permit required by this chapter shall be made on such forms as are prescribed by the director. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.100 - Action. 
Upon receipt of the application and following approval of the director, the director shall forward one copy to the county tax collector for collection of the permit to construct or health permit fee, and one copy to the city license collector for information to assist in collection of the business license tax. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.110 - Fictitious name. 
A permit may be issued pursuant to this chapter to a corporation duly authorized to transact business in this state, or to a person operating under a fictitious name who has complied with all the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 17900) of Part 3 of Division 7 of the Business and Professions Code. Otherwise, all such permits shall be issued in the true name of the applicant. Except as provided, in this section no permittee may operate under any false or fictitious name. A permit issued to a corporation shall designate such corporation by the exact name which appears in the articles of incorporation of such corporation. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.120 - Temporary activities. 
A.  If the applicant for a permit under this chapter shows to the satisfaction of the director that because a business or occupation or other activity is of a seasonal nature, or because of statutory or ordinance regulations, or because of termination or loss of lease, or because of acquisition by the public of the premises on which the occupation or business or other activity is situated, or because of similar reasons, such business, occupation or activity can only be carried on for a limited period of time, not more than three-quarters' of a year, a permit fee shall be the following fractions of the annual fee: 
Time Period 	Fraction of Fee 
One-quarter of a year or less ..... 	One-fourth 
More than one-quarter but not more than one-half of a year ..... 	One-half 
More than one-half but not more than three-quarters of a year ..... 	Three-fourths 
 
B.  License fees of twenty-five dollars or less shall not be prorated. 
C.  A public swimming pool which operates more than three months of the year shall not be considered a seasonal activity. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.130 - Exemption from permit fee—Blind applicant. 
The director shall issue without fee a permit to any individual applicant who otherwise would be entitled to such permit if such person files with the tax collector a certificate by a licensed physician and surgeon or by the Bureau of Vocational Rehabilitation of the Department of Education of the state that he has not more than ten percent visual acuity in his better eye, with correction. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.140 - Exemption from permit fee—Charitable organizations. 
Excepting operators of organized camps, as defined in the Health and Safety Code, Section 18897, any person exempt from taxation under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, or Section 23701 (a, b, d, e, f, g) and 23701(L) of the Revenue and Taxation Code who conducts exclusively for charitable purposes an activity for which there is to be derived no personal benefit through distribution of profits or payment of excessive charges or compensation, shall not be charged any fee for permits required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.150 - Filing for permit fee exemptions—Charitable organizations. 
A.  Persons exempt from permit fees under the provisions of Section 9.20.140 shall file acceptable evidence showing entitlement to such exemption with the tax collector within twenty days following application for permit; otherwise, no permit fee exemption shall be granted. Acceptable evidence of exempt status means a copy of an appropriate tax exemption letter prepared by the Internal Revenue Service or State Franchise Tax Board. 
B.  In lieu of an appropriate tax exemption letter from the Internal Revenue Service or State Franchise Tax Board, a declaration on a form prescribed by the tax collector attesting to the nonprofit or charitable status of the permittee will be accepted if the permittee is exempt under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code or Section 23701 (a, b, d, e, f, g) and Section 23701(L) of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.160 - Exemption from permit fee—Tax supported institutions. 
Any permit applicant wholly supported by tax revenues shall not be charged a fee for any permit required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.170 - Collection of fees. 
The tax collector shall collect the permit fees and penalties as directed by this chapter, when he receives the approved application for a permit from the director and perform such other duties as are by this chapter prescribed. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.180 - Lost permit. 
Where the director finds that a permit (whether in the form of a tag, plate, paper or card, sticker, or otherwise) has been lost, he shall issue a duplicate permit to the owner thereof upon payment of a fee in the amount provided for by this chapter. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.190 - Transfer of permit. 
Permits are not transferable from one person to another, nor by the same person from one business location to another; provided, however, that a permit issued to a partnership by addition or departure of a partner, if the partnership, as reorganized, applies for such transfer in the same manner as for a new permit and pays the transfer fee as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.200 - Posting or carrying permit. 
Every person having a permit under the provisions of this chapter and engaging in a permitted business or activity at a fixed place of business shall keep such permit posted and exhibited in public view while in force. Such person engaging in a business or occupation and not having a fixed place of business shall carry such permit with him at all times while engaging in the business, or activity for which it was granted. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.210 - Tags or stickers. 
The director shall issue an appropriate tag or sticker for each vehicle or vending machine under permit at the time the permit is issued. The permittee shall keep such tag or sticker affixed to each vehicle or machine in a conspicuous place at all times. Where the applicant for such permit owns more than one vending machine, the director shall issue but one permit form which shall set forth, in addition to the information required, the number of machines under permit for which the permit fee has been paid and tags or stickers have been issued. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.220 - Suspension and revocation. 
If the director determines that any of the provisions of this chapter or of applicable statutes, quarantine orders, rules or regulations are not being complied with within the city, he may issue and serve upon the permittee a notice of intended suspension or revocation setting forth in clear and concise language the acts and omissions with which the permittee is charged and specifying the provision violated. The notice shall specify a date and time, not more than fifteen days following its service upon the permittee, and place of hearing before the director or his agent designated in the notice, and shall be served on the permittee at least five days prior to the hearing. The permittee shall attend such hearing and may show cause, if any, why the permit should not be suspended or revoked. The director may, on his own motion or upon good cause shown by the permittee, continue any such hearing by giving notice to the permittee of the time and place of the continued hearing. At the close of the hearing or at any time within ten days thereafter, the director shall order such disposition of the permit, within the terms of the original or any amended notice of intended suspension or revocation, as he deems proper, and such order in writing shall be served upon the permittee. The order of suspension or revocation shall be effective from the time of such service. If the permittee should fail to appear at any such noticed hearing or continued hearing, the director may make all such orders as he might make if the permittee were present. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.230 - Emergency suspension. 
In the event that the director determines that the immediate suspension of a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter is necessary in the interest of public health or safety, he shall suspend the permit by serving upon the permittee a notice of suspension effective forthwith; setting forth in clear and concise language the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged and stating the permittee's rights to an appeal hearing. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.240 - Hearing of appeal. 
At any time within the fifteen-day period after a permit has been suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.20.230, the permittee may, on a form provided by the director, request in writing an appeal before the director. The request for an appeal must be accompanied by an administrative fee in an amount set by city council resolution. Failure to request an appeal hearing within fifteen days after the permittee [has] received notice of suspension or revocation shall be deemed a waiver of the permittee's right to such hearing. Upon the receipt of a request for an appeal hearing filed in accordance with the provisions of this section, the director shall schedule such hearing within fifteen days and notify the permittee in writing of the date, time and location of the appeal hearing at least five days prior to hearing. The permittee shall attend such hearing and may show cause, if any, why the permit should be reinstated. The director may, on his own motion or upon good cause shown by the permittee, continue any such hearing by giving notice to the permittee of the time and place of the continued hearing. At the close of the hearing or any time within ten days thereafter, the director shall order such final disposition of the permit as he deems proper and such order in writing shall be served on the permittee. The order of reinstatement, suspension or revocation shall be effective from time of such service. If the permittee should fail to appear at any such noticed hearing or continued hearing, the director may make all such orders as he might make if the permittee were present. 
(Ord. 950 § 5, 2002: Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.250 - Operation with a suspended or revoked permit. 
No person shall conduct any business, occupation or activity requiring a permit to construct or health permit after said permit has been suspended or revoked by the director pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.260 - Itinerant restaurant permit fees. 
The fees for itinerant restaurants shall be the same as those for restaurants. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.270 - Food vendor permit fees. 
The fee for food vendors shall be the same as the fee for food demonstrators. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.280 - Permit fees for roadside businesses. 
The fees for retail sales areas of grower-seller premises, food establishments open to the outside air, roadside stands of grower-seller premises food establishments open to the outside air, roadside stands and retail dairies shall be the same as fees applicable to retail food production and marketing establishments. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.290 - Public water system permit fees. 
The fees for public water systems shall be the same as fees applicable to water purveyors. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
9.20.300 - Fees set by resolution. 
All fees and fee penalties provided for in this chapter shall be identical to those fixed by resolution of the Ventura County board of supervisors for establishments operating in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. 389 § 1 (part), 1978.)  
Chapter 9.22 - SAFER SEX IN THE ADULT FILM INDUSTRY 
 
9.22.010 - Title. 
This chapter will be known as the "Safer Sex in the Adult Film Industry Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3(Exh. A), 2-25-2015; Ord. No. 1105, § 3(Exh. A), 3-11-2015)  
9.22.020 - Findings and declarations. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  The HIV/AIDS crisis and the ongoing epidemic of sexually transmitted diseases, to which the making of adult films has contributed, have negatively affected public health and the quality of life of residents of the city. 
B.  Safer sex practices can prevent and reduce the spread of HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases. 
C.  Public health research has documented widespread transmission of sexually transmitted diseases by unprotected sexual activity such as occurs in the adult film industry in the metropolitan Los Angeles area. 
D.  The use of condoms and other biological barriers is the best and most effective way to stem the spread of sexually transmitted infections in the adult film industry. 
E.  Several organizations committed to protecting the public health have called for mandatory use of condoms in the production of adult films, including the American Medical Association, the American Public Health Association, the California Conference of Local AIDS Directors, the California STD Controllers Association, the National Coalition of STD Directors, the National Association of City and County Health Officials, the AIDS Healthcare Foundation, and the California Medical Association. 
F.  Producers of adult films are required by California Code of Regulations Title 8, Section 5193 to use barrier protection, including condoms, to protect employees during the production of adult films and it is the intent of this chapter to discourage violations of those standards without duplicating or contradicting them as permitted by such cases as Cohen v. Board of Supervisors (1985) 40 Cal.3d 277 and Bravo Vending v. City of Rancho Mirage (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 383. 
G.  Many producers of adult films in the metropolitan Los Angeles region have been found to consistently violate the worker safety provisions of California Code of Regulations Title 8, Section 5193. 
H.  Recent efforts to promote safer sex in the adult film industry in Los Angeles County and Ventura County have caused producers of adult films to seek out filming locations in areas of the city, creating a threat to public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3(Exh. A), 2-25-2015; Ord. No. 1105, § 3(Exh. A), 3-11-2015)  
9.22.030 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to minimize the spread of HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases in the production of adult films in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3(Exh. A), 2-25-2015; Ord. No. 1105, § 3(Exh. A), 3-11-2015)  
9.22.040 - Definitions. 
Unless the context demonstrates another meaning was intended, the following definitions apply to the construction of this chapter: 
A.  "Adult film" means any commercial film, video, multimedia or other representation (including live theater) of sexual penetration or oral sex, but excludes representations of simulations of such conduct under circumstances in which the sexual transmission of infectious disease is not foreseeable. 
B.  "Applicant" means a person who applies for a permit pursuant to Section 9.22.050. 
C.  "Business day" means a day when City Hall is open to the public for the conduct of city business. 
D.  "Commercial" as applied to an adult film means either that: (1) the filming is intended to be or is remunerated by sale of adult films, advertising, or otherwise or (2) any person is compensated for services as a performer or for other services in production of the adult film, including but not limited to cameramen, sound artists, film editors, lighting artists, electricians, carpenters, and greensmen. 
E.  "Director" means the community development director of the city or the director's designee. 
F.  "Filming" means the production of any adult film and includes the conduct identified in subsection J. of this section. 
G.  "Oral sex" means conduct by which a performer makes oral contact with the anus or genitals of another performer. 
H.  "Performer" means any person who engages in sexual penetration or oral sex in the filming of an adult film as one or more of the following: (1) the penetrator, (2) the one penetrated, (3) the person who makes oral contact or (4) the person who is the object of such contact. 
I.  "Permittee" means a person issued a permit pursuant to Section 9.22.050. 
J.  "Producer of adult film" means: (1) any person who compensates a performer to engage in sexual penetration or oral sex in the production of an adult film, and (2) any person engaged in the production of an adult film with authority to govern the workplace conduct of performers. "To produce an adult film" means to engage in conduct which makes one a producer of an adult film. 
K.  "Sexual penetration" means oral, vaginal, or anal penetration by a part of the human body or by an inanimate object. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3(Exh. A), 2-25-2015; Ord. No. 1105, § 3(Exh. A), 3-11-2015)  
9.22.050 - Permit required. 
A.  No person may produce an adult film in the city without first obtaining a permit pursuant to this section. 
B.  The director will issue a permit under this section within five business days of receipt of a completed application on a form the director designates for that purpose unless the director determines on the basis of substantial evidence that one or more of the following is true: 
1.  The applicant failed to provide the information requested on the application form or the information provided is false or intentionally misleading; 
2.  The applicant failed to pay any fee lawfully established by the city for the issuance of such permits; 
3.  The applicant failed to acknowledge receipt of a copy of this chapter (which the director will provide) by signing where indicated on the application form or otherwise; or 
4.  The information provided on the application demonstrates that the activity for which the permit is requested would violate this code or other applicable law. 
C.  The application form designated by the director will only require information needed to reasonably demonstrate notice of and compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other provisions of this code. In particular, the application form will not inquire into the substantive content of an adult film other than as reasonably necessary to determine that the film is an adult film. 
D.  If the director denies a permit pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section, the director will give the applicant written notice of that denial and the reason(s) for it within five business days of the director's receipt of an application. Written notice directed to the applicant by any means possible in light of the information provided by the applicant, including personal delivery, mail, telecopier or facsimile, email, or other means likely to achieve actual notice, will be sufficient. 
E.  Denial of a permit under this section will be subject to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8, as it may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3(Exh. A), 2-25-2015; Ord. No. 1105, § 3(Exh. A), 3-11-2015)  
9.22.060 - Permit exceptions. 
No permit under this chapter will be required for non-commercial activity or other conduct within the scope of the privacy rights afforded by the Constitutions of the United States or of California. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3(Exh. A), 2-25-2015; Ord. No. 1105, § 3(Exh. A), 3-11-2015)  
9.22.070 - Condom requirement. 
Performers and producers of adult films, as applicable, will comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Condoms or dental dams will be used in the production of every adult film in the city in every instance of oral sex and in every instance of sexual penetration. 
B.  Condoms used in the production of an adult film in the city will be lubricated with a condom-safe water- or silicone-based lubricant. 
C.  An adequate supply of condoms and dental dams will be made available at the filming location of an adult film in the city at no cost to performers. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3(Exh. A), 2-25-2015; Ord. No. 1105, § 3(Exh. A), 3-11-2015)  
9.22.080 - Additional requirements. 
Any adult film permit issued under this chapter will expressly condition the permit on the following: 
A.  The permit will abide by all applicable health and safety regulations, including the worker safety provisions of California Code of Regulations Title 8, Section 5193 and the condom requirements stated in Section 9.22.070. 
B.  The permittee must post a copy of the permit and this chapter at every site where production of an adult film depicting sexual penetration or oral sex takes place and maintain it in a place easily visible to all performers while production takes place there. In addition, a legible sign must be displayed at all times at the location where any adult film is filed in any conventional typeface with a font size not smaller than 36 points, that provides the following notice so as to be clearly visible to all performers: 
"The use of condoms is required for all acts of anal, oral, or vaginal sex during the production of adult films to protect performers from sexually transmitted infections. 
Any public health concerns regarding any activities occurring during the production of any adult films should be directed to: 
City of Camarillo 
Department of Community Development 
601 Carmen Drive 
Camarillo, CA 93010 
(805) 388-5360" 
C.  Upon written request of the director on the basis of a complaint that provides a reasonable basis to believe such inspection is necessary, a permittee will: (1) permit the Ventura County sheriff's department or other person designated by the director to review all film or other media evidencing sexual penetration or oral sex in the production of an adult film in the city whether or not the film or media is included in an edited version of the adult film, and (2) allow the Ventura County sheriff's department or other person designated by the director to inspect, during production or otherwise, any site at which sexual penetration or oral sex in the production of an adult film takes place to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
D.  An adult film permit issued under this chapter may not be transferred, assigned, or used by any person other than the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3(Exh. A), 2-25-2015; Ord. No. 1105, § 3(Exh. A), 3-11-2015)  
9.22.090 - Adult film permit application fees. 
The city council may from time to time adopt a resolution establishing fees necessary to recover the costs of processing adult film permit applications. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3(Exh. A), 2-25-2015; Ord. No. 1105, § 3(Exh. A), 3-11-2015)  
9.22.100 - Violations. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter or of any condition of a permit imposed by this chapter will be punishable, and may be remedied, in any of the means stated in Title 1 of this code or otherwise authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3(Exh. A), 2-25-2015; Ord. No. 1105, § 3(Exh. A), 3-11-2015)  
Chapter 9.24 - REGULATION OF SMOKING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1129, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 28, 2016, amended chapter 9.24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 9.24, §§ 9.24.010—9.24.0110, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1053, § 2, 4-28-2010; Ord. No. 1088, §§ 2—4, 6-11-2014. 
 
9.24.010 - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions contained in this code, including the city's Zoning Ordinance, the following words and phrases are defined as set forth below, for the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a different definition: 
A.  "Business" means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legal entity formed for profit-making purposes, including but not limited to, retail establishments where goods and/or services are sold, and professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are provided. 
B.  "Dining area" means any area, including streets and sidewalks, available to or customarily used by the general public that is designed, established, or regularly used for consuming food or drink. 
C.  "Employee" means any person who is employed or retained as an independent contractor by any business, employer or non-profit entity in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. Employee also means any person who volunteers his or her services to a non-profit entity, business or employer. 
D.  "Employer" means any person, business or non-profit entity that retains the services of one or more employees. 
E.  "Enclosed area" means all space in a building between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows exclusive of door or passage ways which extend from the floor to the ceiling; and all areas which are screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid. 
F.  "Family day care home" means a home providing day care for children, which is subject to state and/or county licensing requirements. 
G.  "Multi-unit residence" means a building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by two or more families living independently of each other, with each provided with kitchen facilities. A single-family house shared by roommates is not a multi-unit residence for purposes of this section. 
H.  "Multi-unit residence common area" means every area of a multi-unit residence accessible to and usable by the occupants of more than one dwelling space, including but not limited to halls, lobbies, laundry rooms, paths, courtyards, elevators, stairs, community rooms, outdoor eating areas, play areas and swimming pools. 
I.  "Non-profit entity" means any corporation, unincorporated association or other legal entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational, character building, political, social or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objects or purposes of the organization and not to private financial gain. 
J.  "Parking lot" means a parking area, whether public or private, used for the parking of vehicles and available for public use, either free of charge or for remuneration. 
K.  "Place of employment" means any area under the control or possession of an employer, business or non-profit entity which employees may enter during the course of their employment, including but not limited to, indoor and outdoor work areas, construction sites, vehicles used in employment or for business purposes, taxis, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and banquet rooms, bingo and gaming facilities, retail tobacco stores, long-term health care facilities, warehouses, and employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is a "place of employment" if it is used, at any time, as a family day care home or residential care home. 
L.  "Public place" means any area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, regardless of any fee or age requirement, but does not include streets or sidewalks, except those streets or sidewalks designated by city council resolution. 
M.  "Reasonable distance" means a distance of twenty-five feet in any direction from an area in which smoking is prohibited. 
N.  "Recreational area" means any area that is publicly or privately owned, and open to the general public for recreational purposes regardless of any fee requirement, including but not limited to, parks, picnic areas, gardens, swimming pools, walking paths, skateboard parks, sporting facilities, stadiums, fitness clubs and playgrounds, but does not include golf course fairways. 
O.  "Residential care home" means a home providing round-the-clock care for children or elderly persons, which is subject to state and/or county licensing requirements. 
P.  "Retail smoking products store" means any retail business establishment generating at least 90 percent of its revenues from the sale of smoking products, including but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, electronic smoking devices and smoking accessories. 
Q.  "Service area" means any publicly or privately owned area, including streets and sidewalks, designed to be used or regularly used by one or more persons to receive or wait to receive a service, enter a public place or place of employment, or make a transaction, whether or not the exchange of money is involved. The term "service area" includes but is not limited to information kiosks, automatic teller machines (ATMs), ticket lines, bus stops or shelters, mobile vendor lines or cab stands. 
R.  "Sidewalk" means any public or private sidewalk or walkway located in a public place. 
S.  "Smoke" means the gases, particles or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, including from an electronic smoking device, when the purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human inhalation of the gases, particles or vapors. Smoke does not mean the combustion of material solely for olfactory purposes such as, for example, smoke from incense, that does not contain any tobacco or nicotine or the emissions from a product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in mitigating, treating or preventing disease. 
T.  "Smoking" means engaging in an act that generates smoke, such as possessing a lighted pipe, a lighted hookah pipe, a lighted cigar, a lighted cigarette, an operating electronic smoking device, or any other act of smoking as defined in Section 22950.5(c) of the Business & Professions Code. 
U.  Smoking lounge" means a business established for the purpose of providing customers with a place to purchase and smoke cigarettes, cigars and pipe tobacco, electronic smoking devices and or the purchase of smoking accessories and which generates at least 90 percent of its revenues from the sale of tobacco products and/or electronic smoking devices, including but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, electronic smoking devices, and smoking accessories. 
V.  "Unenclosed area" means any area that is not an enclosed area. 
W.  "Electronic smoking device" means an electronic or battery-operated device that delivers vapors for inhalation. This term includes every variation and type of such devices whether they are manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah or any other product name or descriptor. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 3(Exh. A), 9-28-2016)  
9.24.020 - Prohibition of smoking in certain enclosed and unenclosed areas. 
A.  Smoking is prohibited in the following enclosed and unenclosed areas within the City of Camarillo, except in such places in which smoking is already prohibited by state or federal law, in which case the state or federal law applies: 
(1)  Public places; 
(2)  Dining areas; 
(3)  Recreation areas; 
(4)  Service areas; 
(5)  Private residences if used, at any time, as a family day care home or residential care home; 
(6)  The permitted sites of public events held in unenclosed areas, including but not limited to sports events, entertainment and speaking performances, ceremonies, pageants, parades, farmers' markets and fairs, whether in a private venue or on a public street. This prohibition applies from the time 60 minutes before the event begins to the time 60 minutes after the event ends; 
(7)  Multi-unit residence common areas, but not including parking lots; and; 
(8)  Sidewalks designated by city council resolution. 
B.  Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed and unenclosed places of employment, except in such places in which smoking is already prohibited by state or federal law, in which case the state or federal law applies, and except as provided for in Section 9.24.030E of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 3(Exh. A), 9-28-2016)  
9.24.030 - Permissible smoking areas. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is permitted in the following areas unless prohibited by federal or state law: 
A.  Private residences, except if used, at any time, as a family day care or residential care home, subject to state and/or county licensing requirements; 
B.  Retail smoking products stores and smoking lounges that are located in a building which contains no other businesses or uses and the walls of the building are at least ten feet from any other building; except that smoking of electronic smoking devices is permissible in smoking lounges legally in operation on the effective date of this ordinance at their current location even if said smoking lounge is in a building that contains other businesses with adjacent to that smoking lounge. 
C.  Parking lots, except: 
(1)  Smoking is not permitted in parking lots when the parking lot is included in an approved permit for a public event. 
(2)  Smoking is not permitted in parking lots within a reasonable distance of any location where smoking is prohibited by this chapter. 
D.  Streets and sidewalks, except: 
(1)  Smoking is not permitted on streets or sidewalks designated as "No Smoking" by city council resolution. 
(2)  Smoking is not permitted on streets or sidewalks within a reasonable distance of any location where smoking is prohibited by this chapter. 
E.  Up to twenty percent of hotel and motel guest rooms, provided at least 80 percent of the guest rooms in a hotel or motel are designated as permanent non-smoking rooms and ashtrays and matches are permanently removed from such non-smoking rooms. Permanent "No Smoking" signage must be posted in non-smoking rooms; and 
F.  Enclosed places of employment when all three of the following criteria are satisfied: 
(1)  There are no employees other than the owner(s) or operator(s) of the business or non-profit entity; 
(2)  The public is not permitted in such places of employment; and 
(3)  The enclosed area containing the place of employment is located in a building which contains no other businesses or uses and the walls of the building are at least ten feet from any other building. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 3(Exh. A), 9-28-2016)  
9.24.040 - Reasonable smoking distance required. 
A.  Smoking in unenclosed areas is prohibited within a reasonable distance from any entrance, exit, window, opening, crack, or vent into an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited, except while actively passing on the way to another destination and so long as smoke does not enter any enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited. 
B.  Smoking in unenclosed areas is prohibited within a reasonable distance from any unenclosed area in which smoking is prohibited under Section 9.24.020 of this chapter, except while actively passing on the way to another destination. 
C.  The prohibitions in subsections (A) and (B) do not apply to unenclosed areas of private residential properties that are not multi-unit residences. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 3(Exh. A), 9-28-2016)  
9.24.050 - Duty of person, employer, business or non-profit entity. 
A.  No person, employer, business or non-profit entity may knowingly permit smoking in an area which is under the control or possession of the person, employer, business or non-profit entity and in which smoking is prohibited by law and the person, employer, business or non-profit entity is not otherwise compelled to act under state or federal law. 
B.  No person may dispose of any cigarette, cigar or tobacco or electronic smoking device or any part of a cigarette or cigar or electronic smoking device except in a designated waste disposal container. 
C.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any person, landlord, employer, business or non-profit entity who controls any property, establishment or place of employment regulated by this chapter may declare any part of such area in which smoking would otherwise be permitted to be a non-smoking area. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 3(Exh. A), 9-28-2016)  
9.24.060 - Posting of signs. 
A.  Signs for Enclosed Areas. 
(1)  Signs with the words "No Smoking in This Establishment or Within 25 Feet of Entrances, Exits and Operable Windows," a City of Camarillo phone number where complaints can be directed, and citation of this Chapter, California Labor Code Sec. 6404.5 and California Government Code Sec. 7597, will be provided by the city and must be conspicuously posted at all entrances to every enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter by the person, employer, business or non-profit entity having control or possession of such place. For purposes of this chapter, the city manager or designee will be responsible for the posting of signs in facilities owned or leased in part by the City of Camarillo. 
(2)  For enclosed buildings with multiple tenants, signs with the wording specified in this section must be conspicuously posted at each exterior entrance to the building by the person, employer, business or non-profit entity having control or possession of such building. Individual enclosed areas within the multiple-tenant building need not be posted. 
B.  Signs for All Other Areas. "No Smoking" or "Smoke Free" signs, with letters of no less than two inches in height or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) must be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every unenclosed area in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter by the person, employer, business or non-profit entity having control or possession of such place. 
C.  In any business where smoking is permitted in enclosed areas pursuant to this chapter and, in addition to the "No Smoking" sign requirements of Section 9.24.030E: 
(1)  Signs must be permanently posted which include the words: "WARNING: SMOKING ALLOWED IN THIS ESTABLISHMENT" or "WARNING: SMOKING ALLOWED IN PORTIONS OF THIS ESTABLISHMENT"; 
(2)  Each such sign must be printed in capital letters not less than two inches in height; and 
(3)  All such signs must be posted so as to be clearly visible from the exterior of the entrance(s) to the building. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 3(Exh. A), 9-28-2016)  
9.24.070 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  A violation of this chapter constitutes an infraction, subject to penalties as provided for in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
B.  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this Chapter will constitute a violation. 
C.  The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedy available at law or in equity. 
D.  Enforcement of this chapter may be implemented by the city manager. Any peace officer or code enforcement official also may enforce this chapter. 
E.  Except as otherwise provided, enforcement of this chapter is at the sole discretion of the city. Nothing in this chapter creates a right of action in any person against the city or its agents to compel public enforcement of this chapter against private parties. 
F.  Punishment under this section will not preclude punishment pursuant to Health & Safety Code Section 13002, Penal Code Section 374.4, or any other law proscribing the act of littering. Nothing in this section precludes any person from seeking any other remedies, penalties or procedures provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 3(Exh. A), 9-28-2016)  
9.24.080 - Non-retaliation. 
No person, business, employer or non-profit entity may intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to attain compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 3(Exh. A), 9-28-2016)  
9.24.090 - Public education. 
The city manager, in conjunction with the Ventura County Department of Health and other health organizations, may engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this ordinance to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners, operators, employers and managers in their compliance with it. Such program may include the publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 3(Exh. A), 9-28-2016)  
9.24.100 - Other applicable laws. 
This chapter will not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise prohibited by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 3(Exh. A), 9-28-2016)  
9.24.110 - Application to publicly owned facilities. 
All facilities owned, leased or controlled by the city or by any other public agency will be subject to the provisions of this chapter, unless now or hereafter the application of this chapter to such public facilities is prohibited or preempted by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 3(Exh. A), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.30 - PRICES OF NECESSARY ITEMS DURING LOCAL EMERGENCIES 
 
9.30.010 - Regulation of prices. 
This chapter shall apply to the regulation of prices of necessary goods and merchandise during a local emergency or disaster for which a proclamation of a local emergency has been issued by the city or the county of Ventura pursuant to Government Code Section 8630 et seq. 
(Ord. 812 § 2 (part), 1994.)  
9.30.020 - Excessive price increase prohibited. 
During such time as a proclamation of local emergency is in full force and effect as having been issued by the city or by the county of Ventura, it is unlawful for any person or any legal entity to sell or offer to sell any of the goods and merchandise, hereafter described, for a price which exceeds ten percent of the price for such goods or merchandise charged by any such person for such goods and merchandise immediately prior to the issuance of the proclamation of local emergency, unless such person can establish that an increased price was directly attributable to additional costs imposed by the supplier or manufacturer of the goods or merchandise. "Goods and merchandise" as used in this chapter means and includes necessary goods and merchandise which are offered for sale at retail which shall include, but shall not be limited to: food, water, milk, confections or condiments manufactured or designed to be consumed by man or animal, flashlights, radios, batteries, candles, blankets, soap, diapers, prescription and nonprescription drugs, bandages, gauze and isopropyl alcohol. 
(Ord. 812 § 2 (part), 1994.)  
9.30.030 - Hearing. 
If there is a reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated the provisions of this chapter, the district attorney of the county of Ventura may, prior to the filing of a criminal complaint, conduct a hearing upon due notice and an opportunity to be heard, to determine whether a criminal complaint should be filed. In the exercise of prosecutorial discretion, the district attorney may dispense with the requirement of conducting a hearing prior to the filing of a criminal complaint. 
(Ord. 812 § 2 (part), 1994.)  
9.30.040 - Penalty—Civil actions. 
A.  Criminal Penalties. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Civil Actions. Any aggrieved consumer may prosecute a civil action under applicable state law to enforce this section and in any action a civil penalty may be imposed as provided by law, and, where appropriate, restitution to aggrieved consumers may be ordered. 
(Ord. 812 § 2 (part), 1994.)  
Chapter 9.32 - STORMWATER QUALITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1074, § 2, adopted Dec. 12, 2012, amended Ch. 9.32 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 9.32, §§ 9.32.010—9.32.130, pertained to stormwater quality management, and derived from Ord. 892 § 2(part), adopted 1998. 
 
9.32.010 - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter implements the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (the "Clean Water Act" or "CWA"), 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 and following, as amended, and Division 7 of the California Water Code by prohibiting the discharge of any pollutant to navigable waters of the United States from a point source unless the discharge is authorized by a permit issued pursuant to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES") required by CWA Section 402, 33 U.S.C. Section 1342, and by prohibiting non-stormwater discharges into the storm drain system. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases will have the meanings set forth this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section or elsewhere in this chapter will have the meanings set forth in the regulations implementing the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, Clean Water Act Section 402, and Division 7 of the California Water Code, as they may be amended from time to time, and if not defined in such laws, then the applicable definitions in the municipal stormwater permit will apply. 
"Basin plan" means the Water Quality Control Plan for Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, adopted by the regional board on June 13, 1994, as amended from time to time. 
"Best management practices (BMPs)" means measures, practices, and procedures to prevent or reduce, to the maximum extent that is technologically and economically feasible, the discharge of pollutants to the city's storm drain system and receiving waters. A BMP may consist of a structural BMP, source control BMP, treatment control BMP, or any other BMP promulgated by the California Stormwater Quality Association (CASQA), California Department of Transportation (Caltrans), or approved by the director for the purpose of controlling or eliminating stormwater pollution. 
"Channel" means an open conduit either naturally or artificially created that periodically or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting link between two waterbodies. 
"Construction activity" means any construction or demolition activity, clearing, grading, grubbing, or excavation or any other activities that result in a land disturbance. Construction activity does not include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety or routine maintenance activities required to maintain the integrity of structures by performing minor repair and restoration work, maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility. 
"Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of waters of the state by waste to a degree that creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or spread of disease. Contamination also includes any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of waste, whether or not waters of the state are affected as defined in California Water Code Section 13050(k). 
"Critical source facilities" means those businesses, commercial or industrial facilities that have the potential to contribute pollutants to stormwater runoff and are listed in Part 4.D and Attachment D of the municipal stormwater permit. 
"Dechlorinated/debrominated swimming pool discharge" means any swimming pool discharge with a residual chlorine or bromine level of 0.1 mg/L or less; and that does not contain any detergents, wastes, algaecides, or cyanuric acid in excess of 50 ppm, or any other chemicals including salts from pools commonly referred to as "salt water pools". The term does not include swimming pool filter backwash or swimming pool water containing bacteria. 
"Development" means any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction for which either a discretionary land use approval or a permit is required, for any public or private residential (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial; commercial; retail; institutional; and other nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or mass grading for future construction. 
"Director" means the city's director of public works and persons designated by the director. 
"Discharge" when used without qualification means the discharge of a pollutant. 
"Discharge of a pollutant" means any addition of any pollutant to waters of the United States, to the city's storm drain system, or any addition of any pollutant to waters of the contiguous zone from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft which is being used as a means of transportation. 
"Discharger" means any person causing a discharge. 
"EPA" or "U.S. EPA" means the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States of America. 
"Environment" means the physical conditions that exist within the area and that will be affected by a proposed project. The environment means both naturally occurring and man-made conditions. The area involved will be the area in which significant effects would occur, either directly or indirectly, as a result of the project. 
"Hazardous substances" means those substances designated as hazardous substances under Section 311(b)(2)(A) of the Clean Water Act, which are listed in the table at 40 CFR Section 116.4, and other applicable law. 
"Hearing officer" means the director or the director's designee, who will preside at the administrative hearings authorized by the chapter and issue final decisions on matters raised in such hearings. 
"Illicit connection" means any device or artifice used to connect into the storm drain system, without a permit, through or by which an illicit discharge may be discharged. 
"Illicit discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term illicit discharge includes all non-stormwater discharges not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit and discharges which are exempt or conditionally exempt in accordance with any applicable order of the regional board. 
"Invoice for costs" means an invoice for the actual costs and expenses of the city, including, but not limited to administrative overhead, salaries, attorneys' fees and other expenses recoverable under applicable law, incurred during any inspection, investigation or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter, where a notice of violation or other enforcement remedy under this chapter is used to obtain compliance with this chapter. 
"Maximum extent practicable" means the level of pollutant control that is derived from available technology or other controls at the maximum level that is practical. Pollution prevention and source control BMPs in combination with structural and treatment methods where appropriate are emphasized to achieve compliance. The maximum extent practicable approach is an ever evolving and advancing concept that considers technical and economic feasibility. 
"Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)" or "storm drain system" means a conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels and watercourses, or other facilities owned, operated, maintained or controlled by the city and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting or disposing of stormwater into waters of the United States (as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.2). 
"Municipal stormwater permit" means the applicable NPDES Permit for Waste Discharge Requirements for Stormwater (Wet Weather) and Non-Stormwater (Dry Weather) Discharges from the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems within the Ventura County Watershed Protection District, County of Ventura, and the Incorporated Cities Therein, as amended from time to time. 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit" means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under CWA Sections 307, 318, 402, and 405 and includes NPDES general permits and the permit issued by the regional board, and entitled Waste Discharge Requirements for Stormwater and Non-Stormwater Discharges from the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System within the Ventura County Watershed Protection District, County of Ventura and the Incorporated Cities Therein, Order No. R4-2010-0108, (NPDES Permit No. CAS004002) and subsequently-issued NPDES permits. 
"New development" means land disturbing activities, structural development, construction or installation of a building structure, creation and replacement of impervious surfaces and land subdivision. 
"Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge to a storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
"Occupant" means any person who dwells, resides or works at a property. 
"Point source" means any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include agricultural stormwater discharges and return flows from irrigated agriculture. 
"Pollutant" means a "pollutant" as defined in Section 502(6) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1362(6) and incorporated by reference into California Water Code section 13373, or other applicable law, which is discharged into water. 
"Pollution" means the man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. Pollution also means an alteration of the quality of waters of the state by waste to a degree that unreasonably affects, or has the potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses. 
"Post-construction stormwater management plan" means a plan that defines the strategy and describes the design, placement and implementation of stormwater retention and stormwater treatment BMPs to effectively prevent non-stormwater discharges and reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable, for post-construction urban runoff to the city's storm drain system. 
"Potable water sources" means the potable water system for the treatment, distribution, and provision of water for residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional use that meets all California safe drinking water regulatory standards for human consumption. 
"Receiving waters" means all surface water bodies identified in the basin plan. 
"Redevelopment" means land-disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition or replacement of five thousand square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site as defined in the municipal stormwater permit. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to: the expansion of a building footprint; addition or replacement of a structure; replacement of impervious surface area that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities related to structural or impervious surfaces. For an existing single-family dwelling and accessory structures, redevelopment means projects that create, add, or replace ten thousand square feet of impervious area. Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety. 
"Regional board" means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region. 
"Responsible person" means the owner or occupant of a property and any other person responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
"Source control BMP" means any schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, managerial practices or operational practices that aim to prevent stormwater pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution. 
"State board" means the California State Water Resources Control Board. 
"State general permit" means a permit issued by the state board or the regional board pursuant to 40 CFR Sections 122 and 123 to regulate a category of point sources. The term state general permit includes, but is not limited to, the General Permit for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activity and the General Industrial Activities Stormwater Permit and the terms and requirements of both. In the event the EPA revokes the in-lieu permitting authority of the state board, then the term state general permit will also refer to any EPA administered stormwater control program for industrial, construction, and any other category of activities. 
"Stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff, and/or drainage associated with rain storm events and/or snow melt, as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(13). 
"Stormwater pollution control plan (SWPCP)" means a plan or equivalent form, as required by the municipal stormwater permit or by the director, identifying potential pollutant sources from a construction site with less than one acre of soil disturbance and describing proposed design, placement and implementation of BMPs, to effectively prevent non-stormwater discharges and reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges to the city's storm drain system, to the maximum extent practicable, during construction activities. 
"Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)" means a plan, as required by a state general permit, identifying potential pollutant sources and describing the design, placement and implementation of BMPs, to effectively prevent non-stormwater discharges and reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges during activities covered by the state general permit. 
"Structural BMP" means any structural facility designed and constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff pollution. 
"Treatment" means the application of engineered systems that use physical, chemical, or biological processes to remove pollutants. 
"Treatment control BMP" means any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media absorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process. 
"Ventura County Technical Guidance Manual for Stormwater Quality Control Measures" or "technical guidance manual" means the county technical guidance manual for stormwater quality measures required by the municipal stormwater permit, as amended from time to time. 
"Waste" means garbage, hazardous waste, solid waste, yard waste, wood waste, sewage, or wastewater, including any wastewater of the community derived from human, agricultural, commercial or industrial sources, including domestic sewage, liquid waste and industrial wastes, together with such surface water, groundwater and stormwater as may be present. 
"Watercourse" means any natural or artificial channel for passage of water including the Ventura County Watershed Protection District (VCWPD), previously the Ventura County Flood Control District (VCFCD), jurisdictional channels, or "red line channels" (as described in the list of channels within the comprehensive plan of the VCFCD as of October 4, 1994, and amended). 
"Waters of the state" means any surface water or groundwater, including saline waters, within the boundaries of the state of California. 
"Waters of the United States" means bodies of water as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.2. 
"Wet or rainy season" means the calendar period from October 1 through April 15. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.030 - Prohibition of illicit connections and illicit discharges. 
A.  The discharge of pollutants into the storm drain system is prohibited. 
B.  All discharges of material other than stormwater into the storm drain system must be in compliance with the city's NPDES permit and any other NPDES permit applicable to the subject property. 
C.  No person may do any of the following: 
1.  Construct, use, maintain, operate or utilize an illicit connection; 
2.  Cause, permit, or allow any agent, employee, independent contractor or other person, to construct, maintain, operate, or utilize an illicit connection; 
3.  Cause, allow or facilitate an illicit discharge; or 
4.  Cause, permit, or allow any agent, employee, or independent contractor, to cause, allow, or facilitate an illicit discharge. 
D.  In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the director may, by written notice, require persons responsible for an illicit discharge or illicit connection to immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the illicit discharge or illicit connection and, if necessary, to take measures to eliminate the source of the illicit discharge or illicit connection. If the illicit discharge or illicit connection is not discontinued in the time specified, the city may take measures to eliminate the source of the illicit discharge or illicit connection to prevent the occurrence of future illicit discharges or illicit connections. 
E.  Whenever the director finds that an illicit discharge or illicit connection resulting in the release of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which may result in or has resulted in the release of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which may result in or has resulted in pollutants entering the storm drain system, or watercourse, the director may require by written notice to the responsible person that the pollution cease, be remediated, and the affected property be restored to its pre-pollution condition within a specified time, along with all other remedies available to the city. 
F.  The director may, by written notice, require a person responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system to eliminate or to secure approval for the connection within a specified time, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharge to it has been established or approved prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.040 - General discharge prohibitions. 
A.  No person may discharge any material, other than stormwater into the city storm drain system or receiving waters, unless a permit has first been obtained. 
B.  The following discharges are exempt from the general permit requirement in subsection A: 
1.  Discharges originating from a state, federal, or other source for which the city is pre-empted from regulating by state or federal law; 
2.  Discharges covered by a separate individual or general NPDES permit, or conditional waiver for irrigated lands; 
3.  Discharge flows from fire-fighting activities; or 
4.  Discharges that fall within one of the categories below that are not a source of pollutants that exceed water quality standards, and where specified, meet all the conditions stated: 
a.  Natural flows. 
i.  Stream diversions authorized by the state board. 
ii.  Natural springs and rising groundwater. 
iii.  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration. 
iv.  Flows from riparian habitats or wetlands, provided all necessary permits or authorization are received prior to diverting the stream flow. 
b.  Flows incidental to urban activities. 
i.  Discharges from potable water sources provided the flows are: 
(1)  Low volume, incidental, and infrequent releases that are innocuous from a water quality perspective; 
(2)  Dechlorinated, pH adjusted if necessary, re-oxygenated, and both the volume and velocity are controlled to prevent re-suspension of sediments; and 
(3)  All sediments must be collected and disposed of in a legal manner. 
ii.  Gravity flow from foundation, footing, and crawl space drains. 
iii.  Discharges from air conditioning condensate with flow segregated to prevent introduction of pollutants. 
iv.  Reclaimed and potable irrigation water runoff with flow segregated to prevent introduction of pollutants. 
v.  Dechlorinated/debrominated swimming pool discharges that: 
(1)  Do not have Chlorine or Bromine residuals that exceed 0.1 mg/L; 
(2)  Do not contain any chemicals, detergents, wastes, or algaecides; 
(3)  Do not contain cyanuric acid in excess of 50 ppm; 
(4)  Do not contain salts or pH levels in excess of the water quality standards set forth in the municipal stormwater permit; 
(5)  The volume and velocity is controlled to prevent re-suspension of sediments; and 
(6)  The cleaning waste water and filter back wash is not be discharged to storm drain system. 
c.  Non-commercial car washing by residents or non-profit organizations. 
d.  Sidewalk rinsing using a high pressure-low volume of water device with no additives. 
e.  Pooled stormwater from treatment BMPs provided that: 
i.  The discharge is not a source of pollutants; 
ii.  Sediments are to be disposed of properly in compliance with all applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.050 - Specific discharge prohibitions. 
The following discharges are prohibited from entering the storm drain system: 
A.  Discharges from the washing or cleaning of gas stations, auto repair garages, or other types of automotive service facilities. 
B.  Discharges from mobile auto washing, carpet cleaning, steam cleaning, sandblasting, and other such mobile commercial and industrial operations. 
C.  Discharges from areas where repair of machinery and equipment, which are visibly leaking oil, fluid or antifreeze, is performed. 
D.  Discharges from storage areas for materials containing grease, oil, or other hazardous substances, or uncovered receptacles containing hazardous materials. 
E.  Discharges from swimming pools that have a chlorine/bromine concentration greater than 0.1 mg/L or a chloride concentration greater than 150 mg/L. 
F.  Discharges from swimming pool filter backwash, decorative fountains, and ponds. 
G.  Discharges from industrial/commercial areas, including the washing or cleaning of restaurant mats. 
H.  Discharges from stationary or mobile pet grooming facilities. 
I.  Trash container leachate. 
J.  Spills, dumping or disposal of pesticide, fungicide, herbicide, litter, landscape and construction debris, garbage, food, animal waste, fuel or chemical wastes, batteries, and any other materials that have the potential to adversely impact water quality. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.060 - Reduction of pollutants in stormwater. 
A.  Discharges of stormwater containing pollutants that have not been reduced to the maximum extent practicable are prohibited. 
B.  Any person engaged in activities that will or may result in pollutants entering the storm drain system or watercourses must undertake all practicable measures to reduce such pollutants. 
C.  With written concurrence of the regional board, the city may exempt in writing other non-stormwater discharges that are not a source of pollutants to the storm drain system or watercourses. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.070 - Reduction of litter. 
A.  Prohibition. No person may throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, kept, or maintained, in or upon any public or private driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, trail, or component of the storm drain system or any receiving waters, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, accumulations, or pollutant so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. 
B.  Waste Management on Residential Sites. Waste must be deposited in a proper receptacle that must be covered to prevent scattering by wind or animal. Spillage and overflow of wastes around containers must be promptly cleaned and properly disposed of. 
C.  Waste Management on Commercial, Industrial Sites and Private Residential Complexes. It is the responsibility of any person owning or operating any commercial establishment, industrial park, or residential complex with common areas to procure and place trash receptacles at their own expense on the premises. Persons placing trash in receptacles must do so in such manner as to prevent litter from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. Persons owning or occupying a place of business, who sell or offer for sale food or other goods for immediate consumption wrapped in paper, plastic, cardboard or other similar disposable materials or containers, must endeavor to implement a general litter removal program so as to remove litter generated by such business at least each business day. No person owning or occupying a place of business may sweep into or deposit in the storm drain system the accumulation of litter from any building or lot from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business must keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.080 - Construction development. 
A.  Any construction activity that results in a land disturbance that requires a grading, building, or discretionary permit must be undertaken in accordance with: 
1.  Any conditions and requirements established by the municipal stormwater permit or other permits which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of pollutants in stormwater runoff from the construction site. 
2.  Any condition or requirement established by the director to protect specific watersheds or drainage basins. 
3.  Any construction activity requiring a grading or demolition, or stockpile permit must include a plan identifying the structural and non-structural BMPs to be implemented during the construction activity to reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff from the site and prevent construction site discharges from causing or contributing to a violation of water quality standards. 
a.  The stormwater runoff plan required for the construction activity will be based on the area of land to be disturbed by the construction activity as follows: 
i.  Any construction activity requiring a grading, demolition or stockpile permit that results in the disturbance of less than one acre of land will require that the responsible person to submit for approval a stormwater pollution control plan (SWPCP), or equivalent, as required by the municipal stormwater permit. 
ii.  Any construction activity requiring a grading, demolition or stockpile permit that results in the disturbance of one acre or greater, will require that the responsible person to submit a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) in accordance with the municipal stormwater permit and state general permit. 
b.  Prior to the issuance of a grading permit or any permit authorizing construction activity including demolition, clearing, grading, grubbing, excavation, construction, if required by the state board, or where the director determines there is a substantial potential for discharge of significant levels of a pollutant into the storm drain system or receiving waters, the responsible person must obtain approval for the required plan based on the area of land disturbed by the construction activity. 
c.  Each applicable SWPPP or SWPCP, must name a responsible person for the project. 
d.  The owners of a development project, and their successors and assigns, and each named responsible person, must implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements of the approved SWPPP or SWPCP. Any failure to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements of such plan will constitute a violation of this chapter. 
e.  Compliance with the conditions and requirements of a SWPPP or SWPCP will not exempt any responsible person from the requirement to comply independently with each provision of this chapter. 
f.  Any construction activity requiring a SWPPP or SWPCP will be inspected a minimum of once during the wet season for the implementation of stormwater quality controls. If the city determines that the SWPCP or SWPPP has been property implemented, a follow-up inspection will be conducted by city of the site within two weeks of the initial inspection. 
g.  The costs and expenses of the city incurred in the review, approval, or revision of any SWPPP or SWPCP, as well as for the construction site inspection and reinspection will be included as part of the applicable fee for such plans. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.090 - Post construction development. 
A.  All new development and redevelopment within the city must be undertaken in accordance with: 
1.  Any conditions and requirements established by the municipal stormwater permit. 
2.  Any condition or requirements established by the city to protect specific watersheds or drainage basins. 
B.  Applicability of this chapter to new development and redevelopment projects will be determined in accordance with the municipal stormwater permit. 
C.  The following requirements apply to new development and redevelopment projects that are subject to post-construction stormwater controls : 
1.  A post-construction stormwater management plan (PCSMP) will be required to be submitted . 
2.  Each PCSMP must: 
a.  Include the name the owner or other responsible person for the project; 
b.  Illustrate the location of proposed post-construction stormwater controls; 
c.  Provide engineering calculations and analysis in accordance with the technical guidance manual that demonstrate that the post-construction stormwater controls will function appropriately; 
d.  Include an operation and maintenance plan in accordance with the technical guidance manual. The operation and maintenance plan must specify a required schedule and requirements for maintenance and monitoring; 
e.  Include a stormwater treatment device access and maintenance agreement on the form provided by city. The director may require that the agreement be recorded with the county recorder's office. 
3.  The owner or responsible person must implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements of the approved post-construction stormwater management plan. Each failure to implement and adhere to the post-construction stormwater management plan will constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
4.  The costs and expenses of the city incurred in the review, approval or revision of any post-construction stormwater management plan or other related requirements will be charged to the owner or responsible person of the applicable new development or redevelopment project as a fee per the applicable city fee resolution. 
5.  Compliance with the conditions and requirements of a post-construction stormwater management plan and related maintenance agreement does not exempt any person or development project from the requirement to comply independently with each provision of this chapter. 
D.  The following requirements apply to all properties with post-construction stormwater controls: 
1.  The owner or responsible person of a property with a post-construction stormwater control device must submit to the city an annual statement on the form provided by the city that certifies that the post-construction stormwater device is being adequately maintained and functions as designed. If the annual statement is not timely received by city, the city may inspect the post-construction stormwater device and the owner or responsible person will be charged for such inspection and any necessary reinspections. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.100 - Best management practices. 
A.  Authorization to Adopt and Enforce Best Management Practices. The director may adopt requirements establishing appropriate best management practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of the storm drain system. If relevant BMPs have been promulgated by the city or any federal, state or county agency for an activity, operation or facility that would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system or watercourses, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility must implement such BMPs. 
B.  Responsibility to Implement Best Management Practices. Any person engaged in activities or operations or owning facilities or property that will or may result in pollutants entering the storm drain system, or watercourses, as determined by the director, must implement applicable BMPs to the extent they are technologically and economically achievable to prevent or reduce such pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.110 - Compliance with NPDES permits. 
Each industrial discharger associated with any construction activity, or any other discharger described in any NPDES permit as may be adopted by the EPA, the state board or the regional board must comply with and undertake all other activities required by any applicable NPDES permit with regard to such discharges. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.120 - Watercourse and storm drain system protection. 
A.  Every owner or responsible person for a property, through which a watercourse or portion of the storm drain system passes, must keep and maintain the property reasonably free of litter, debris, vegetation and other obstacles which may contribute pollutants, contaminates or cause a blockage of the flow of water through the watercourse or storm drain system. 
B.  Every owner or responsible person for a property, must maintain all existing structures within or adjacent to the storm drain system so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the storm drain system; and, consistent with other laws regarding riparian habitat protection, may not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for such maintenance, nor remove any such vegetation in a manner as to increase the vulnerability of a watercourse to erosion. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.130 - Prohibited acts affecting watercourses or storm drains. 
No person may commit or cause to be committed any of the following acts, unless a appropriate permit or approval from all agencies with jurisdiction of the proposed act or project has first been obtained: 
A.  The discharge of a pollutant into any pipe or channel to a watercourse or storm drain system. 
B.  Modify the natural flow of water in a watercourse or storm drain system. 
C.  Deposit in, plant in or remove any material from a watercourse or storm drain system including its banks, except as required for maintenance. 
D.  Construct, alter, enlarge, connect to, change or remove any structure in a watercourse or storm drain system. 
E.  Place any loose or unconsolidated material along the side of or within a watercourse or storm drain system, or so close to the side as to cause a diversion of the flow, or to cause a probability of such material being transported by stormwaters passing through a watercourse or storm drain system. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.140 - Inspections. 
A.  Right to Inspect. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to monitor or enforce any of the provisions of, or perform any duty imposed by, this chapter, any permit, stormwater pollution control plan or other applicable law, or whenever the director has reasonable cause to believe there exists upon any premises, including any mobile or portable vehicles, any violation of the provisions of this chapter, any permit, stormwater pollution control plan or other applicable law, or any condition which makes such premises hazardous, unsafe or dangerous, the director is authorized to enter such property at any reasonable time and to inspect the same and perform any duty imposed upon the director by this chapter, or other applicable law. 
B.  Entry. The director is authorized to enter public or private property to investigate the source or potential source of a suspected illicit discharge to a storm drain system or watercourses located within the city at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to stormwater compliance. Prior to commencing any inspection as authorized by this chapter, the director will obtain the consent of the owner or responsible person for the premises or will obtain an administrative inspection warrant or criminal search warrant. 
C.  Records Review. The director may examine and copy such records as is necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Sample and Test. The director may inspect, sample and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents), or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the storm drain system. The director may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems or other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests, including but not limited to smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The director may take photographs or videotape, make measurements or drawings and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property. 
E.  Monitoring. The director may undertake monitoring and analysis including both the construction and maintenance of devices at the owners' expense, or require the owner or responsible person to undertake construction and maintenance of devices, at the owners' expense, for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the storm drain system. 
F.  Test Results. The owner or responsible person of property subject to inspection must provide copies of test results to the city. On submission of a written request to the director, such person will be entitled to receive copies of any results of tests conducted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.150 - Inspections of critical source facilities. 
The city will conduct regular inspections of critical source facilities in accordance with the requirements of the municipal stormwater permit. In order to defray the cost of these mandatory inspections, critical source facilities are required to pay the applicable inspection fee established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.160 - Remedies for violations. 
A.  Notice of Violation. The director will review each report of illicit connection or illicit discharge, and, if appropriate, may serve a notice of violation to the owner or responsible person of any public or private property, as to which an illicit connection or illicit discharge exists. The notice of violation must include the following: 
1.  Identify the provision(s) of this chapter, the applicable stormwater pollution prevention plan, stormwater pollution control plan, post-construction stormwater mitigation plan, or permit alleged to have been violated; 
2.  State that continued noncompliance may result in civil, criminal or administrative enforcement actions ; 
3.  State a compliance date; 
4.  Describe the manner of abatement required; 
5.  Order any necessary remediation work; and 
6.  State that the city may recover its costs of abating the violation. 
B.  The notice of violation may include where deemed applicable by the director, the following : 
1.  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to prevent threatened or future unauthorized illicit discharges, including but not limited to, the threat of an illicit discharge from any pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, holding or storage area; 
2.  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to discontinue any illicit connection; 
3.  Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering or proper disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact stormwater runoff; 
4.  Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent continued or threatened violations of this chapter including, but not limited to, requirements for compliance with BMPs guidance documents promulgated by any federal, state or local agency; 
5.  Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of a stormwater pollution prevention plan, stormwater pollution control plan, post-construction stormwater mitigation plan or permit issued pursuant hereto, or this chapter. 
C.  Cease and Desist Orders. 
1.  The director may issue a cease and desist order where the public health, safety and/or welfare requires the same, directing the owner or responsible person to: 
a.  Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or illicit discharge to the storm drain system; 
b.  Immediately contain or divert any flow of non-stormwater off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of this chapter; 
c.  Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter; 
d.  Clean up the area affected by the violation. 
2.  The director may direct by cease and desist order that the owner or responsible person immediately cease any activity not in compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the applicable plan, permit or this chapter. For construction projects and activities for which a grading or building permit is required a stop work order may be issued by the director or building and safety official of the city to ensure corrective actions are made to the satisfaction of the director. No construction work may be made until corrective actions have been completed to the satisfaction of the director. 
3.  A cease and desist order will be considered a notice of violation. 
D.  Recovery of Costs. The director will serve an invoice for costs upon the owner or other responsible person who is subject to a notice of violation or a cease and desist order. If any owner or other responsible person fails to either pay the invoice for costs, then the city may institute collection proceedings. 
E.  Service of Notices. Any notice of violation, cease and desist order or invoice for costs (collectively, "order") must be served pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and will be subject to the following: 
1.  Each order must state that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth in this chapter. 
2.  The order must include the address of the affected property and be addressed to the owner as shown on the most recently issued equalized assessment roll or as may otherwise appear in the current records of the city. 
3.  If the owner or other responsible person cannot be located after the reasonable efforts of the director, the order will be deemed served ten business days after posting on the property. 
F.  Emergency Abatement. The director is authorized to take any reasonably necessary precautions including, but not limited to, decontamination, packaging, dyking and transportation of materials, in order to protect life, protect property or prevent damage resulting from a condition which is likely to result in a discharge presenting an imminent hazard to the public health, safety or welfare; or which, either individually or in conjunction with other discharges, is an imminent hazard to the city's storm drain system, the environment or which places the city in violation of its NPDES permit. In the furtherance of such an operation, city personnel, any party contracting with the city or duly authorized representative of another government agency will have immediate access to the premises. The director may prohibit approach to the scene of such emergency by any person, vehicle, vessel or thing, and all persons not actually employed in the extinguishment of the condition or the preservation of lives and property in the vicinity thereof. Any costs incurred by the city in performing emergency abatement procedures may be recovered pursuant to subsection 9.32.160.D. 
G.  Consecutive Violations. Each day in which a violation occurs and each separate failure to comply with either a separate provision of this chapter, a notice of violation, an administrative compliance order, a cease and desist order, an applicable stormwater pollution prevention plan, stormwater pollution control plan, post-construction stormwater mitigation plan, or a condition or requirement of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
9.32.170 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by the issuance of an order may appeal from the issuance of such order in accordance with the following: 
1.  Any such appeal must be filed in writing within fifteen days of the date of service of the order by the director upon the appealing party. 
2.  No such appeal will be valid for any purpose unless it is timely filed with the city clerk and unless a filing and processing fee is paid contemporaneously with the filing thereof in an amount as set by city council resolution. 
3.  Upon the timely filing of such an appeal, the hearing officer will set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal as expeditiously as is possible and notify the appellant in writing of the time and place of the hearing.. 
4.  At the time of such hearing, the hearing officer will permit any interested person to present any relevant evidence bearing on the matters involved in the issuance of the order which is the subject of the appeal. The hearing officer need not follow the strict provisions of the rules of evidence as utilized in a judicial proceeding but will follow the substance of such rule to the end that the decision rendered is based upon reliable relevant evidentiary material. The hearing officer's decision will be final and subject only to judicial review. 
B.  The provisions of Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure set forth the procedure for judicial review of any action taken by the city pursuant to this chapter." 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 12-12-2012)  
Chapter 9.36 - REGULATION OF THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES AND PRODUCTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1129, § 4(Exh. B), adopted Sept. 28, 2016, amended chapter 9.36 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 9.36, §§ 9.36.010—9.36.050, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1101, § 3(Exh. A), 1-28-2015. 
 
9.36.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth below: 
A.  "Business" means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other legal entity formed for profit-making purposes, including, but not limited to, retail establishments where goods or services are sold. 
B.  "Electronic smoking device" means an electronic or battery operated device that delivers vapors for inhalation. This term includes every variation and type of such devices whether they are manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah or any other product name or descriptor. 
C.  "Electronic smoking device paraphernalia" means cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juice, tips, atomizers, electronic smoking device batteries, electronic smoking device chargers, and any other item specifically designed for the preparation, charging, or use of electronic smoking devices. 
D.  "Electronic smoking device product" means any form or concentration of nicotine, synthetically produced nicotine, or any other product that is used in an electronic smoking device to produce smoke. 
E.  "Electronic smoking device retailer" means any person or legal entity operating a business at which electronic smoking devices and/or electronic smoking device products are offered for sale. 
F.  "Employee" means any person who is employed in any capacity by a business which offers for sale any tobacco product, including but not limited to, any person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity which offers for sale any tobacco product. 
G.  "Person" means a natural person or any legal entity. 
H.  "Self-service display" means any open display of any type of smoking products and paraphernalia that the public has access to without the assistance or intervention of an employee. 
I.  "Smoke" means the gases, particles or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, including from an electronic smoking device, when the purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human inhalation of the gases, particles or vapors. Smoke does not mean the combustion of material solely for olfactory purposes such as, for example, smoke from incense, that does not contain any tobacco or nicotine or the emissions from a product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in mitigating, treating or preventing disease. 
J.  "Smoking" means engaging in an act that generates smoke, such as possessing a lighted pipe, a lighted hookah pipe, a lighted cigar, a lighted cigarette, an operating electronic smoking device, or any other act of smoking as defined in Section 22950.5(c) of the Business & Professions Code. 
K.  "Smoking lounge" means a business established for the purpose of providing customers with a place to purchase and smoke any form of tobacco or electronic smoking device product and/or purchase smoking products and paraphernalia and which generates at least ninety percent of its revenues from the sale of smoking products and paraphernalia. 
L.  "Smoking products and paraphernalia" means electronic smoking device, electronic smoking device paraphernalia, electronic smoking device product, tobacco paraphernalia, and tobacco product. 
M.  "Smoking products and paraphernalia retailer" means any person or legal entity operating a business at which smoking products and paraphernalia are offered for sale. 
N.  "Smoking products and paraphernalia vending machine" means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper currency, or other things representative of value, which dispenses or releases smoking products and paraphernalia. 
O.  "Tobacco paraphernalia" means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, cigarette rolling machines, any other item designed for the consumption or preparation of tobacco products, or any other item as defined in Section 22962(a)(2) of the Business and Professions Code. 
P.  "Tobacco product" has the meaning set forth Section 22950.5(d)(1) of the Business and Professions Code, and includes any of the following: 
(1)  A product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, or snuff. 
(2)  An electronic device that delivers nicotine or other vaporized liquids to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah. 
(3)  Any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. 
Q.  "Vendor-assisted" means that only an employee of a smoking products and paraphernalia retailer has access to smoking products and paraphernalia and assists a customer by supplying the smoking products and paraphernalia, and the customer does not take possession of the smoking products and paraphernalia until it is purchased. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 4(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.36.020 - Prohibitions. 
A.  Signage. No person may engage in the sale of any smoking products and paraphernalia without first posting and permanently maintaining a plainly visible sign at the point-of-sale of smoking products and paraphernalia which must contain the following words with initial letters capitalized in the following manner: 
The Sale of Tobacco Products or Electronic Smoking Devices to Persons Under 21 Years of Age is Prohibited by Law and Subject to Penalties. Valid Identification May Be Required. To Report an Unlawful Tobacco Sale Call 1-800-5ASK-4-ID. Business and Professions Code Section 22952. 
The sign must be square in shape and no smaller than 5.5 inches high by 5.5 inches wide (30.25 square inches) or be rectangular in shape and no smaller the 3.66 inches high by 8.5 inches wide (31.11 square inches). A sign may be larger; however, the sign must be proportionate to one set of the dimensions. The sign must be printed in ink that is of high contrast from the color of the background material. The size, typeface and weight of the lettering must be in conformance with California Code of Regulations Title 17, Section 6902. 
Signs may be available from the Tobacco Education Clearing House of California at 
www.tobaccofreecatalog.org . 
B.  Identification. No person or employee may sell, offer to sell, permit to be sold, give, or in any way furnish any smoking products and paraphernalia to any person who appears to be under 27 years of age, without first verifying by means of photographic identification containing the person's date of birth that the person is not under 21 years of age, except where the person is at least 18 years of age and presents a valid, unexpired, photographic identification issued by the United States Armed Forces that indicates the person's proof of age and military status. 
C.  Packaging. No person or employee may sell, offer to sell or permit to be sold, any smoking products and paraphernalia not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with all required health warnings. 
D.  Self-Service Display. No person or employee may sell, offer for sale or display for sale, give, or in any way furnish any smoking products and paraphernalia by means of a self-service display or by any means other than vendor-assisted sales. 
E.  Smoking. No vendor may allow an employee or any other person to smoke or otherwise sample a tobacco product or electronic smoking device product prior to purchase, unless the vendor's place of business is a legally permitted smoking lounge, and the smoking of the tobacco or electronic smoking device product is allowed under state or federal law. 
F.  Machines. No business or other commercial retail or wholesale outlet, may locate, install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance or use on his or her or its premises of, any smoking products and paraphernalia vending machine for the purpose of selling or distributing any smoking products and paraphernalia. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 4(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.36.030 - Non-retaliation. 
No person may discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant agrees to abide by the provisions of this chapter. 
No person may intimidate or threaten any reprisal or effect any reprisal for the purpose of retaliating against any employee because such employee seeks to attain compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 4(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.36.040 - Conflicts of law. 
This chapter will not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking products and paraphernalia vending machines and/or distribution of smoking products and paraphernalia product samples where they are otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. This chapter will not be construed to be in conflict with any laws and/or regulations imposed by the state or federal government. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 4(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.36.050 - Penalty for violation. 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter will be deemed to be a misdemeanor and punishable as such. Each day a violation of any provision of this chapter will continue is to be a new and separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 4(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.40 - SOLICITATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND COMMERCIAL PARKING AREAS 
 
9.40.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the place and manner of the solicitation of contributions in certain public rights-of-way and commercial parking areas. These regulations are not intended to restrict the right of free speech, but to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare while providing alternative channels of communication and locations for the solicitation of contributions. All administrative and enforcement interpretations and discretion is to be exercised consistent with the purposes and intent stated in this section. 
(Ord. 978 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
9.40.020 - Definitions. 
"Commercial parking area" means all private property comprising the off-street parking area on property zoned commercial or industrial that is generally held open for the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular parking under Section 11.36.010(B) of this code, including but not limited to setbacks and portions that are landscaped. 
"Enter" means to stand in, or place any part of one's body, or extend an object into the area of a public right-of way. 
"Public right-of-way" means the area dedicated to public use for street purposes, including the privately owned and maintained roads within the city that are generally held open to the public for the purposes of vehicular traffic under Section 11.36.010(A) of this code, and includes, but is not limited to, medians, streets, driveways, roadways, parkways, alleys, and other public vehicular ways. It does not include sidewalks and other nonvehicular ways. 
"Responsible person" means the owner or person in lawful possession of a commercial parking area. 
"Solicit" means any action or gesture which induces another person to reasonably believe that a contribution of any kind is being sought, whether or not an actual contribution is received. 
"Traveling along a public right-of-way" means a vehicle being operated on a public right-of-way, excluding vehicles lawfully parked at the edge of street or in a designated parking space or area. 
"Vehicle" means a vehicle as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 670, as such section may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 978 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
9.40.030 - Prohibition of the solicitation of contributions in public rights-of-way. 
No person may enter into a public right-of-way to solicit a contribution of any kind from any person in a vehicle that is traveling along a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 978 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
9.40.040 - Prohibition of the solicitation of contributions in commercial parking areas. 
A.  No person may solicit contributions of any kind from a location within a commercial parking area other than an area designated for such solicitation, if any, by the responsible person where notice of such prohibition has been posted in the manner set forth in subsection B of this section. 
B.  This section only applies to commercial parking areas where, as applicable, the responsible person has caused to be posted in a conspicuous place at one or more entrances to such commercial parking area a notice not less than eighteen by twenty-four inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height and not to exceed, in total area, six square feet in per sign face. The content of such notice must be in substantially the following form: 
"IT IS UNLAWFUL TO ENGAGE IN THE SOLICITATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS IN AREAS OF THIS PARKING LOT WHICH ARE NOT APPROVED FOR SUCH ACTIVITY BY THE OWNER OR OCCUPANT OF THE PROPERTY. VIOLATORS WILL BE CITED AND FINED." 
(Ord. 978 § 2 (part), 2005.) 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2, 5-11-2011)  
9.40.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter will be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in this code. Any such person will be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every act of solicitation that is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 978 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
Chapter 9.50 - PROHIBITION ON THE OCCUPANCY OF NON-HABITABLE ROOMS, SPACES AND STRUCTURES 
 
9.50.010 - Purposes. 
The purposes of this chapter include: 
A.  To restate in a single place the prohibitions on the occupancy of non-habitable rooms, structures or spaces for cooking, eating, living or sleeping purposes, which are contained in multiple code provisions including the uniform codes that are adopted by reference in Chapter 16.04; 
B.  To provide for recurring inspections of properties found to be in violation of this chapter in order to ensure continued compliance; and 
C.  To provide for enhanced civil penalties to deter such illegal uses of property and to recover part of the costs associated with such property inspections and related code enforcement activities. 
(Ord. 1007 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
9.50.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Responsible person" means a person with a right of ownership, management, occupation, or possession of private property. 
(Ord. 1007 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
9.50.030 - Prohibition on the occupancy of non-habitable rooms, spaces and structures. 
No person may cause or permit on any property the occupancy of non-habitable rooms, structures or spaces for cooking, eating, living or sleeping purposes in violation of this code. 
(Ord. 1007 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
9.50.040 - Reinspection of premises. 
Any property found in violation of Section 9.50.030 under any of the code enforcement remedies authorized under Title 1 or Title 9 of this code, or by state or federal law, is subject to reinspection up to four times a year for a period of five years from the date of the violation by city code enforcement officers to ensure that no further occupation of non-habitable rooms, structures or spaces for cooking, eating, living or sleeping purposes in violation of this code exist at such property. 
(Ord. 1007 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
9.50.050 - Penalties. 
A.  Civil Fines. The fine schedule for administrative citations resulting from violations of this chapter is as follows: 
1.  A first violation is punishable by a five hundred dollar fine; 
2.  A second violation at the same property or by the same responsible person within a twelve-month period is punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars; 
3.  A third or subsequent violation at the same property or by the same responsible person within a twelve-month period is punishable by a fine of one thousand five hundred dollars. 
B.  The second, third or subsequent violation fines prescribed in subsections (A)(2) and (A)(3) are payable whether or not the responsible person for allowing such illegal occupation of non-habitable rooms, structures or spaces is different from the responsible person for any prior violations at the same property. 
C.  The fine schedule prescribed in subsection (B) is a "rolling schedule" meaning that in calculating the fine payable the city will count backward starting from the date of the most recent violation to determine the number of violations at the same premises or by the same responsible person. 
(Ord. 1007 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
Title 10 - PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 26, 2014, amended Title 10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Title 10, Chs. 10.04, 10.20, 10.30, 10.32, 10.34, 10.38, 10.40, 10.44, 10.48, 10.50, 10.60, 10.72, pertained to public peace, morals and welfare, and derived from prior Code §§ 4302, 4305—4308; Ord. No. 36, § 1, adopted 1965; Ord. No. 39, § 1, adopted 1965; Ord. No. 40, § 1, adopted 1965; Ord. No. 43, § 1, adopted 1965; Ord. No. 54, § 1, adopted 1965; Ord. No. 342, § 1, adopted 1976; Ord. No. 407, § 1, adopted 1978; Ord. No. 423, § 1, adopted 1979; Ord. No. 486, § 1, adopted 1981; Ord. No. 618, §§ 2—4, adopted 1986; Ord. No. 691, §§ 1—4, adopted 1989; Ord. No. 789, § 1, adopted 1993; Ord. No. 802, § 2, adopted 1994; Ord. No. 882, § 2, adopted 1997; Ord. No. 893, § 1, adopted 1998; Ord. No. 921, §§ 1—4, 6—8, adopted 1999; Ord. No. 922, §§ 1—4, 6—8, adopted 1999; Ord. No. 967, § 1, adopted 2003; Ord. No. 992, § 1, adopted 2006; Ord. No. 993, §§ 1, 2, adopted 2006; Ord. No. 994, § 2, adopted 2006; Ord. No. 997, § 3, adopted 2006; Ord. No. 998, §§ 2, 3, adopted 2006; Ord. No. 1008, § 2, adopted 2007; Ord. No. 1019, § 10, adopted 2008. 
 
I. - GENERAL REGULATIONS  
Chapter 10.04 - NONRESIDENTIAL ALARM SYSTEM REGULATIONS  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
10.04.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted in accordance with the city's police powers, as set forth in the California Constitution, in order to regulate the installation and use of alarm systems and to recover costs associated with responding to false alarms associated with nonresidential alarms. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter: 
"211 Alarm or takeover alarm" means a silent alarm dispatch request generated by the manual activation of an alarm system device intended to signal that a robbery is in progress or that an alarm site has been entered by intruders. 
"Administrator" means the police chief or designee, subject to city manager approval. 
"Alarm" means a sound, signal or message generated by an alarm system installed at a nonresidential location. 
"Alarm agent" means a person employed by an alarm business, whose duties include altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing or servicing alarm systems. 
"Alarm business" means a commercial enterprise that sells, leases, installs, moves, maintains, alters, services or monitors alarm systems; alarm business does not include a business that: 
1.  Sells but does not service alarm systems; or 
2.  Manufactures alarm systems and sells the same to retailers, and not to the public. 
"Alarm dispatch" means a visit by a public safety officer to an alarm site in response to an alarm dispatch request. 
"Alarm dispatch request" means a notification to the city that an alarm has been activated at an alarm site. 
"Alarm site" means a building, structure or portions thereof, at which an alarm system operates, except that in multi-tenant structures, each alarm system is considered to serve a separate alarm site. 
"Alarm system" means any mechanical or electrical device or connected devices, not including a smoke detector, designed or used for the detection of unauthorized entry into a building or structure, or the commission of an unlawful act within a building or structure, or the existence of a fire or medical emergency within a building or structure, that when activated emits a sound and/or transmits a signal or message. 
"Audible alarm" means an alarm system device that, when activated, emits an audible sound at the alarm site. 
"Automatic dialing device" means a device that automatically sends, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency. 
"False alarm dispatch" means an alarm dispatch to which the responding public safety officer, having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site, finds no evidence of a situation requiring a response by a public safety officer. 
"Monitoring" means the process by which an alarm business receives signals from alarm systems and relays an alarm dispatch request to the city. 
"Nonresidential" means all uses except single-family homes and multifamily residences. 
"One plus code" means an alarm system code that adds one to the last digit of the normal arm or disarm code. 
"Public safety department" means the Ventura County sheriff's department or Ventura County fire department serving as the city's police department and fire department, respectively. 
"Silent alarm" means an alarm system device or connected devices that, when activated, automatically transmits a non-audible message or signal to an alarm business, indicating the need for an emergency response to the alarm site. 
"Unsecured," in reference to an alarm site, means that a building or structure is not equipped with a lock, bar or other device that prevents a door or window from being opened from the exterior of the alarm site without breaking the door or window. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.030 - Administration. 
The administrator is authorized to receive applications, issue and revoke permits, and otherwise administer and implement this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.040 - Permit required. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided, it is unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain an alarm system unless authorized by a permit issued by the administrator pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  A permit is not required for the following: 
1.  Alarm systems affixed to motor vehicles or boats; 
2.  Alarm systems designed to alert only the inhabitants of the alarm site and that do not have audible alarms that can be heard at the exterior of the alarm site; or 
3.  Alarm systems for single-family homes and multifamily residences. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.050 - Prohibitions—Alarm businesses. 
It is unlawful for an alarm business to: 
A.  Program an alarm system so that a one plus code activates the alarm; 
B.  Install a single-action, nonrecessed button as a device to activate a 211 alarm or a takeover alarm; or 
C.  Install an automatic dialing device in an alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.060 - Prohibition—Automatic dialing device. 
It is unlawful for an alarm system to consist of or include an automatic dialing device. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.070 - Prohibitions—Audible alarms. 
It is unlawful for an alarm system to include an audible alarm that: 
A.  Emits sounds similar to that made by an emergency vehicle, siren or civil defense warning system; or 
B.  Activates for any purpose other than detection of an unauthorized entry into the alarm site or a hazard prompting a response by the public safety department. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.080 - Prohibition—Activation of alarms. 
A.  It is unlawful for a 211 alarm or a takeover alarm to be activated by means of a single-action, nonrecessed button. 
B.  It is unlawful for any alarm to be activated by a one plus code. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.090 - False alarms prohibited—False alarm fees. 
A.  Permittees must take all practicable, reasonable, actions to prevent false alarms from being generated by their alarm systems. 
B.  Each alarm system is allowed three false alarms in any twelve-month period. The city may impose a fine on a permittee for each subsequent false alarm generated by an alarm system that causes a response by the public safety department. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.100 - Notices. 
A.  Where the provisions of this chapter require that an applicant/permittee be served with notice, such notice is deemed served when personally delivered to the applicant/permittee; when deposited in first class U.S. mail, addressed to the applicant/permittee's last known address; or when sent via facsimile to the applicant/permittee's last known facsimile number. 
B.  Unless otherwise provided, written notification to a permittee or applicant of a permit decision will state with particularity the basis for such decision. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.110 - Establishing fees/fines. 
All fees and fines applicable to this chapter must be established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Article II. - Permit Application and Issuance 
 
10.04.120 - Application form and content. 
A.  Permit applications must be filed by a natural person in the name of each applicant proposing to obtain a permit. 
B.  Every application must be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized representative, under penalty of perjury. 
C.  Permit applications and permits will be in a form prescribed by the administrator and contain all of the following information: 
1.  The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone numbers of the person filing the application; 
2.  The proposed location for the alarm system; 
3.  The name and telephone numbers for a contact person in the event of an alarm where the permittee is unavailable; 
4.  Notification that nothing in this chapter imposes a duty upon the city to respond to an alarm; and 
5.  Such additional information as the administrator may reasonably require to process the application. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.130 - Change in application information. 
A.  Whenever any change occurs in the information contained in the permit, the permittee must give the administrator written notice of the change within thirty days of the date that the change becomes effective. 
B.  If a permittee fails to give the administrator timely written notice of a change in the information contained in the application, the administrator may charge the permittee an administrative fee. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.140 - Permit issuance. 
A.  The administrator must issue a permit if: 
1.  The application was complete in accordance with this chapter; 
2.  There are no grounds for denying the permit; and 
3.  The applicant accepts the permit in writing. 
B.  Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter must conform to the permit conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.150 - Permit denial. 
A permit can be denied for the following reasons: 
A.  The application is incomplete; 
B.  The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental application information requested by the administrator; 
C.  Information submitted by the applicant is materially false; 
D.  The application is submitted by a person with a suspended permit or whose permit was revoked; or 
E.  The application seeks authorization for an alarm system that is prohibited by this code or unlawful under any other local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.160 - Notice of denial. 
Where the administrator denies a permit, the administrator must serve notice to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Article III. - Conditions 
 
10.04.170 - Permit conditions. 
Persons issued a permit pursuant to this chapter must comply with the following: 
A.  Permittees must comply with all local, state and federal laws regulating alarm systems. 
B.  Permittees must maintain a valid business license issued pursuant to this code. 
C.  Permittees must respond, or have an authorized representative respond, to the alarm site within thirty minutes after being notified by the public safety department that an alarm is malfunctioning. 
D.  Permittees must pay all fees required by this chapter including, without limitation, fees for failing to respond to an alarm site and for false alarms. 
E.  Permittees must consent to having public safety officers enter onto an alarm site if the permittee, or the permittee's authorized representative, fails to respond to an alarm site as required by this chapter upon being notified by the public safety department. 
F.  Permittees must maintain at each alarm site a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. 
G.  Nothing in this chapter imposes a duty on the city to respond to an alarm. 
H.  Permittees must enter into a hold harmless agreement with the city which will, in part, indemnify city, its officers, employees, and agents, from any liability arising from permittees' activities in a form approved by the city attorney's office. 
I.  Permits are not transferable to another person or to another location. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.180 - Effective term of permit—Permittee required to provide notice of changes from information contained in permit. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B, a permit issued under this chapter will remain in effect unless suspended or revoked by the administrator. 
B.  A permit will automatically expire unless a permittee timely files a change in application information in accordance with Section 10.04.130 whenever one of the following occurs: 
1.  There is a change of ownership at the alarm site; 
2.  There is a change of business name or use (as defined in Section 19.04.805) at the alarm site; 
3.  The permittee moves the business to a new location; 
4.  The alarm system at the alarm site is substantially changed or modified. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.190 - Entry by public safety. 
If public safety officers cannot contact the permittee or his or her authorized representative or the permittee fails to confirm a response within thirty minutes, public safety officers may, but are not required to, enter any unsecured building or structure at the alarm site in order to deactivate the alarm and/or secure the alarm site. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.200 - Silent or audible alarm, presumption. 
It is presumed that an alarm results in an alarm dispatch request. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.210 - Permittees' joint and several obligations. 
The duties imposed by this chapter on permittees are imposed jointly and severally on each person who occupies or who is entitled to occupy an alarm site, regardless of whether such person installed, operated, or knew of the existence of an alarm system at the alarm site. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Article IV. - Additional Requirements 
 
10.04.220 - Alarm business duties. 
Every alarm business that monitors alarm systems must: 
A.  Make every effort to verify the legitimacy of every alarm, except a 211 alarm or a takeover alarm, before making an alarm dispatch request; 
B.  Report alarm dispatch requests by using telephone numbers designated by the administrator; 
C.  Communicate verified cancellations of alarm dispatch requests in a form and to telephone numbers designated by the administrator; 
D.  Maintain for at least one year, records relating to all dispatches, including the name, address and telephone number of permittees; the time of request for dispatch; information concerning the alarm business' attempt to contact the alarm site by telephone or other electronic means before requesting the dispatch; 
E.  Make such records available to the administrator on request; and 
F.  Disconnect an alarm system located in a business, when directed to do so by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.230 - Alarm agent duties. 
Alarm agents must, on request, display the registration issued by the California Department of Consumer Affairs to any public safety officer or the alarm administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.240 - Deactivation of audible alarm. 
Every audible alarm must have a timer that automatically deactivates the alarm within thirty minutes after it begins sounding, and will not sound again until the system is reset. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.250 - Emergency power supply. 
Alarm systems must be equipped with a relay or an uninterruptible power supply so that a power interruption or restored power following an interruption of normal utility electricity will not activate the alarm system. An emergency power supply must be capable of at least four hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Article V. - Appeals 
 
10.04.260 - Right of administrative review. 
Except as otherwise provided, an applicant may request administrative review of the administrator's decision pursuant to this chapter including, without limitation, decisions regarding permit denial, revocation or imposition of fines. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.270 - Time for administrative review. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be commenced within five days from the date on which written notice of the administrator's decision is served on the applicant/permittee. 
B.  If a request is untimely, the administrator may, nevertheless, extend the time for commencing such review for good cause shown, but in no event may a request be filed more than thirty days after notice was served. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.280 - Commencement of administrative review. 
A.  A request for administrative review must be on a form provided by the administrator and contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the person making the request; 
2.  A description of the decision, determination or order which is the subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order was made or issued; 
3.  A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and 
4.  Such other information as may be required by the administrator. 
B.  A request for administrative review must be accompanied by a fee in an amount determined by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.290 - Administrative review. 
A.  Upon request for administrative review being filed, the administrator will provide a copy of the notice to the city manager within two business days. 
B.  Upon receiving a request for review from the administrator, the city manager will review the request and, within ten business days of receiving the request notice, provide the appellant with a written notification that: 
1.  The administrator's decision is affirmed; 
2.  The administrator's decision is modified; 
3.  The administrator's decision is reversed and a permit is issued. Under such circumstances, the fee collected for an appeal must be returned to the permittee within thirty days of the city manager's decision. 
C.  The city manager may, but is not required to, conduct a hearing at a time and place determined at the city manager's sole discretion. In the event of a hearing, the rules of evidence will not apply. The city manager may consider such evidence as the city manager may deem reliable. The city manager may adopt such additional reasonable rules of procedure that may facilitate the progression of such a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.300 - City manager decision final. 
The city manager's decision is final. There is no right to appeal a decision to the city council. Any court challenge must be filed within ninety calendar days of the city manager's decision in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Article VI. - Enforcement 
 
10.04.310 - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
The administrator may suspend a permit up to thirty calendar days or revoke a permit if: 
A.  The permittee violates any provision of this chapter. 
B.  The permittee fails to make timely payment of any fees or fines imposed. 
C.  The permittee's alarm system causes eight or more false alarm dispatches in a twelve-month period. 
D.  The permittee made any false statement of a material matter in the application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.320 - No new permit after revocation. 
Should a permit be revoked, the permittee is presumptively disqualified to apply for a new permit in accordance with this chapter. This presumption may be overcome upon a showing of good cause as to why a permit should be issued following a revocation. Any such showing must be made to the administrator's satisfaction or, if the administrator denies a permit, to the city manager as prescribed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.330 - Enforcement. 
A.  In addition to the remedies set forth in this chapter, violations of a permit may be enforced as follows: 
1.  Prosecution as infractions or misdemeanors at the city attorney's discretion; 
2.  Abated as public nuisances; 
3.  Enjoined as unfair business practices that are presumed to nominally damage each and every resident of the community in which the permittee operates. 
B.  The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other criminal or civil remedies. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.340 - City attorney enforcement authority. 
In addition to any other general functions, powers, and duties given to the city attorney by this code or California law, the city attorney is authorized to: 
A.  Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal and civil cases for violations of this chapter including, without limitation, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement and suits for injunctive relief; 
B.  Prosecute all actions for the recovery of fines, penalties, forfeitures and other money accruing to the city under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.350 - Notice of violation. 
Upon determining that a person is violating this chapter, the administrator must serve a notice of violation on the apparent violator. The notice must state the basis of such violations and provide information regarding appeals rights. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.04.360 - Liability for fines. 
All fines, fees, penalties and interest imposed pursuant to this chapter are civil debts owed to the city by the person fined. In the event that judicial action is necessary to compel payment of any debt owed to the city, the person or persons subject to the fine are also liable for the costs of suit and attorney's fees incurred by the city to collect the fine. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Chapter 10.06 - PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION 
 
10.06.010 - Public urination and defecation prohibited. 
No person may urinate or defecate in any public place except when using a urinal or toilet that is located in a bathroom, rest room or other structure enclosed from public view. As used in this section, "public place" means both public property and private property open to the public and includes alleys, bridges, driveways, highways, parks, parking lots, pathways, sidewalks, streets, trash enclosures, walkways, and other places or areas generally accessible to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Chapter 10.08 - LITTERING 
 
10.08.010 - Littering prohibited. 
No person may throw, discard, place, or deposit litter in any manner or any amount on any public or private property within the city, except in authorized containers or receptacles used for the collection and disposal of solid waste and which are maintained in a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried away or escaping due to the elements. As used in this section, "litter" means any "solid waste" as defined in Chapter 9.04 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Chapter 10.09 - LOOKOUTS 
 
10.09.010 - Lookouts. 
A.  No person may act as a guard or lookout inside or outside any building, structure or premise within the city for any other person, who is engaged in any illegal act or conduct occurring inside or outside any such building, structure, or premise. 
B.  No person may give any signal intended or calculated to give warning of the approach of any enforcement officer to any person that is engaged in any illegal act or conduct occurring inside or outside any building, structure, or premise within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
II. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON  
Chapter 10.12 - AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION 
 
10.12.010 - Definitions. 
"Aggressive manner" means any of the following: 
A.  Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during or after soliciting, if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to 
1.  Fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of property, or 
2.  Otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value. 
B.  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person or an occupied vehicle without that person's consent in the course of soliciting. 
C.  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact. 
D.  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited either before, during, or after soliciting. 
E.  Persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the person solicited has been solicited and informed the solicitor by words or conduct that such person does not want to be solicited or does not want to give money or any other thing of value to the solicitor. 
F.  Using profane, offensive or abusive language which is inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction, either before, during, or after solicitation. 
"Public place" means both public property and private property open to the public and includes, but is not limited to, parking lots, highways, streets, bridges, alleys, driveways, pathways, sidewalks, walkways, and other places or areas generally accessible to the public. 
"Solicit" means using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures, signs or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value or to offer the sale of goods or services in exchange for money or other thing of value. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.12.020 - Aggressive solicitation prohibited. 
No person may solicit in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE  
Chapter 10.30 - CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES 
 
10.30.010 - Alcoholic beverages in public places. 
A.  No person may drink any alcoholic beverages, or hold or exercise possession or control of any open container containing any such alcoholic beverages: 
1.  On any street, sidewalk, highway or alley; 
2.  On any public school ground, bleacher or stadium; 
3.  In any public place, place of public assembly, or in any place open to the public, except as set forth in subsection F. [6.]; 
4.  In or on any building or premises owned or occupied by the city or any other governmental agency; 
5.  On any private street, building or other private property within the city without the consent of the person or entity in possession or control of the private property; or 
6.  In any area within any public park posted to prohibit consumption of such beverages. 
B.  As used in this chapter, "alcoholic beverages" includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.30.020 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of Section 10.30.010 do not prohibit the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages: 
A.  In a public park when the park is occupied by a group or an organization for the purpose of a social gathering on the part of such group or organization and any necessary permits have been issued by the proper authority; or 
B.  In or on any building or premises or public right-of-way which is owned, occupied or controlled by the city or any other government agency when such drinking is in or on premises where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages is authorized by a license or permit and has been approved by such agency. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Chapter 10.32 - SOCIAL HOST RESPONSIBILITY AND LIABILITY 
 
10.32.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter include: 
A.  To protect public health, safety and general welfare; 
B.  To supplement existing laws that prohibit serving alcoholic beverages to underage persons as well as the consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage persons; and 
C.  To provide for the recovery of costs associated with providing law enforcement, fire and other emergency response services to loud or unruly gatherings. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.32.020 - Definitions. 
The words and terms used in this chapter have the meanings set forth in this section. 
"Alcohol" means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
"Alcoholic beverage" includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
"Loud or unruly gathering" means a party or gathering of two or more persons at or on a residence or other private property upon which loud or unruly conduct occurs. Such loud or unruly conduct includes but is not limited to: 
1.  Excessive noise; 
2.  Excessive traffic; 
3.  Obstruction of public streets or crowds that have spilled into public streets; 
4.  Public drunkenness or unlawful public consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages; 
5.  Service to or consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by any underage person, except as permitted by state law; 
6.  Assaults, batteries, fights, domestic violence or other disturbances of the peace; 
7.  Vandalism; 
8.  Litter; 
9.  Any other conduct which constitutes a threat to public health, safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property or general welfare. 
"Minor" means any person under eighteen years of age. 
"Residence or other private property" means a home, yard, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. 
"Response costs" means the costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire and other emergency response providers to loud or unruly gatherings, including but not limited to: 
1.  Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with loud or unruly gatherings, and the administrative costs attributable to such response; 
2.  The cost of any medical treatment to or for any law enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a loud or unruly gathering; 
3.  The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a loud or unruly gathering. 
"Responsible person" means a person or persons with a right of ownership, management, occupation, or possession of the residence or other private property on which a loud or unruly gathering is conducted, including, but not limited to: 
1.  An owner of the residence or other private property; 
2.  A tenant or lessee of the residence or other private property; 
3.  The landlord of another person responsible for the gathering; 
4.  The person in charge of the residence or other private property; and 
5.  The person who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts or controls the gathering or any other person accepting responsibility for such a gathering. 
"Underage person" means any person under twenty-one years of age. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.32.030 - Responsibility for proper property management. 
Every owner, occupant, lessee or holder of any possessory interest of a residence or other private property within the city is required to maintain, manage and supervise the property, and all persons thereon, in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this chapter. The owner of the property remains liable for such violations regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding the property. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.32.040 - Penalties. 
A.  It is a civil violation of this chapter for any responsible person to conduct, aid, allow, permit or condone a loud or unruly gathering at a residence or other private property. 
B.  Civil Fines. The fine schedule for administrative citations resulting from violations of this chapter is as follows: 
1.  A first violation is punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars; 
2.  A second violation at the same residence or other private property, or by the same responsible person, within a twelve-month period is punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars; 
3.  A third or subsequent violation at the same residence or other private property, or by the same responsible person, within a twelve-month period is punishable by a fine of two thousand dollars. 
C.  The fines prescribed at subsection (B) are in addition to any response costs that may be assessed pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  The second, third or subsequent violation fines prescribed at subsections (B)(2) and (B)(3) are payable whether or not the responsible person for such loud or unruly gathering is different from the responsible person for any prior loud or unruly gathering at the same residence or other private property. 
E.  The fine schedule prescribed at subsection (B) is a "rolling schedule" meaning that in calculating the fine payable the city will count backward starting from the date of the most recent loud or unruly gathering to determine how many prior loud or unruly gatherings have taken place at the residence or other private property in question during the statutory twelve-month period. A warning given pursuant to this chapter will remain in effect for the residence or other private property at a given address until a full twelve-month period has elapsed during which there have been no responses to a loud or unruly gathering at that residence or other private property. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.32.050 - Liability for response costs. 
A.  Liability for Response Costs. If a law enforcement, fire or other emergency response provider responds to a loud or unruly gathering at a residence or other private property within the city within twelve months of a warning given to a responsible person regarding a loud or unruly gathering at the same location, all responsible persons will be jointly and severally liable for the city's costs of providing response costs for that response and all subsequent responses during the twelve-month period. If a responsible person for the gathering is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor and the minor will be jointly and severally liable for the response costs. To incur liability for response costs imposed by this chapter, the responsible person for the loud or unruly gathering need not be present at such gathering resulting in the response giving rise to the imposition of response costs. This chapter imposes vicarious as well as direct liability upon a responsible person. 
B.  Warning. 
1.  Prior to imposing any liability under subsection (A), when a law enforcement, fire or other emergency response provider makes an initial response to a loud or unruly gathering at a residence or other private property within the city, a written warning must be provided to any responsible person for the gathering that: 
a.  A loud or unruly gathering has been found to exist; and 
b.  Any responsible person may be charged for the response costs incurred for subsequent responses to a loud or unruly gathering at the residence or other private property within a twelve-month period from the date of the warning. 
2.  If a responsible person cannot be identified at the scene, the official may subsequently return to the residence or other private property and issue the warning to a then-present responsible person. 
3.  If a written warning is not provided to a responsible person who identifies himself or herself as an owner of the property, then a copy of the warning must be sent within thirty days of the initial response by first-class or certified mail to the owner of the residence or other private property, as identified on the last equalized assessment roll of the Ventura County Assessor. 
4.  A copy of the warning may also be given to any other known responsible person who does not reside at the residence or other private property in question by first-class or certified mail within thirty days of the initial response. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.32.060 - Billing, appeals and collection of response costs. 
A.  The amount of response costs will be deemed a civil debt owed to the city by the responsible person held liable under Section 10.32.050 for the loud or unruly gathering and, if a minor, by the minor's parents or guardians. 
B.  Notice of the response costs for which the responsible person is liable will be mailed by first class or certified mail within forty-five days of the response giving rise to such costs. The notice must contain the following information: 
1.  The name of the person being held liable for the payment of such costs; 
2.  The address of the residence or other private property where the loud or unruly gathering occurred; 
3.  The date and time of the response; 
4.  The law enforcement, fire or emergency service provider who responded; 
5.  The date and time of any previous warning given pursuant to Section 10.32.050 or previous responses to loud or unruly gatherings at the residence or other private property in question within the previous twelve months; 
6.  An itemized list of the response costs for which the person is being held liable; and 
7.  Notice of the right to appeal the imposition and amount of response costs. 
C.  The responsible person must remit payment of the noticed response costs to the city's finance department within thirty days of the date of the notice. 
D.  In the event timely payment is not made, the responsible person owing such costs will be liable in a civil action brought in the name of the city for recovery of the response costs, including interest at the maximum legal rate from the date the payment becomes delinquent, a late penalty of one hundred dollars, and all reasonable attorney's fees and costs associated with the collection action. 
E.  A responsible person may request an administrative hearing to review the imposition and amount of response costs by filing a request for such a hearing within fifteen days of the date the city sent notice of the liability for response costs in the manner provided by Section 1.13.140 of this code. The administrative hearing process will be subject to and conducted in the manner provided by Sections 1.13.150 through 1.13.210 of this code with the exception that the term "response costs" will be substituted for the term "fine." 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.32.070 - Reservation of legal remedies. 
Nothing in this chapter constitutes a waiver by the city of any right to seek reimbursement for actual costs of response services through other legal remedies or procedures. The procedure provided for in this chapter is in addition to any other available legal remedy. This chapter in no way limits the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.32.080 - Protected activities. 
This chapter does not apply to activities protected by the California Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Chapter 10.34 - NOISE REGULATIONS 
 
10.34.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to maintain and preserve the quiet atmosphere of the city, and to implement programs aimed at maintaining noise levels throughout the city at acceptable levels consistent with the goals and objectives of the noise element of the city's general plan. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.020 - Definitions. 
All terminology used in this chapter, but not defined in this section, is intended to conform with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. The following words, phrases, and terms as used in this chapter have the following meanings: 
"Agricultural property" means a parcel of real property which is designated as agricultural on the city's official zoning map or used for agricultural purposes in accordance with Title 19. 
"Ambient noise" means the composite of all noise from sources near and far, excluding the alleged intrusive noise source. The ambient noise constitutes the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location. 
"A-weighted sound level" means the sound level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the "A" weighting network, and designated in dB(A) or dBA. 
"Commercial property" means a parcel of real property which is designated for commercial/office purposes on the city's official zoning map or used for commercial or office purposes in accordance with Title 19. 
"Construction" means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
"Daytime" means the time period from seven a.m. to nine p.m. 
"Decibel" means a unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty times the logarithm to the base of ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty micropascals. 
"Director" means the director of community development or the director's designee. 
"Emergency machinery, vehicle, or alarm" means any machinery, vehicle, or alarm used, employed, performed or operated in an effort to protect, provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or used by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
"Emergency work" means work made necessary to protect, provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
"Fixed noise source" means a stationary device which creates sounds while in a fixed or stationary position, including but not limited to industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fan compressors, generators, air-conditioners and refrigeration equipment. 
"Impulsive noise" means a sound of short duration, usually of high intensity and lasting less than three seconds, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
"Industrial property" means a parcel of real property which is designated for manufacturing purposes on the city's official zoning map or used for manufacturing purposes in accordance with Title 19. 
"Intrusive noise" means an alleged offensive noise which intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise at the receptor property. 
"Mobile noise source" means any noise source other than a fixed noise source. 
"Nighttime" means the time period from nine p.m. to seven a.m. 
"Noise disturbance" means an alleged intrusive noise which violates an applicable noise standard as set forth in this chapter. 
"Noise level" means the "A" weighted sound pressure level as measured using a slow dynamic characteristic for sound level meters. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture or corporation. 
"Pitch" means the frequency of a sound. High pitch refers to high frequencies and low pitch refers to low frequencies. 
"Public right-of-way" means any street, parkway, trail, public way, sidewalk, bikepath, or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
"Real property boundary" means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person. 
"Residential property" means a parcel of real property which is designated for residential purposes on the city's official zoning map or used for residential purposes in accordance with Title 19. 
"Sound amplifying equipment" means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or other sound regardless of location. "Sound amplifying equipment" does not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
"Sound level meter" means an instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels, which satisfies the requirements pertinent for type S2A meters in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters, S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.030 - Designated noise zones. 
Designated noise areas are as follows: 
A.  Noise Zone I: Agricultural and open space properties; 
B.  Noise Zone II: Residential properties; 
C.  Noise Zone III: Commercial/office properties; 
D.  Noise Zone IV: Industrial properties. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.040 - Exterior noise standards. 
A.  The following exterior noise levels, unless otherwise specifically indicated, apply to all receptor properties within a designated noise zone and constitute the ambient noise level for the purpose of establishing standards: 
Noise 
Zone 	Designated Noise Zone Land Use 	Time Interval 	Exterior 
Noise 
Level 
(dBA) 
I 	Agricultural and open space properties 	7 a.m.—9 p.m. 	55 
		9 p.m.—7 a.m. 	45 
II 	Residential properties 	7 a.m.—9 p.m. 	55 
		9 p.m.—7 a.m. 	45 
III 	Commercial/office properties 	7 a.m.—9 p.m. 	65 
		9 p.m.—7 a.m. 	55 
IV 	Industrial properties 	7 a.m.—9 p.m. 	65 
		9 p.m.—7 a.m. 	55 
 
B.  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, no person may operate or cause to be operated any source of sound at any location within the city, or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by the person which causes the noise level when measured on any other property to exceed the following standards. 
Any noise operated under the authority of Standard 3 will be included in the computation for Standards 1 and 2, and any noise operated under the authority of Standard 2 will be included in computations for Standard 1. 
1.  Standard No. 1 is the applicable ambient exterior noise level as set forth in subsection (A) of this section plus five dBA for a cumulative period of more than 20 minutes in any hour. 
2.  Standard No. 2 is the applicable ambient exterior noise level as set forth in subsection (A) of this section plus ten dBA for a cumulative period of more than ten minutes in any hour. 
3.  Standard No. 3 is the applicable ambient exterior noise level as set forth in subsection (A) of this section plus fifteen dBA for a cumulative period of one minute in any hour. 
C.  With respect to residential receptor properties, the exterior noise level may not exceed forty-five dBA between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.050 - Interior noise standards. 
A.  The following interior noise levels for common wall residential dwellings apply, unless otherwise specifically indicated, within all such dwellings with windows in their normal seasonal configuration and constitute the ambient noise level for the purpose of establishing standards: 
Noise 
Zone 	Designated Land 
Use 	Time Interval 	Allowable 
Interior 
Noise 
Level 
(dBA) 
ALL 	Common wall & freestanding dwellings 	9 p.m.—7 a.m. 	40 
		7 a.m.—9 p.m. 	45 
 
B.  No person may operate or cause to be operated within a dwelling unit any source of sound or allow the creation of any noise which causes the noise level when measured inside a neighboring receiving dwelling unit to exceed the following. Any noise operated under the authority of Standard B will be included in computations for Standard A. 
1.  Standard A is the applicable ambient interior noise level as set forth in subsection A of this section plus five dBA for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour. 
2.  Standard B is the applicable ambient interior noise level as set forth in subsection A of this section plus ten dBA for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.060 - Correction for character of sound. 
For any source of sound which emits a pure tone or impulsive noise, the noise levels as set forth in Sections 10.34.040 and 10.34.050 will be reduced by five decibels. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.070 - Noise level measurement. 
A.  The "A" weighting scale of the sound level meter and the "slow" meter response are utilized for continuous noise level measurement. Fast response is utilized for impulsive type sounds. The noise level will be measured at a position or positions at any point on the receptor property. In general, the microphone will be located four to five feet above the ground and ten feet or more from the nearest reflective surface, where possible. However, in cases where another elevation is deemed appropriate, the latter will be utilized. 
B.  Interior noise measurements will be made within the affected residential unit. The measurements will be made at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling, or floor nearest the noise source, with windows in the normal seasonal configuration. Calibration of the measurement equipment, utilizing an acoustic calibrator, will be performed immediately prior to recording any noise data. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.080 - General prohibition. 
No person may operate or cause to be operated, any source of sound at any location within the city or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by the person, which causes the noise level when measured on any other property, to exceed the noise standard for that land use as set forth in Sections 10.34.040, 10.34.050, or 10.34.060. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.090 - Prohibitions—Motor vehicles. 
A.  Refuse Collection Vehicles. No person authorized to engage in waste disposal service or garbage collection may operate any truck-mounted waste or garbage loading and/or compacting equipment or similar device in any manner so as to create any noise exceeding eighty dBA, measured at a distance of fifty feet (fifteen meters) from the equipment in an open area. Between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m., Section 10.34.040 will apply. 
B.  Vehicles Off Public Right-of-way. No person may operate or cause to be operated any motorized vehicle, including motorized recreation vehicles, off a public right-of-way in such a manner that the sound levels emitted violate the provisions of Section 10.34.040, 10.34.050, or 10.34.060. The term "motorized recreation vehicles" includes, but is not to be limited to, commercial or noncommercial racing vehicles, motorcycles, carts, campers, and dune buggies. 
C.  Vehicle or Aircraft Repair and Testing. No person may repair, rebuild, modify or test any motor vehicle or aircraft in such a manner that the sound levels emitted violate the provisions of Sections 10.34.040, 10.34.050, or 10.34.060. Nothing in this section prohibits, restricts, penalizes, enjoins, or in any manner regulates the movement of aircraft which are in all respects conducted in accordance with, or pursuant to, applicable federal laws or regulations. 
D.  Standing Motor Vehicles. No person may operate or permit the operation of any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) in excess of six thousand pounds, or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle, for a period longer than five minutes in any hour while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion, on a public right-of-way or public space within two hundred feet of a residential area between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.100 - Prohibitions—Sound signaling devices. 
A.  Stationary Nonemergency Signaling Devices. No person may sound or permit the sounding of any electronically amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place, for more than ten seconds in any hourly period. Houses of religious worship are exempt from this provision. 
B.  Emergency Signaling Devices. 
1.  No person may intentionally sound or permit the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes or for testing, as provided in division 2 of this subsection. 
2.  Testing of a stationary emergency signaling system, including the functioning of the signaling device and the personnel response to the signaling device, may not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such testing may not occur before seven a.m. or after nine p.m. The testing time for any single device may not exceed sixty seconds. The provisions of this section do not apply to any public agency. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.105 - Prohibition—Loud and unnecessary noise in public places. 
A.  No person may use their voice or make noise in a public place in a loud, unusual, penetrating or boisterous manner that results in discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity where there is no substantial effort to communicate with any person in the immediate vicinity or to communicate at a lower volume of sound or in a more reasonable manner. As used in this section, "public place" means both public property and private property open to the public and includes commercial establishments, public buildings, parks, parking lots, sidewalks, streets, walkways, and other places or areas generally accessible to the public. 
B.  The standards that will be considered in determining whether a violation of this section exists include the following: 
1.  The volume of the noise; 
2.  The intensity of the noise; 
3.  Whether the noise can be heard from a distance of fifty feet or more from the noise source; or from a distance determined to be reasonable under the circumstances by the officer at the scene; 
4.  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
5.  The time of the day or night the noise occurs; 
6.  The duration of the noise; 
7.  The extent to which nearby persons and the activities of such persons are disturbed by the noise; and 
8.  The extent to which the individual making the noise was requested to cease the disturbance or lower the volume of the noise and such person failed to do so. 
C.  No person will be cited under this section unless the person engages in conduct prohibited by this section after having been notified by an enforcement officer that the conduct violates this section. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.110 - Special prohibitions. 
A.  Amplified Sound. It is unlawful for any person, other than law enforcement personnel or other authorized governmental personnel, to install, use or operate within the city a loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position for the purposes of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lecturing, or transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, place or public property without first obtaining a permit from the director in accordance with Section 10.34.130. 
B.  Power Tools and Machinery. It is unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawnmower or garden tool, or any similar tool, between nine p.m. and seven a.m. the next day so as to create a noise disturbance which violates the provisions of Sections 10.34.040, 10.34.050, or 10.34.060. 
C.  Weed and Debris Blowers. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 10.34.110(B), it is unlawful for any person to operate or to permit the operation of any mechanically powered blower, such as is commonly used for cleaning yards, driveways, gutters and curbs, and parking lots, between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. the next day. 
D.  Machinery, Equipment, Fans and Air-Conditioning. It is unlawful for any person to operate any machinery, equipment, pump, fan, air-conditioning apparatus, or similar mechanical device so as to create any noise which violates the provisions of Sections 10.34.040, 10.34.050, or 10.34.060. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.120 - Exemptions. 
The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Emergency Exemption. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
B.  Warning Devices. Warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety, such as police and fire and ambulance sirens, including the testing of warning devices. 
C.  Outdoor Activities. Activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or private school grounds, including but not limited to school athletic and school entertainment events. 
D.  Drums. It is unlawful for any person to use any drums or other instrument or device of any kind for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the city. This section does not apply to any person who is a participant in a school band or in a parade for which a permit has been approved by the city to engage in such conduct. 
E.  Construction, Buildings and Structures. It is unlawful for any person adjacent to or within any residential zone in the city to operate power construction equipment or tools or perform any outside construction or repair work on buildings, or structures to operate any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, steam or electric hoist, or other construction device between the hours of seven p.m. of one day to seven a.m. of the next day or at any time on any Sunday, or at any time on any public holiday, in such a manner as to violate the noise standards set forth in Sections 10.34.040, 10.34.050, or 10.34.060. The performance of emergency work is exempt from this section. 
1.  Home repairs and routine maintenance of personal property such as automobiles or boats is not considered construction. 
2.  The planning commission and city council retain the right to impose more restrictive hours of construction on any projects involving major construction activity by adding appropriate conditions to the city's approval of subdivisions, planned development permits, conditional use permits, variances and other projects. 
3.  All minor construction activities such as, but not limited to, home additions, roof replacement, and patio construction will be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.130 - Permit application and fees. 
A.  Issuing Authority. The issuing authority is the director. 
B.  Approving Authority. The approving authority is the director. 
C.  Applications. Every user of sound-amplifying equipment or drums, or other devices falling under the provisions of this section, must file a registration statement with the director at least five days prior to the date on which the sound-amplifying equipment is intended to be used, which statement must contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of both the owner and the user of the sound-amplifying or other equipment; 
2.  The maximum sound-producing power of the sound-amplifying or other equipment, including the wattage to be used, the volume and decibels of sound which will be produced, and the approximate distance for which sound will be audible or is capable of being audible from the sound-amplifying equipment; 
3.  A general description of the sound-amplifying or other equipment which is to be used; 
4.  Whether the sound-amplifying or other equipment will be used for commercial or noncommercial purposes; and 
5.  The dates on which, and location where, the equipment is proposed to be operated. 
D.  Processing of Application. The director will approve the registration statement unless the director finds that: 
1.  The use of the equipment would constitute an unreasonable interference to traffic safety; or 
2.  The conditions of pedestrian movement are such that the use of the equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety; or 
3.  The registration statement required reveals that the applicant would violate the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  Issuance or Denial. If the registration is approved, the director, upon the payment of the fee set forth in subsection (G) of this section will return an approved copy of the registration statement to the applicant, which will constitute permission for the use of the sound-amplifying equipment as requested. If the event the registration statement is disapproved, the director will immediately return it to the applicant with a statement of the reasons for disapproval. 
F.  Appeal. The decision of the director may be appealed by the applicant to the planning commission by filing a written appeal, which states the reasons for the appeal and is accompanied by payment of the appeal fee, within ten days after the director's decision. The decision of the planning commission will be the final decision. 
G.  Fees. Prior to the issuance of the registration statement, a fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars per day, or any portion thereof, must be paid to the city if the loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment is to be used for commercial purposes. No fee will be required for the operation of a loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment if the applicant is an organization exempted under the provisions of this code from the payment of a business license. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.140 - Variances. 
The director is authorized to grant variances from any provision of this chapter, subject to terms and conditions such as, but not limited to, area, noise levels and time limits as the director determines are appropriate to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The director may refer the variance application to the planning commission for its consideration. This section in no way affects the duty to obtain any permit required by law for such activities. 
A.  Application. Any person seeking a variance under this section must file an application with the director. The application must contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the variance is sought into compliance with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons. The application must be accompanied by the applicable fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars or as established by resolution. A separate application must be filed for each noise source; provided, however, several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one application. 
B.  Notice. Notice of an application for a variance will be posted in City Hall for at least five days with courtesy notices mailed to all adjoining properties. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the variance may file a statement with the director containing any information to support the individual's claim. 
C.  Issuance or Denial. In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the director will balance the hardship on the applicant, the community and other persons of not granting the variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on the property affected, and any other adverse impacts of granting the variance. Applicants for variances and persons contesting variances may be required to submit additional information as the director may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the director will keep on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the variance. 
D.  Conditions. Variances will be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity. The variance will not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the variance will terminate the variance and subject the person holding it to all provisions of this chapter. 
E.  Time Limitations. A variance may not exceed sixty days from the date on which it was granted. Application for extension of time limits specified in variances or for modification of other substantial conditions will be treated like applications for initial variances under subsection (A) of this section. 
F.  Appeal. Any applicant or other person aggrieved by the decision of the director may appeal the decision to the planning commission by filing a written appeal, which states the reasons for the appeal and is accompanied by payment of the applicable appeal fee, within ten days after the director's decision. The decision of the planning commission will be the final decision. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.34.150 - Enforcement. 
A.  The director and any enforcement officer is authorized to enforce provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Prima Facie Violation. Any noise exceeding the noise level limits for a designated noise zone as specified in this chapter, or any noise constituting an occurrence of any prohibited act specified in this chapter, will be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  In citing violations, the enforcing officer must specify the standard which has been violated, as set forth in Sections 10.34.040 and 10.34.050, in the notice of violation. 
D.  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor and may be punished as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
E.  Except where a person is acting in good faith to comply with an abatement order issued pursuant to subsection (F) of this section, violation of any provision of this chapter will be cause for a notice of violation to be issued by the director or other responsible enforcement official according to procedures which the director may prescribe. 
F.  In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the director or other responsible enforcement official may issue an order requiring abatement, within a reasonable time period, of a sound source alleged to be in violation of this chapter. No complaint or further action will be taken in the event that the cause of the violation has been removed, the condition abated or fully corrected within the time period specified in the written notice. 
G.  As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter, which operation or maintenance causes or creates sound levels exceeding the allowable limits as specified in this chapter, is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to summary abatement by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. Additionally, no provision of this chapter may be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or other legal remedy of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or from other law. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Chapter 10.38 - GAMBLING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1135, § 3, adopted Jan. 11, 2017, amended chapter 10.38 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 10.38, §§ 10.38.010—10.38.030, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014. 
 
10.38.010 - Gambling places prohibited. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person may maintain or cause to be maintained within the city any property used for gambling, where any game not mentioned in Section 330, 330a or 337a of the California Penal Code, is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, balls, billiard balls, pool balls, cues or other device for money, checks, chips, credit or any other representative of value, or for merchandise or for anything of value. 
(Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 1-11-2017)  
10.38.020 - Playing or betting prohibited. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person may play or bet at or against any game not mentioned in Section 330, 330a, or 337a of the California Penal Code, which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on within the city with cards, dice, balls, billiard balls, pool balls, cues or other device for money, checks, chips, credit or any other representative of value or for any merchandise or anything of value. 
(Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 1-11-2017)  
10.38.030 - Exceptions for charitable fundraising events. 
The prohibitions on gambling in this chapter do not apply to controlled games at a charitable fundraising event conducted by a nonprofit organization, if the charitable fundraising event meets all of the following conditions: 
A.  The nonprofit organization conducting the charitable fundraising event must qualify for and secure all required approvals for the event prior to the start of the event. 
B.  The charitable fundraising event must be conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions of Business and Professions Code sections 19985 through 19987, which specifically authorize eligible nonprofit organizations to conduct controlled games as fundraisers under specified circumstances. 
C.  Only "controlled games" as defined in California Penal Code Section 337j(e) may be played at the charitable fundraising event. 
D.  The nonprofit organization may hold only one charitable fundraising event involving controlled games per calendar year. 
E.  The charitable fundraising event may not last more than five consecutive hours. 
F.  The nonprofit organization conducting the event must check or cause to be checked the identification of participants to ensure each participant is of at least 21 years of age. 
G.  In accordance with the Business and Professions Code Section 19986(c), no cash prizes or wagers may be awarded to participants, however, the winner of each game may be entitled to a prize from those donated to the charitable fundraising event. An individual prize awarded to each winner may not exceed a cash value of $500.00, and the total cash value of prizes awarded at a single event may not exceed $5,000.00. 
H.  In accordance with the Business and Professions Code Section 19986(d), at least 90 percent of the gross revenue from the charitable fundraising event must go directly to the sponsoring nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 1-11-2017)  
IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY  
Chapter 10.40 - TRESPASSING 
 
10.40.010 - Posted property defined. 
"Posted property" means any property used exclusively or principally for agricultural purposes, and that contains signage that is designed and placed on the property as follows: 
A.  Design: Signs must adhere to the following requirements: 
1.  Signs must be made of wood, metal, or other equally substantial material; 
2.  The area of each sign face is at least one square foot; 
3.  Sign faces must contain the words "PRIVATE PROPERTY - NO TRESPASS" in legible letters that are at least two inches in height, as well as any other words that may be desired indicating that trespassers are subject to prosecution; and 
4.  The color of the words on the sign faces must be either black against a white background, or white against a black background. 
B.  Placement: Signs must be placed on the property as follows: 
1.  Signs must be placed at each corner of the property and at each entrance to the property; 
2.  Where property exceeds one acre in size, signs must also placed along the boundaries of the property at intervals not more than three hundred feet apart; and 
3.  Sign faces must be positioned so that they are at least three feet above the normal ground level. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.40.020 - Trespassing unlawful. 
No person may enter into, upon, on or across the posted property of another without the permission, express or implied, of the owner, tenant or person in lawful possession or control of the posted property. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.40.030 - Public officers exempted. 
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any entry upon posted property if the entry is by a peace officer in the course of the officer's duty or by any other public official when carrying out a duty imposed or authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Chapter 10.42 - CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC PLACES 
 
10.42.010 - Purpose. 
The use of public places for camping and storage of personal property interferes with the rights of the public to use such areas in the manner in which they were intended. The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that public places are readily accessible to the public in a safe and unobstructed manner. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.42.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meaning set forth in this section: 
"Camp" or "camping" means the use of public places for living accommodation purposes such as sleeping activities, or making preparations to sleep (including the laying down of bedding or other camp paraphernalia for the purpose of sleeping), or storing personal belongings, or making any fire, or using any tents or shelter or other structure or vehicle for sleeping or doing any digging or earth breaking or carrying on cooking activities. These activities constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in light of all the circumstances, that a person, in conducting these activities, is in fact using the area as a living accommodation regardless of his or her intent, or the nature of any other activities in which he or she might also be engaged. 
"Camp paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, tents, huts, pillows, tarps, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, personal cooking facilities or other similar equipment or materials that are used to create temporary shelters and accommodations. 
"Dwelling" or "living quarters" means any vehicle or temporary shelter used as a person's place of residence or occupancy in place of a traditional building structure. 
"Personal effects" means personal property consisting of the following items: 
1.  Medication, eye glasses, or other medical devices; 
2.  Sleeping bag or bed roll which is sanitary and non-verminous; 
3.  Tents in usable and reasonably good condition; 
4.  Clothes stored in a manner protecting them from the elements, which are not unsanitary, soiled, or verminous; and 
5.  Personal property with an individual fair market value of fifty dollars. 
"Public place" means any public property, improved or unimproved, including but not limited to parks, outdoor recreation areas, public parking lots and private parking lots open to the general public, publicly owned drainage culverts and basins, and publicly maintained landscaped areas. "Public place" also includes any public right-of-way, and includes any public streets, sidewalks, alleyways, or passageways that are open to vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic. 
"Store" or "storage" means to put aside or accumulate for later use or safekeeping, to place or leave in a location. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.42.030 - Camping and storage of personal property prohibited. 
A.  No person may camp on a public place. 
B.  No person may store unattended personal property, including camp paraphernalia, in any public place. 
C.  No person may use any car, trailer, camper, recreational vehicle, or mobile-home as a dwelling or as living quarters to camp on any public place. 
D.  No person may camp or store unattended personal property, including camp paraphernalia, on any privately owned property to the extent that such camping or storage was not authorized in advance by the property owner, or despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance. 
E.  No person will be cited under this chapter unless the person engages in conduct prohibited by this chapter after having been notified by an enforcement officer that the conduct violates this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.42.040 - Exceptions. 
A.  The prohibitions on camping and the storage of unattended personal property in this chapter will not apply when a person can affirmatively demonstrate that camping is otherwise involuntary or unavoidable due to circumstances beyond a person's control. However, nothing in this section will prevent the city from abating a condition created by such camping or storage of personal property that presents an immediate threat to the public health or safety. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter may be construed to prohibit camping or the storage of unattended personal property pursuant to a valid permit, license, or other approval issued under federal, state or local law, or as otherwise expressly permitted in another part of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.42.050 - Property removal. 
A.  An enforcement officer may remove personal property unlawfully stored or found in a public place as follows: 
1.  The location of any personal property including camping paraphernalia, will be tagged and dated with a notice including the following: 
"It is illegal to store personal property in public places. If this personal property is not removed by (specify date at least three days from posting), this personal property will be deemed intentionally abandoned and subject to removal and possible destruction." 
2.  The officer may remove any personal property still unlawfully stored or remaining in the public place after the posting period has expired. 
B.  If the unlawful camping or storage of personal property in a public place presents an immediate threat to the public health or safety, an enforcement officer may immediately remove the personal property without prior notice. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.42.060 - Personal effects. 
A.  At the time of removal of any unlawfully stored or remaining personal effects, the enforcement officer must conspicuously post and date a notice either at the exact location from which the personal effects were removed or at another nearby location giving the following information: 
1.  A list of personal effects removed; 
2.  A telephone number for information on retrieving personal effects; 
3.  The address and hours of operation where personal effects may be collected; and 
4.  The period of time during which the personal effects may be claimed. 
B.  Following removal of unlawfully stored or remaining personal effects, an enforcement officer must: 
1.  Maintain an inventory identifying the personal effects; where the personal effects were approximately located; and the reasonable value of each item; 
2.  Place the removed personal effects in containers labeled in a manner facilitating identification by the officer and owner and which reasonably protect such property from damage or theft; and 
3.  Store the removed personal effects in a location designated by the city for a period of ninety days. 
C.  If personal effects are claimed within ninety days from removal, unless the property is connected to a crime or is illegal to possess, the city will release the stored property to the owner upon the following: 
1.  The person claiming ownership identifies the property and approximate location where the property was left by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.42.070 - Disposition of property. 
A.  Unlawfully stored or found personal effects removed from a public place and remaining unclaimed at the end of ninety days from removal may be disposed of by the city. 
B.  All other unlawfully stored or found personal property removed from a public place pursuant to this chapter is deemed intentionally abandoned and may be summarily abated and destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Chapter 10.44 - PARK REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1142, §§ 3—5, adopted June 14, 2017, amended chapter 10.44 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former 10.44, §§ 10.44.010, 10.44.020, pertained to similar suject mater, and derived from Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014. 
 
10.44.010 - Prohibited acts—All public parks. 
No person while within the limits of any public park of the county, the city, or any park and recreation district or any other public park shall commit any of the following acts: 
A.  Cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, monument, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property, or mark or write upon any building, monument, fence, bench or other structure; 
B.  Cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel without first obtaining permission of the public agency having control over such park; 
C.  Distribute any commercial handbill or circular, or post, place or erect any commercial bill, notice, paper or advertising device or matter of any kind without first obtaining permission of the public agency having control over such park; 
D.  Hitch or fasten any horse or other animal except at a place specifically designated or provided for such purpose; 
E.  Ride or drive any horse or other animal or propel any vehicles, cycle or automobile elsewhere than on the roads or drives provided for such purpose; 
F.  Indulge in riotous, boisterous, threatening or profane or indecent language; 
G.  Practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession without first obtaining the permission from the public agency having control of such park; 
H.  Make or kindle a fire in any park at a place other than the one designated and set apart for such purpose; 
I.  Permit or allow any livestock to run at large within the boundaries of the park; 
J.  No male person over eight years of age shall enter into any rest room for women and no female person over six years of age shall enter into any rest room for men; 
K.  It is unlawful to stable, keep, pasture or breed any horse, stud, stallion, mare, gelding, colt, jack, jenny, mule, cow, bull, steer, calf, oxen, sow, boar, pig, shoat, ram, sheep, lamb, goat, kid, or other animal or animals without first obtaining permission from the public agency having control of such park; 
L.  It is unlawful to possess or discharge any firearms, firecrackers, rocket, torpedo or other fireworks, or air gun or slingshot without first obtaining permission of the public agency having control over such park; 
M.  It is unlawful to dispose of bottles, cans, waste, paper or other rubbish other than in a container provided for such purpose; 
N.  It is unlawful to camp without first obtaining the written permission from the public agency having control of such park: 
O.  It is unlawful to drive any automobile, other than maintenance or service vehicles, or other vehicle including gasoline or electric powered go-carts, motorcycles, motorized bicycles, or any motorized scooter or similar device within the limits of any park at a speed greater than a careful and prudent speed and in no event in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 3, 6-14-2017)  
10.44.020 - Prohibited acts—City property. 
No member of the public shall commit any of the following acts on Constitution Park, Dizdar Park, Library Property exterior to Library Building and "F"-Canyon ("city property"): 
A.  Use by organized sports teams; 
B.  Possess or use any radio or remote controlled devices including, but not limited to, airplanes, cars, unmanned aerial vehicles, drones or other radio or remote controlled devices; 
C.  Use playground or other park equipment or improvements for other than intended use; 
D.  Cycling, scooters, skateboard, roller skating and inline skating on city property designated by resolution of the city council pursuant to Camarillo Municipal Code Section 11.76.010 A. 
E.  Possess or use weapons, guns, knives, spears, swords, bow and arrow, paintball guns, airsoft guns or any object that propels projectiles of any kind; 
F.  Possess or use a javelin, shot put, lawn darts or other sports equipment which has the potential to cause injury to other persons at the park; 
G.  Use trees for: climbing, swinging or attaching anything to a tree; 
H.  Play or practice baseball (hardball and softball), golf and other sports which involve hitting a ball. However, this prohibition does not apply to low impact sports such as whiffle ball and similar type sports; 
I.  Participate in activities which pose a risk of injury to participant or the public; 
J.  Participate in activities which may cause damage to city property; 
K.  Use city property anytime other than sunrise to sunset except for city buildings and parking lots with permission of the city; 
L.  Possess or use cooking devices including, but not limited to, grills, barbeque or other cooking devices unless with a cooking device provided for public use by the city; 
M.  Conduct any business; 
N.  Possess or use amplified sound equipment or devices of any kind; 
O.  Possess or use bounce houses, jumpers or other inflatables; 
P.  Possess or use alcohol or illegal drugs; 
Q.  Smoke, vape or ingest tobacco or marijuana products; 
R.  Unleash animals or pets; 
S.  Leave any animal or pet waste undisposed; 
T.  Possess or operate motorized vehicles or devices other than maintenance or service vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 4, 6-14-2017; Ord. No. 1144, § 3, 9-27-2017)  
10.44.030 - City property; Special events permits. 
No member of the public while on city property as defined in Section 10.44.020 shall commit any of the acts prohibited by Section 10.44.020 unless a special events permit has been approved by the city pursuant to Chapter 19.63 of the Camarillo Municipal Code granting permission for such uses. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 4, 6-14-2017)  
Chapter 10.46 - SITTING AND LYING ON CERTAIN PROPERTY IN PUBLIC PLACES 
 
10.46.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meaning set forth in this section: 
"Obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic" means to walk, stand, place an object, sit or lie in such a manner as to block passage by another person or a vehicle, or to require another person or a driver of a vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact. 
"Public place" means both public property and private property open to the public and includes, but is not limited to, parking lots, highways, streets, bridges, alleys, driveways, pathways, sidewalks, walkways, and other outdoor places or areas generally accessible to the public in the city's commercial zones. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.46.020 - Sitting or lying in public places prohibited. 
A.  No person may sit or lie down upon a public sidewalk, street, curb, biking or walking path, or in doorways and entrances to buildings; or upon a blanket, chair, stool, or any other object placed upon a public sidewalk, curb, biking or walking path, or in doorways and entrances to buildings in any commercial zone. 
B.  No person may sit or lie down upon a public bench or other seating facility that is intended for use by multiple individuals at the same time, in a way that prevents such accommodation of the public bench by multiple users at the same time. 
C.  No person may intentionally sit or lie down and obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic in a public place. 
D.  No person will be cited under this chapter unless the person engages in conduct prohibited by this chapter after having been notified by an enforcement officer that the conduct violates this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.46.030 - Exceptions. 
The prohibitions in Section 10.46.020 will not apply in the following cases and to the following persons: 
A.  Persons who involuntarily or unavoidably sit or lie down in a public place due to circumstances beyond the person's control, including but not limited to a medical emergency. 
B.  Persons, who, as a result of a disability, utilize a wheelchair, walker, or similar device to move about the public sidewalk or other public walkways and paths. 
C.  Persons operating or patronizing a commercial establishment conducted on the public sidewalk pursuant to an applicable, valid city permit or approval; or persons participating in or attending a parade, festival, performance, rally, demonstration, meeting or similar event conducted in a public place. 
D.  Any conduct in public places that are privately owned where such conduct is in conformity with permission granted by the owner or person in possession and control of such premises. 
E.  Any conduct that is in conformity with the terms of any permit or other approval granted pursuant to this code or city policy. 
F.  Any conduct that constitutes lawful activity protected under the laws of the State of California or by the United States Constitution, including but not limited to peaceful protesting, picketing, demonstrating, signature gathering, voter registration, or leafleting. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Chapter 10.48 - GRAFFITI 
 
10.48.010 - Purpose. 
The city council finds and determines as follows: 
A.  That graffiti on public and private properties is a blighting factor; and 
B.  That graffiti encourages other acts of malicious vandalism; and 
C.  That graffiti depreciates the value of the adjacent and surrounding properties; and 
D.  That graffiti is inconsistent with the city's aesthetic standards, and unless it is quickly removed from public and private properties, other adjacent properties will become the target of graffiti; and 
E.  That the existence of graffiti tends to breed community discontent and criminal activity; and 
F.  That unlawful placement of graffiti on public and private properties is often committed by persons under the age of eighteen years using aerosol pressurized containers of paint, indelible markers and pens, and etching tools; and 
G.  That the placement of graffiti is often done in connection with gang activities; and 
H.  That the public interest, convenience and necessity require the adoption and implementation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions in this section govern the construction of this chapter. 
"Aerosol paint container" means any aerosol or pressurized container, or similar device, having a capacity of more than three ounces, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint, or other nonwater soluble substance. 
"Building" is defined as set forth in Section 19.04.125. 
"Chapter" means this Chapter 10.48. 
"Code" means the Camarillo Municipal Code. 
"Etching tool" means any etching tool, glass cutter or similar device. 
"Fence" means a fence or wall regardless of height. 
"Graffiti" means any unauthorized inscription, insignia, symbol, word, figure, character or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, sprayed or painted on a building, fence, landscaping or structure. 
"Graffiti implement" means an aerosol paint container, an indelible marker, a paint stick, an etching tool or any similar device. 
"Indelible marker" means any indelible marker, felt tip marker or similar implement containing nonwater soluble fluid and that has a flat, pointed or angled writing surface of a width of one-fourth of an inch or greater. 
"Landscaping" is defined as set forth in Section 19.04.430. 
"Minor" means a person under eighteen years of age. 
"Paint stick" means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar nonwater soluble substance, which is capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaves a mark at least one-fourth of an inch in width. 
"Responsible adult" means a parent or legal guardian of a minor. 
"Structure" is defined as set forth in Section 19.04.775. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.030 - Prohibition of graffiti. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to use a graffiti implement to apply graffiti on any publicly or privately owned building, fence, landscaping or structure located within the city; and 
B.  Any individual who is found guilty of violating this section may, in the discretion of the court in the criminal proceeding, in addition to other authorized fines or penalties: 
1.  Pay restitution to the person or the city, who removed the unlawfully placed graffiti, and 
2.  Perform community service in the city. 
If the violator is a minor, the minor's responsible adult will be responsible for payment of the restitution, in the discretion of the court. "Restitution" as used in this section means the payment of a sum equal to all damages resulting from the placement of graffiti contrary to the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, direct and indirect costs of the removal thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.040 - Civil debt. 
A.  Any person who places graffiti on the building, structure, fence or landscaping of another, without that person's consent, will be responsible to the owner or to such other person who is entitled to possession of the building, fence, structure or landscaping, for all damages occurring as a result of the placement of the graffiti, including, but not limited to, the costs, direct and indirect, of graffiti removal and attorneys' fees incurred. 
B.  If graffiti is removed by the city pursuant to this chapter, all damages occurring as a result of the placement of the graffiti, including, but not limited to, costs of graffiti removal, direct and indirect, and attorneys' fees incurred, may be recoverable from the person who caused the graffiti to be placed contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The obligations imposed under this section are enforceable as a civil debt. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.050 - Furnishing to minors prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, other than a responsible adult, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or in any way furnish to any minor without the consent of the minor's responsible adult, a graffiti implement. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.060 - Parental civil liability. 
A.  Any act of a minor which results in the unlawful placement of graffiti on a building, fence, landscaping or structure will be imputed to that minor's responsible adult for civil liability purposes including, but not limited to, civil damages and attorneys' fees incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any such claim for damages. The responsible adult will be jointly and severally liable with the minor for all civil damages and attorneys' fees. Such obligations will be enforceable as a civil debt. 
B.  This section in no way limits or narrows the liability of a responsible adult for acts of a minor pursuant to Civil Code Section 1714.1, Government Code Section 53069.3, Penal Code Section 640.5 or any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.070 - Possession by any minor of graffiti implements in public places. 
It is unlawful for any minor to have in his or her possession a graffiti implement during the hours of ten p.m. to six a.m. of any day, while in any public street, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.080 - School exception for graffiti implement possession by minor. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it is lawful for a minor to possess a graffiti implement while the minor is attending, or traveling to or from: 
A.  A school at which the minor is enrolled; or 
B.  A church of which the minor is a member, if the minor is participating in a class at the school or church, or other school-sanctioned or church-sanctioned event, which class or event requires the use of a graffiti implement. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.090 - Restrictions on sale of graffiti implements. 
No person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment which offers for sale or sells graffiti implements, may cause such graffiti implements to be stored, except in an area which may be viewable by, but which is not accessible to, members of the public without employee assistance. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.100 - Required signage. 
Any person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment which offers for sale or sells graffiti implements must post and maintain in a conspicuous location a sign in letters at least three-eighths of an inch high, with substantially the following language: 
"IT IS UNLAWFUL TO SELL OR GIVE TO A MINOR NOT ACCOMPANIED BY A PARENT OR GUARDIAN ANY GRAFFITI INSTRUMENT." 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.110 - Reward. 
The city council may authorize the offering of rewards for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for a violation of any provision of this chapter. The amount of any reward will be established, from time to time, by the city council. The procedure for offering and claiming a reward under this section will be established by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.120 - Nuisance. 
It is declared that the existence of graffiti on any building, structure, fence or landscaping is a public nuisance, and will be abated as such as is provided in this code. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.130 - Summary graffiti nuisance abatement—Notice and assessment of costs upon owner or person in possession of property. 
The city council has determined that the continued existence of graffiti or other inscribed material on buildings, fences, landscaping and structures within the city is a public nuisance, and has the effect of encouraging the placement of more graffiti at the same location as well as on adjacent buildings, structures, fences and landscaping. The prompt removal of graffiti or other inscribed material is necessary to prevent its proliferation. Accordingly, where the city manager finds that graffiti or other inscribed material has been placed on privately owned buildings, fences, landscaping or structures and the consent of the owner, or other person entitled to possession of the property, cannot, for any reason, be obtained for the entry by the city or its agents upon the property where the building, fence, landscaping, or structure is located for the purpose of removing any graffiti or other inscribed material, the city manager may cause the summary abatement of the graffiti in the following manner: 
A.  Notice. The city manager must give the owner or other person entitled to possession of the building, fence, landscaping or structure not less than twenty-four hours' written notice that unless the graffiti or other inscribed material to which the notice relates is removed within the period of time set forth in the notice, that the city will enter upon the property for the purpose of summarily abating the public nuisance by removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material. The notice must also contain a statement that if the graffiti or other inscribed material is not timely removed by the owner or other person entitled to possession of the building, fence, landscaping or structure and if the removal is done instead by the city or its agents then all costs incurred may be assessed against the property upon which the graffiti or other inscribed material is located, in the time and manner set forth in Section 9.17.100 of this code. 
B.  Service of Notice. The notice must be given by personal service on the person to be notified, or by first class mail, addressed to the person to be notified at the person's last known address. 
C.  Assessment of Costs. Where nuisance abatement costs are to be assessed against the property, the procedures set forth in Section 9.17.100 must be utilized. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.140 - Expenditure of public funds. 
A.  City Manager Authorization. The city manager is authorized to expend city funds to remove graffiti from publicly or privately owned real property within the city as is provided in this chapter; 
B.  Removal of Graffiti—Private Property—Consent. Such removal will be performed by the city by its authorized employees or agents, only after the city manager: 
1.  Finds that the graffiti is located on a privately owned building, fence, landscaping or structure in the city; and 
2.  Secures the consent of the owner or other person entitled to possession of the building, fence, landscaping or structure upon which the graffiti has been placed; 
C.  Exception. The consent of a property owner to graffiti removal will be presumed where the facade of the building, fence or structure upon which the graffiti is unlawfully placed, directly abuts the lot line of the lot upon which the building, fence or structure is located, which lot line separates the lot from a public street, sidewalk, parkway, easement or alley. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.150 - Penalties for violation. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor and is punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.160 - Graffiti abatement—Liability for expense—Report of names and addresses of person with custody or control of minors to city officials. 
A.  As an alternative to the assessment of costs for the summary abatement of any nuisance resulting from the defacement of the property by graffiti or any other inscribed material at the expense of the owner or other person entitled to possession of the property upon which such nuisance is located as provided in Section 10.48.130, summary abatement may, at the discretion of the city manager, be made at the expense of the minor or other person creating, causing, or committing the nuisance. The expense of abatement of the nuisance may be assessed as a lien against property of the minor or other person and becomes a personal obligation of the minor or other person pursuant to Section 10.48.170. 
B.  The parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor described in subsection A will be jointly and severally liable with the minor. The expense of abatement of any nuisance, resulting from the defacement by a minor of the property of another by graffiti or any other inscribed material, may also be assessed as a lien against the property of a parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, and becomes a personal obligation of the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor pursuant to Section 10.48.170. 
C.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the city may seek the assistance of the probation officer of the county to report the names and addresses of the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, if known, to the city clerk or other official designated by the city council. 
D.  As used in this section and Section 10.48.170, the following terms have the following meanings: 
"Expense of abatement" includes, but is not limited to, court costs, attorney's fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the minor or other person. 
"Minor" or "other person" means a minor or other person who has confessed to, admitted to, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of Sections 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code, or a minor convicted by final judgment of a violation of Sections 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code, or a minor declared a ward of the Juvenile Court pursuant to Section 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code by reason of the commission of an act prohibited by Sections 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.48.170 - Graffiti nuisance abatement lien and special assessment upon the property of a minor or other person, or the parent or guardian of a minor. 
Pursuant to Government Code Sections 38772, 38773.2, and 38773.6, and any successor statutes, a minor or other person (as defined in Section 10.48.160 of this code) creating, causing or committing a nuisance resulting from the defacement of the property of another by graffiti or any other inscribed material, will be obligated to pay all city expenses and all administrative costs associated with abating the nuisance. 
A.  Recordation of a Lien That Will Become a Judgment Lien. A nuisance abatement lien in favor of the city for such expenses of the city may be created and recorded, pursuant to this section, against the property of the minor or other person, or the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. The lien must specify: the amount of the lien, that the lien is imposed on behalf of the city, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
1.  Notice must be served on the minor or other person, or parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, before recordation of the lien on the parcel of land owned by the minor or other person, or parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. The notice must be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Sections 415.10 and following. If the minor or other person, or the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the property owned by the minor or other person, or by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, for a period of ten days, and by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
2.  The city's nuisance abatement lien may then be recorded in the county recorder's office, and from the date of recording, will have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien and may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment. 
3.  Any fees or costs incurred by the city for processing or recording the lien and providing notice to the minor or other person, or parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, may be recovered by the city as part of any action to enforce the lien. 
B.  Recordation of Lien That Will Become a Special Assessment. The city's total abatement costs as described in this chapter, may also be collected as a special assessment against the parcel of land owned by the minor or other person, or by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. 
1.  Prior to recordation, a notice of nuisance abatement lien must be sent by certified mail to the property owner at the address appearing on the latest equalized assessment roll. 
2.  In addition to the matters set forth in subsection (A) of this section, the notice of the nuisance abatement lien must specify that the lien will constitute a special assessment that will be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and will be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. If payments are permitted to be made in annual installments, the rate of interest on the unpaid balance must be specified. 
3.  After confirmation and recordation of the nuisance abatement lien that will constitute a special assessment, the city will provide a copy of the notice of proposed recordation, proof of service, and the recorded lien to the tax collector to add the amount of the assessment to the next regular tax bill levied against the respective parcel. Any costs incurred by the city in connection with recording the lien may be added to the assessment. 
4.  The city manager may determine that in lieu of collecting the entire assessment at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes, the assessment may be paid in annual installments over a period not to exceed five years. If any installment is delinquent, the amount will be subject to the same penalties and procedure for foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary municipal taxes. Any assessments so deferred will bear interest on the unpaid balance at a rate of six percent per year. 
5.  If any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrance for value has been created and attached thereon before the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement will not result in a lien against the real property but instead will be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
C.  Satisfaction. In the event that the judgment lien or special assessment is satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, a notice of discharge containing the information specified in the lien will be recorded by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
V. - CONSUMER PROTECTION  
Chapter 10.50 - RENT REVIEW MEDIATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1121, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 24, 2016, amended chapter 10.50 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 10.50, §§ 10.50.010—10.50130, pertained to rent review for mobilehomes and apartment complexes of five units or more and derived from Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014. 
 
10.50.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a mediation forum to assist in the resolution of disputes that may arise from time to time between tenants and owners of residential rental complexes and mobilehome parks to the end that an agreement may be reached for fair and equitable rent adjustments. 
(Ord. No. 1121, § 3(Exh. A), 2-24-2016)  
10.50.020 - Definitions. 
The following words or phrases as used in this chapter have the following meanings: 
"Commission" means the rent review mediation commission established by Section 10.50.030. 
"Commissioners" means the individuals selected by the city council to serve on the rent review mediation commission. 
"Mobilehome park" means an area of land that contains 25 or more mobilehome spaces that are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation. 
"Owner" means an owner of a residential rental complex or mobilehome park, or the agent or representative of the owner. 
"Non-fixed term lease" means a lease that is: (1) month-to-month or for a period of 12 months or less, or (2) a lease that has been for a term longer than 12 months and the term is set to expire within 6 months and the amount of any rent increase for the new term is not established under the lease. 
"Rent" means consideration, including any bonus, benefits or gratuity demanded or received in connection with the use and occupancy of any residential rental unit or space. 
"Residential rental complex" means any property that has five or more residential rental units. 
"Residential rental unit" means any dwelling unit that is rented to a tenant. 
"Space" means the area in a mobilehome park upon which a mobilehome is placed and for which rent is charged. 
"Tenant" means any person or persons entitled to occupy a residential rental unit in a residential rental complex or space in a mobilehome park pursuant to a non-fixed term lease. 
(Ord. No. 1121, § 3(Exh. A), 2-24-2016)  
10.50.030 - Rent review mediation commission. 
A.  Establishment and Composition of Rent Review Mediation Commission. There is established a rent review mediation commission for purposes of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. The commission consists of seven members. Commissioners will be appointed for a term of four years, and will serve at the pleasure of the city council. Two members will be tenants in the city (one each from a mobile home park and residential rental complex), and two members will be owners (one each from a mobile home park and residential rental complex, who need not be residents of the city), and the three other members will be city residents who are neither a tenant nor an owner of a residential rental complex or mobilehome park. 
B.  Vacancies. If a vacancy occurs on the commission, the city council may appoint a qualified person to fill such vacancy. 
C.  Powers and Duties. The commission is empowered to act in an advisory capacity to assist in the settlement of rental disputes between tenants and owners. 
D.  Meetings and Mediations. The city clerk will call such meetings or mediations of the commission as may be required for the commission to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
E.  Quorum. The presence of at least five commissioners for a meeting or mediation will constitute a quorum provided that at least one owner and one tenant representative are present. The decision of the commission regarding any recommendation, solution or settlement of any dispute brought before the commission will be by a majority vote of the members present. 
F.  Docket. The city clerk will maintain a record of all mediation proceedings conducted before the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1121, § 3(Exh. A), 2-24-2016)  
10.50.040 - Notice to tenants of rent review mediation forum. 
A.  Notice upon Rent Increase. Owners must distribute a notice of the availability of the rent review mediation forum provided by the commission with every rent increase to existing tenants with a non-fixed term lease. The notice must be in substantially the following form: 
THE CITY OF CAMARILLO HAS A RENT REVIEW MEDIATION COMMISSION THAT PROVIDES A VOLUNTARY NON-BINDING MEDIATION FORUM TO REVIEW RENT INCREASES. COPIES OF THE CITY'S RENT REVIEW MEDIATION CHAPTER ARE AVAILABLE UPON REQUEST AT OUR OFFICE OR MAY BE OBTAINED AT CITY HALL (601 CARMEN DRIVE) OR ON THE CITY'S WEBSITE AT: WWW.CITYOFCAMARILLO.ORG. 
B.  General Notice of Rent Review Mediation Forum. Owners must also post in the on-site management office, or if no such office exists, then in a publicly accessible location, a notice that is at least 8 x 10 inches in substantially the same form as in subsection (A) above. 
(Ord. No. 1121, § 3(Exh. A), 2-24-2016)  
10.50.050 - Rent review procedures. 
A.  Request for Mediation. A tenant on a non-fixed term lease who receives a notice of a proposed rent increase may file a request for the commission to review the proposed rent increase in a mediation. The request should be filed with the city clerk within 30 calendar days of receipt of notice of a proposed rent increase. The request must identify the owner and state the reason for the tenant's claim that the proposed rent increase is unreasonable or unfair. If the proposed rent increase will affect 25% or more of the tenants with non-fixed term leases in the residential rental complex or mobilehome park over the next 12 months, then at least five tenants in similarly situated units or spaces must sign the request for a rent review mediation. 
B.  Scheduling of a Mediation. Upon the city clerk's receipt of a request for a rent review mediation, the clerk will contact the owner named in the request and the tenant and attempt to set up a mediation to be held before the commission. The mediation will be scheduled within a reasonable time. If the increase affects more that 25 percent of the tenants with non-fixed term leases, then the owner must provide a list of all such affected tenants so that notice of the mediation may be provided to all interested tenants. 
C.  Submissions by Owner. If the owner agrees to participate in the rent review mediation, then at least seven days before the mediation, the owner should submit to the city clerk information concerning the residential rental unit or space at issue, which may include, but is not limited to the following: 
1.  The actual operating expenses by category for the residential rental complex or mobilehome park for the preceding three-year period. 
2.  The anticipated expenses for the residential rental complex or mobilehome park for the 12-month period of the proposed increase, including details of changes in any cost elements. 
3.  The rent schedule for each residential rental unit or space within the residential rental complex or mobilehome park for the last three years. 
4.  A schedule of other fees and income from the residential rental complex or mobilehome park. 
5.  The vacancy rates of each unit in the residential rental complex or mobilehome park during the preceding three-year period. 
6.  Any other factors affecting the need for the proposed rent increase. 
D.  Submission by Tenant. At least seven days before the mediation, the tenant should submit to the city clerk any additional information not included in the initial request for review regarding the proposed rent increase that the tenant would like the rent review commission to consider. 
E.  Mediation Procedure. At the mediation, the parties may offer any statements, documents, or other information that is relevant to the proposed rent increase. 
F.  Failure to Appear at Mediation. Failure of any of the noticed parties to appear at the scheduled mediation will not preclude the commission from conducting the mediation as scheduled and from issuing its recommendation as provided in Section 10.50.070. 
G.  Consolidation. The commission may consolidate requests for mediation received from tenants within the same residential rental complex or mobilehome park with respect to a proposed rent increase and all such requests may be considered in a single mediation. 
(Ord. No. 1121, § 3(Exh. A), 2-24-2016)  
10.50.060 - Rent review considerations. 
In making a recommendation based on a request for a rent review mediation, the commission may consider all relevant factors including but not limited to the following: 
A.  Increases or decreases in property taxes; 
B.  Unavoidable increases or decreases in operating and maintenance expenses, including utility rates, insurance, government assessments, materials and services; 
C.  Capital improvements, as distinguished from normal repair, replacement and maintenance; 
D.  Increases or decreases in size of the space or residential rental unit; 
E.  Substantial deterioration of the improvements, other than as a result of ordinary wear and tear; 
F.  Failure on the part of the owner to provide adequate services, or to comply substantially with applicable housing, health and safety codes; 
G.  Federal and state income tax benefits; 
H.  Downgrading, reduction or elimination of services; and 
I.  Fair and just return on the property to the owner, including comparable market rents within the city. 
The commission will not support a rent increase solely by reason of a change of ownership that results in increased costs of debt service or a refinancing of the mobilehome park or residential rental complex that results in increased costs of debt service. 
(Ord. No. 1121, § 3(Exh. A), 2-24-2016)  
10.50.070 - Recommendation of commission. 
A.  The commission will consider all relevant information in determining whether the proposed rent increase is fair, equitable, and necessary in order for the owner to receive a just and reasonable return on its investment. 
B.  At the conclusion of the rent review mediation, the commission will issue its recommendation and will cause a written summary of the recommendation to be sent by mail to the tenant(s) and owner within ten business days after the mediation. 
C.  At the conclusion of the mediation or no later than five business days after receipt of the commission's written recommendation, the parties to a rent review mediation are encouraged to advise the commission whether they accept the commission's recommendation. 
D.  The city clerk will submit to the city council, for information purposes only, a copy of all rent review recommendations made by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1121, § 3(Exh. A), 2-24-2016)  
10.50.080 - Rent review a protected right and retaliation prohibited. 
Use of the rent review mediation process provided in this chapter is declared to be a protected right pursuant to California Civil Code section 1942.5(c). Tenants cannot be required to waive their rights under this chapter and any such purported waiver will be void as contrary to public policy. No owner or tenant who has been a party to a rent review mediation process under this chapter may undertake or cause any type of retaliatory act or omission against another party as a result of the other party having invoked or participated in the rent review mediation process. 
(Ord. No. 1121, § 3(Exh. A), 2-24-2016)  
VI. - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS  
Chapter 10.60 - CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS 
 
10.60.010 - Definitions. 
The words and terms used in this chapter have the following meanings: 
"Curfew hours" means the period of time commencing at ten p.m. on each day of the week, including Friday and Saturday, and terminating at six a.m. of the next following day. 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. Emergency includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury, loss of life or property damage. 
"Emancipated" means a minor who has been judicially emancipated or a minor who has graduated from high school. 
"Guardian" means a person or public or private agency who, under court order, is designated as the guardian of the person of a minor. 
"Minor" means a natural person under eighteen years of age. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a minor. 
"Public place" means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public is invited, or has access; public place includes, but is not limited to, public streets and the common public areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
"Remain" means to: 
1.  Linger or stay at or in a public place; or 
2.  Fail to leave a public place when requested to do so by a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.60.020 - Offenses. 
A.  A minor who violates any provision of this chapter by remaining in a public place during curfew hours is guilty of an infraction; subsequent violations by the same minor occurring within ninety consecutive calendar days are punishable as misdemeanors. 
B.  A parent or guardian of a minor is guilty of a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly permits, or by failing to exercise sufficient control over the minor, allows the minor to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.60.030 - Defenses—Curfew hour violation. 
It is a complete defense to a prosecution of a minor for a violation of the curfew hour provisions of this chapter, if the minor was, at the time of the charged violation: 
A.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; or 
B.  Directly engaged in an errand at the express direction of the minor's parent or guardian; or 
C.  In a motor vehicle which is engaged in intrastate or interstate travel; or 
D.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going directly to or directly returning home from an employment activity; or 
E.  Involved in an emergency; or 
F.  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence; or 
G.  Attending a school activity or religious activity sponsored by a school or religious group/church or a recreational activity sponsored by a public entity or a private sponsoring entity which provides adult supervision of the activity; or while going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, such an activity; or 
H.  Lawfully exercising constitutional rights such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, or the right of assembly; or 
I.  Emancipated. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.60.040 - Penalties. 
A person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate violation for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
VII. - WEAPONS  
Chapter 10.72 - DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS 
 
10.72.010 - Discharge prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within the limits of the city. 
B.  This section does not apply to: 
1.  Any peace officer acting in the official line of duty; or 
2.  Any person when necessary to protect a human life or to destroy or kill any predatory or dangerous animal while defending one's self or another person against an immediate threat of great bodily harm; or 
3.  The discharge on any target trap, target range, skeet range, or shooting area which has been inspected by the chief of police and approved in writing by the chief of police and the city; or 
4.  The discharge of an air gun, air rifle, or air pistol, or any spring gun, spring rifle, or spring pistol, or any carbon dioxide or other gas operated gun, rifle or pistol in any private place or location constructed such that it is impossible for the ammunition, projectiles or other objects expelled by such guns, rifles or pistols to escape the place or location; or 
5.  The discharge of blank cartridges in theatrical performances or sporting events; or 
6.  The firing of salutes by firing squads at military funerals. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.72.020 - Firearms—Defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter "firearm" means and includes a "rifle," "shotgun," "pistol," "revolver," and any other instrument which expels a metallic projectile, such as a BB or pellet, through the force of gunpowder, explosive, air pressure, CO2 pressure, or spring action, or any spot marker gun. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.72.030 - Discharge by minors. 
A minor may only discharge a firearm pursuant to Section 10.72.010(B). No minor may discharge a firearm under Section 10.72.010(B) 3, 4, 5, or 6 unless he or she is supervised and in the presence of an adult. No adult need be present if the discharge is allowed under Section 10.72.010(B)2. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
10.72.040 - Penalty for violation. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3(Exh. A), 2-26-2014)  
Title 11 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC  
Chapter 11.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
11.04.010 - Generally. 
The following words and phrases when used in this title shall for the purposes of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter unless the context thereof requires a different meaning. 
Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined in this chapter but now are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, such definitions are incorporated in this title and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases in this title as though set forth herein in full. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.)  
11.04.020 - Alley. 
"Alley" means any highway as defined in Section 11.04.050 having a width of twenty-five feet or less and not provided with a sidewalk or sidewalks. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.4.)  
11.04.030 - Commercial vehicle loading zone. 
"Commercial vehicle loading zone" means that space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading and unloading of passengers and materials, marked and designated as provided in this title. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.7.)  
11.04.040 - Crosswalk. 
"Crosswalk" means that portion of the roadway included within the prolongation of the curb and property lines of an intersecting street and also, any cross strip of highway, not to exceed twenty feet in width, which is not a crosswalk by reason of intersecting highways but which shall be designated as a crosswalk by ordinance. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.5.)  
11.04.050 - Highway. 
"Highway" means every road, street, or other way set apart for public travel, except bridle and foot paths. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.1.)  
11.04.060 - Official traffic-control devices. 
"Official traffic-control devices" means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this title placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of warning, regulating or guiding traffic. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.9.)  
11.04.070 - Official traffic signal. 
"Official traffic signal" means any device whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated by which traffic alternately is directed to stop and proceed and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.10.)  
11.04.080 - Park. 
"Park" means to stand or leave standing any vehicle whether occupied or not, or temporarily, for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.11.)  
11.04.090 - Parkway. 
"Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or sidewalk. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.12.)  
11.04.100 - Passenger loading zone. 
"Passenger loading zone" means that space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during loading and unloading of passengers, marked and designated as provided in this title. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.8.)  
11.04.110 - Road commissioner. 
"Road commissioner" means the road commissioner of the county acting and performing the duties imposed in this title for and on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.14.)  
11.04.120 - Roadway. 
"Roadway" means that portion of a highway between the regularly established curblines, or when no curbs exist, that portion improved, designated and ordinarily used for vehicular travel and/or parking. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.2.)  
11.04.130 - Safety zone. 
"Safety zone" means that portion of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians, marked and designated as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.6.)  
11.04.140 - Sidewalk. 
"Sidewalk" means that portion of a highway between a curbline or traversable roadway and the adjacent property lines. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.3.)  
11.04.150 - Stop. 
"Stop," when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
"Stop" or "stand," when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3100.13.)  
Chapter 11.08 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
 
11.08.010 - Purpose. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property not including highways except as expressly permitted in this title, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 164 § 1 (part), 1970: prior code § 5300.)  
11.08.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows and certain provisions shall be construed as set forth in this chapter unless it is apparent from the context a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes street. 
B.  "Public property" does not include "highway." 
C.  "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 164 § 1 (part), 1970: prior code § 5301.)  
11.08.030 - Exceptions. 
A.  This chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
2.  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. 
(Ord. 164 § 1 (part), 1970: prior code § 5302.)  
11.08.040 - Alternate regulations. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 164 § 1 (part), 1970: prior code § 5303.)  
11.08.050 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the director of planning and community development or his designee. In the enforcement of this chapter, entry may be made by the director of planning and community development or his designee on private or public property, except for vehicles on the highway, to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or to obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 679 § 1, 1989: Ord. 164 § 1 (part), 1970: prior code § 5404.)  
11.08.060 - Franchises. 
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 164 § 1 (part), 1970: prior code § 5305.)  
11.08.070 - Administrative costs. 
The city council from time to time shall determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof, under this chapter. 
(Ord. 164 § 1 (part), 1970: prior code § 5306.)  
11.08.080 - Notice of intent to abate and remove. 
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance shall be issued, unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. Such notice shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and of the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. The notice of intention to abate shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owners of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. 
(Ord. 510 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 164 § 1 (part), 1970: prior code § 5307.)  
11.08.090 - Request for hearing. 
A public hearing shall be held before the city manager upon request for such a hearing by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which such vehicle is located. This request shall be made to the city clerk within ten days after the mailing of notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle. If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such time period, this statement shall be construed as a request for hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting such request. If such a request is not received within such period, the city shall have the authority to remove the vehicle. For purposes of this chapter, "city manager" shall include his designee. 
(Ord. 679 § 2, 1989: Ord. 510 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 164 § 1 (part), 1970: prior code § 5308.)  
11.08.100 - Hearing. 
All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the city manager who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or part thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The technical rules of evidence shall not apply. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
At the conclusion of the public hearing the city manager may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter. 
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced to its presence, the city manager shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such landowner. 
If an interested party makes a written presentation to the city manager but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. 679 § 3, 1989: Ord. 510 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 164 § 1 (part), 1970: prior code § 5309.)  
11.08.120 - Decision to remove vehicle. 
An order for abatement and removal of a vehicle, made pursuant to this chapter, shall include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
The city manager may impose such conditions and take such actions as are deemed appropriate and justified under the circumstances to carry out removal of the vehicle or part thereof. 
Five days after adoption of the order or five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section 11.08.100, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. 
After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to Section 5004 of the Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. 679 § 5, 1989: Ord. 510 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 164 § 1 (part), 1970: prior code § 5311.)  
11.08.130 - Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Ord. 164 § 1 (part), 1970: prior code § 5312.)  
11.08.140 - Costs. 
The city manager shall determine the administrative costs and cost of removal to be charged. If the administrative costs and the cost of removal are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to this chapter and are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
(Ord. 679 § 6, 1989: Ord. 510 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 164 § 1 (part), 1970: prior code § 5313.)  
11.08.150 - Removal required. 
No person shall fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is applicable. 
(Ord. 164 § 1 (part), 1970: prior code § 5314.)  
Chapter 11.12 - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
11.12.010 - Parking in excess of seventy-two consecutive hours. 
A.  No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any highway, street or alley for more than a period of seventy-two consecutive hours. 
B.  This section shall be considered violated if: 
1.  At the end of the seventy-two hour period the vehicle is parked or left standing in the same place as it was in the beginning of such period and physical markings or other facts which indicate that the vehicle has not been moved; or 
2.  If at the end of the seventy-two hour period the vehicle has not been moved more than two-tenths of a mile. The determination of whether the vehicle has been moved more than two-tenths of a mile shall be based on physical markings, odometer readings or other facts. 
(Ord. 725 § 1, 1990: Ord. 672 § 1, 1989: Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3138.)  
11.12.020 - Removal of vehicle. 
In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a highway, street or alley in excess of a period of seventy-two hours, any member of the California Highway Patrol or any member of the sheriff's office authorized by the chief of police may remove the vehicle from such highway, street or alley, pursuant to authority granted by Vehicle Code Section 22651. 
(Ord. 630 § 1, 1987: Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3139.)  
Chapter 11.16 - SIGNS AND SIGNALS 
 
11.16.010 - Signs, signals and speed limits. 
The city council shall by resolution determine and designate the character of all official traffic-control signals and warning, regulatory and direction signs, and signs designating the boundaries of business and residence districts as provided in the California Vehicle Code; and the council shall designate what intersections shall be controlled by official control signals. The council may by ordinance alter the speed limits in accordance with the provisions of the state Vehicle Code. Such ordinances will not be incorporated into this code. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3101.)  
11.16.020 - Road commissioner. 
The road commissioner shall place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, all official traffic-control signals, authorized by the council, and warning and direction signs necessary for proper control of traffic and all regulatory signs required or authorized by this chapter or the state Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3101.1.)  
11.16.030 - Failure to post signs. 
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required may be enforced against any alleged violator thereof, if at the time and place of such alleged violation any sign required by this chapter is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3101.2.)  
11.16.040 - Obedience. 
No operator or pedestrian at any time shall violate any instruction appearing on any traffic sign or any indication as set forth in the California Vehicle Code presented by any traffic signal upon any highway, placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or under the authority of the council. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3102.)  
11.16.050 - Crosswalks. 
The road commissioner shall provide and maintain painted or other appropriately devised symbols or warning signs at all crosswalks which have been designated as such by the council. He may do so at such other crosswalks where, in his opinion, such symbols or warning signs are necessary. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3103.)  
11.16.060 - Safety zones. 
The road commissioner is authorized to install and maintain safety zones at all locations where there is particular danger to standing pedestrians, and to locate and designate the same upon the surface of the roadway by appropriate devices, signs or marks. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3104.)  
11.16.070 - Markings. 
The road commissioner may place appropriate traffic guidelines dividing highways into the number of traffic lanes that is proper and necessary, and to place such other pavement markings as are necessary to direct vehicular movements in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3105.)  
Chapter 11.20 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
 
11.20.010 - Vehicles for sale. 
A.  No person shall park any vehicle, or cause any vehicle to be parked, on any highway for the purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale. 
B.  No person shall park any vehicle, or cause any vehicle to be parked, on private property other than that owned by such person or to which he has a right of possession, where the principal purpose of such parking is to display, advertise, offer the vehicle for sale, or sell unless the written consent of the owner, lessee or authorized representative of the property has first been obtained. 
1.  The written consent shall specify the location where the vehicle may be parked; the date(s) on which the vehicle can be parked; and the license number of the vehicle. 
2.  The written consent shall be displayed in the vehicle so as to be visible from the outside of the vehicle. 
3.  For purposes of this subsection, when a vehicle is parked on private property for three or more consecutive hours with a sign thereon indicating that the vehicle is for sale, it is presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle has parked it there for the principal purpose of displaying, advertising, or offering the vehicle for sale. 
(Ord. 746 § 2, 1991: Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3115.)  
11.20.020 - Loading zones. 
No operator of any vehicle shall park or stop for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that no stop for the loading or unloading of passengers shall be made for more than three minutes, nor for the loading or unloading of materials for more than twenty minutes, in any loading zone specified by a resolution of the council. The director of public works is authorized to place signs and curb paint markings at such authorized zones in accordance with the terms of the State Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3116.) 
(Ord. No. 1064, § 2, 9-14-2011)  
11.20.030 - Passenger loading. 
No operator of any vehicle shall park the same or stop the same for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers; providing, that no stop for the loading or unloading of passengers shall be made for more than three minutes, in any of the places set forth in the following subsections: 
A.  For a distance of thirty feet along any curb at the main entrance to any hotel; 
B.  At any curb in front of any portion of the main entrance and outside vestibule of any theater during any time such theater is open for public performance; 
C.  In any passenger loading zone when the council shall by resolution determine the location of such passenger loading zone. The road commissioner is authorized to place curb paint markings at such authorized zones in accordance with the terms of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3117.)  
11.20.040 - Parallel parking. 
Except as provided in Section 11.20.050, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle in a roadway, other than parallel with the curb or right-hand edge of the roadway with the two right-hand wheels of the vehicle within one foot of the regularly established curbline, or, where no curbline exists, as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3118.)  
11.20.050 - Angle parking. 
The city council by resolution may determine the location of highways or parts of highways where angle parking shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3119.)  
11.20.060 - Angle of parking. 
When the city council determines the location of highways or parts of highways where angle parking shall be permitted, no person shall stop, stand, or park, cause or permit to be stopped, stood or parked, any vehicle in any roadway otherwise than at an angle of approximately forty-five degrees with the curb thereof, with the nearest wheel not to exceed one foot from the curb. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3119.1.)  
11.20.070 - White lines. 
The road commissioner shall indicate the proper angle for such parking upon such portions of such highways by the painting of white lines upon the surface of the roadway adjacent to the curbline thereof. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3119.2.)  
11.20.080 - Blocking highway. 
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any highway within any business or residence district unless not less than eight feet of the width of the paved or improved or main traveled portion of the highway opposite such stopped, parked or standing vehicle is left clear and unobstructed for the free passage of other vehicles. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3120.)  
11.20.090 - Stopping. 
No operator of any vehicle shall park or stop such vehicle in any of the places set forth in the following subsections when there is in place red paint or other red material upon the curb surface adjacent to such places or when plainly marked by warning signs, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with a traffic sign or signal, or direction of a police officer: 
A.  Within fifty feet of any intersection; provided, that this provision shall not be construed to prevent motor buses stopping to receive or discharge passengers at such locations, when such locations are appropriately marked as bus loading zones; 
B.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within fifty feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite either end of a safety zone; 
C.  For a distance of fifty feet along any curb at the entrance to any hospital; 
D.  For a distance of fifty feet along any curb immediately in front of the main entrance to any substation office of the sheriff of the county; 
E.  Within a distance of one hundred feet along any curb immediately in front of any entrance to any school property occupied by school buildings or appurtenances; 
F.  Along any curb immediately adjacent to any public elementary school property occupied by school buildings or appurtenances when such property is not provided with fences preventing ordinary ingress and egress by pedestrians; 
G.  In any "no parking or stopping any time zone" or "emergency parking only zone" determined and designated by the city engineer; provided, however, such zones shall be designated by red curb painted markings or by signs. 
(Ord. 357 § 1, 1977; Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3121.)  
11.20.095 - Parking in designated spaces. 
No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle, on a public street, or on a public or private parking facility, except entirely within a designated space or the defined limits of a parking space. 
(Ord. 885 § 1, 1997.)  
11.20.100 - Parking limitation on certain streets. 
Pursuant to the provision of Section 22507 of the Vehicle Code, parking on the north side of Ventura Boulevard between Arneill Road and Fir Street is limited to a two-hour maximum between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m., except Sundays and holidays. The city engineer shall cause the area to be appropriately signed. 
(Ord. 348 § 1, 1977.)  
11.20.110 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1084, § 5, adopted Feb. 26, 2014, repealed § 11.20.110, which pertained to prohibition on camping in vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 1037, § 2, adopted June 24, 2009. The user's attention is directed to Chapter 10.42.  
11.20.120 - Private entrances. 
No person shall park any automobile, truck or trailer on any portion of a public highway or public right-of-way, in front of, or within five feet on either side of a private entrance to such public highway or public right-of-way from private property, or opposite such private entrance on either side of the public highway or public right-of-way, unless the paved portion of the public highway or public right-of-way is in excess of twenty feet in width, and even in that event the automobile, truck or trailer shall not be parked in front of the private entrance to the paved public highway or public right-of-way, or within five feet of either side thereof. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3122.)  
11.20.130 - Exemption. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the parking or standing of automobiles, trucks or trailers upon that unpaved portion of a public highway or public right-of-way leading into private property by the owners of such private property, or by the guest of the owners, and with their express consent. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 2133.1.)  
11.20.140 - Trains. 
No person shall operate any train of cars, or cause or permit the same to remain standing so as to block the movement of traffic upon any public street, road or highway within the city for a period of time longer than five minutes. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3123.)  
11.20.150 - Bus zones. 
The road commissioner is authorized to establish and locate bus zones within fifty feet of any intersection when such zones are found by him to be necessary and will not cause a safety hazard. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3124.)  
11.20.160 - Commercial vehicles. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a commercial vehicle on any roadway if such vehicle weighs more than ten thousand pounds for a period of more than two consecutive hours unless it is reasonably necessary to park such vehicle for a longer period of time to carry out work or service which reasonably requires the presence of such vehicle. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply between the hours of five p.m. of one day and eight a.m. of the next day on any street in a commercial or industrial zone. For the purpose of this section, "block" means property facing each side of the roadway between the next intersecting street or alley or between the terminus of a dedicated right-of-way of the street and an intersecting street. 
(Ord. 788 § 1, 1993: Ord. 292 § 1 (part), 1975: Ord. 63 § 1, 1966: Ord. 57 § 1 (part), 1965: Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3125.)  
11.20.170 - Commercial vehicles—Parking in residential zones. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a commercial vehicle weighing over ten thousand pounds gross on any residential street unless such action is reasonably necessary to carry out work or service which requires the presence of such a vehicle. 
(Ord. 788 § 2, 1993: Ord. 762 § 1, 1992: Ord. 145 § 1 (part), 1969: prior code § 3125.1.)  
11.20.180 - Commercial vehicles—Use of streets. 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any commercial vehicle over ten thousand pounds gross weight on any residential street when such streets are posted with respect to such limitation as to use, provided, however, that the exception contained in Section 35703 of the Vehicle Code shall be applicable. 
(Ord. 788 § 3, 1993: Ord. 762 § 2, 1992: Ord. 145 § 1 (part), 1969: prior code § 3125.2.)  
11.20.190 - Commercial vehicles—Parking on public property. 
No person, for a period of more than two hours, shall park any commercial vehicle, weighing more than ten thousand pounds on any unimproved portion of a public right-of-way or any other public property except within a roadway. 
(Ord. 788 § 4, 1993: Ord. 292 § 1 (part), 1975: Ord. 57 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 3126.)  
11.20.210 - Parking or storage of vehicles in front yards on other than approved areas. 
The parking or storage of vehicles in front yard setback areas in residential zones, on other than improved surfaces approved pursuant to the provisions of Title 19 of this code, is prohibited. 
(Ord. 605 § 1, 1986.)  
11.20.220 - Oversized vehicles—Parking prohibited—Parking permits. 
A.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words or phrases are defined as follows, unless the context clearly otherwise requires: 
"Commercial areas" mean those commercial areas of the city identified in the map attached as Exhibit A. 
"Out-of-town visitor" means any natural person who does not reside in the city and who is temporarily visiting a resident of the city. 
"Oversized vehicle" means any vehicle, as that word is defined in the Vehicle Code, or a combination of connected vehicles, that exceeds 25 feet in length and 80 inches in width or 82 inches in height, exclusive of such projecting lights or devices as are expressly allowed under the California Vehicle Code. "Oversize vehicle" does not mean or include a pickup truck, that is less than 25 feet in length and 82 inches in height. 
"Residential areas" means those residential areas of the city identified in the map attached as Exhibit A. 
B.  Daytime Parking Prohibited. Except as provided in subsection (C) or (D) of this section, no person may park or leave standing any oversized vehicle at any time between the hours 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. Mondays through Fridays, including holidays, upon any highway within a residential area or a commercial area of the city. 
C.  Exceptions. This section does not apply to: 
1.  Any person while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of an oversized vehicle; 
2.  Any person while actually engaged in making temporary or emergency repairs to an oversized vehicle; 
3.  Any person while actually engaged in the pickup or delivery of goods, wares and merchandise, including, without limitation, building materials, from or to a property or building located in a residential area or a commercial area; 
4.  Any person who has been issued a valid oversized vehicle parking permit under this section; 
5.  Any public emergency vehicle; or 
6.  Any oversized vehicle properly displaying a valid oversized vehicle handicap permit. 
D.  Permits. 
1.  Oversized Vehicle Parking Permit. An oversized vehicle may be parked on a highway in a residential area or a commercial area if an oversized parking permit or an oversized vehicle handicap permit is issued by the city pursuant to the following: 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of authorizing the issuance of oversized vehicle parking permits is to give owners of oversized vehicles an opportunity, for a limited time, to park the oversized vehicles on a highway adjacent to their residences or businesses for the purpose of loading or unloading such oversized vehicles, and to allow an out-of-town visitor to park on a highway adjacent to the residence that the out-of-town visitor is visiting for a limited time period, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B) of this section. The purpose of authorizing the issuance of oversized vehicle handicap permits is to allow a handicapped person, whether or not such person has a handicap license plate, to park a designated oversized vehicle on highways in the city. 
b.  Issuance of Permits. Oversized vehicle parking permits and oversized vehicles handicap permits will be issued by the police chief of the city, or designee. 
c.  Requirements for Oversized Vehicle Parking Permits. Any bona fide city resident may obtain an oversized vehicle parking permit to park a designated oversized vehicle, for a limited period of time, on a highway adjacent to their residence or their commercial business. Any out-of-town visitor to a residence within the city may obtain an oversized vehicle parking permit authorizing the visitor to park a designated oversize vehicle on a highway adjacent to a specified residence where the visitor is a guest. 
d.  Requirements for Oversized Vehicle Handicap Permit. Any bona fide city resident may obtain an oversized vehicle handicap permit, if such person would be entitled to receive a handicapped placard or license plate under the California Vehicle Code, and if the oversized vehicle is the only vehicle able to accommodate the resident seeking the permit. Oversized vehicle handicap permits will be valid so long as the permit holder meets the requirements of this section relating to such permits, and meets the qualifications for a handicap placard or license plate under the Vehicle Code, regardless of whether such an individual applies for and receives a handicap placard or license plate. 
e.  Application Forms—Fees. Each applicant desiring an oversized vehicle parking permit or an oversized vehicle handicap permit must file with the police chief, a completed city application form, and pay any applicable processing fee approved by a resolution of the city council. 
f.  Description of Permits. Oversized vehicle parking permits and oversized vehicle handicap permits will be issued in a form approved by the police chief, and will include the license plate number of the oversized vehicle to which it relates, and, as to oversized vehicle parking permits, the date of the issuance and the day of its expiration. 
g.  Display. All permits must be placed at the lower driver's side of the windshield of the oversized vehicle to which it relates so that it is clearly visible from the exterior of the oversized vehicle. 
h.  Oversized Vehicle Permit—Duration—Renewal. 
(i)  Oversized Vehicle Parking Permit. An oversized vehicle parking permit will be valid for a period not to exceed five consecutive calendar days. Upon expiration of an oversized vehicle parking permit issued under this section, the applicant may apply for and be granted additional oversized vehicle parking permits, if the applicant still qualifies under the conditions set forth in this section. In no event will oversized vehicle parking permits be issued to an applicant for a total period in excess of ten days within any consecutive 90-day period. 
(ii)  Oversized Vehicle Handicap Permits. Oversized vehicle handicap permits will be valid for a period of two years, and may be renewed, if the applicant continues to meet the qualifications. An oversized vehicle handicap permit will be automatically revoked, if the permit holder no longer meets requirements of subsection (D) of this section. 
i.  Signs giving reasonable notice of the prohibitions contained in this section will be erected within the city as required by Vehicle Code Section 22507. 
(Ord. 928 § 1, 1999; Ord. 925 § 1, 1999; Ord. 886 § 1, 1997: Ord. 875 § 1, 1997.) 
(Ord. No. 1030, §§ 2, 3, 8-27-2008) 
   
11.20.230 - Non-motorized vehicle parking restrictions. 
No person may park a nonmotorized vehicle on any street, alley, or public property for any period of time except as follows: 
(A)  A non-motorized vehicle, with a commercial license registration, while the nonmotorized vehicle is being loaded with, or unloaded of, any goods, wares, or merchandise from property adjacent to the non-motorized vehicle; 
(B)  A non-motorized vehicle required for any lawfully-authorized construction, maintenance, or repair to adjacent property for a period less than 24 hours; or, 
(C)  A non-motorized vehicle used solely for recreational purposes, while the nonmotorized vehicle is being loaded or unloaded, or otherwise prepared for, its intended recreational use. In no event may such a non-motorized vehicle be parked on a street, alley, or public property for a period greater than 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 3, 5-25-2016)  
Chapter 11.24 - MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
 
11.24.020 - Bicycle—Riding on handlebars. 
No operator of any bicycle shall carry any other person upon the handlebars of any such bicycles, nor shall any person so ride upon any such bicycle upon any street or highway. 
(Ord. 340 § 1, 1976: Ord. 33 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 3108.1.)  
11.24.030 - Processions. 
No operator of any vehicle, or bicycle shall drive or ride between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession, where the vehicle immediately in front of which such operator or rider passes in driving through such procession, is conspicuously designated as constituting a part of such procession. 
(Ord. 33 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 3109.)  
11.24.040 - Moving vehicles. 
No person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle, toy vehicle, or other moving device, of any nature whatsoever, on any public highway shall cling to or attach himself, or his vehicle, or such device, to any other moving vehicle. 
(Ord. 33 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 3110.)  
11.24.050 - Pedestrian tunnels. 
No pedestrian shall cross any highway within two hundred feet of any regularly established and maintained underpass, subway, bridge or grade separation, intended for the use of pedestrians in crossing highways except by the use of such underpass, subway, bridge or grade separation. 
(Ord. 33 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 3111.)  
Chapter 11.28 - USE OF HIGHWAYS 
 
11.28.010 - Damage to street. 
No person shall ride, drive or drag or cause to be ridden, driven or dragged, any unlicensed vehicle, tractor, sled or implement over, along or across any street or the improved shoulder of any street in such a manner as to cause injury or damage to such street or improved shoulder. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3130.)  
11.28.020 - Injury to markings. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or any pavement under construction or any freshly painted markings upon any public highways when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or markings, or when a sign is in place stating that the street or road is closed. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3131.)  
11.28.030 - Advertising. 
No person shall paint, post, attach or affix any handbill, dodger, notice, sign or advertisement upon or to any bridge, fence, building or other property belonging to the city, or any tree situated in any public highway, and it is unlawful for any person to deface, mar or discolor any bridge, fence, building or other structure belonging to the city or any tree situated in any public highway in the city by painting, cutting, scratching or breaking the same or attaching or affixing anything thereto and it is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, place or maintain any sign, billboard sign or advertisement in, over or on any public highway. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3132.)  
11.28.040 - Warning signs exempted. 
Nothing in Section 11.28.030 shall be construed to prohibit erection or placing in any highway of mileposts, mile boards, guideposts or guide boards, or the painting, posting, attaching or affixing of warning signs, notices or sign boards upon bridges, fences, buildings or other structures belonging to the city with permission of the city council. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3132.1.)  
11.28.050 - Decorations exempted. 
Nothing in Section 11.28.030 shall be construed as prohibiting the use of decorations or temporary banners used during times of general celebration, nor as prohibiting the use of banners stretched across the public highway for a period not to exceed fifteen days when a permit for the use of such decorations is given by the city council and the installation is approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 341 § 1, 1976: Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3132.2.)  
11.28.060 - Vehicles carrying trash. 
Except as provided in Section 11.28.070, every vehicle carrying trash upon a highway shall be covered with a cover sufficient to prevent any material from falling or being blown from such vehicle. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3133.)  
11.28.070 - Exception. 
When traveling from house to house or from place to place to pick up material, vehicles used in collecting trash or garbage need not be covered so long as the distance between such stops for loading is not more than one-half mile. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3133.1.)  
11.28.080 - Repairing of vehicles. 
No person shall repair or modify any vehicle or install any part or accessory on any vehicle or such vehicles on any public highway, street or alley; provided, however, that such repairs to any vehicle so located may be made whenever the mechanical condition of such vehicle is such that it cannot be moved from the public highway, street or alley without such emergency repairs. 
(Ord. 787 § 5, 1993; Ord. 637 § 1, 1987.)  
Chapter 11.32 - THROUGH HIGHWAYS 
 
11.32.010 - Designation. 
The city council by resolution may designate certain highways or parts of highways under its jurisdiction as through highways, and the road commissioner shall cause to be erected stop signs at specified entrances thereto, or may designate any intersection under its exclusive jurisdiction as a stop intersection and the road commissioner shall cause stop signs to be erected at one or more entrances thereto. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3135.)  
11.32.020 - Stop signs. 
The driver or operator of any vehicle traversing any street, road or highway intersection or any through highways, shall, upon approaching the entrance of the through highway, or any intersection sign posted with a stop sign as provided in this chapter, bring the vehicle to a full stop at such sign before entering or crossing such through highway or intersection. 
(Ord. 33 § 2 (part), 1965: prior code § 3135.1)  
Chapter 11.36 - PRIVATE ROADS AND PARKING FACILITIES 
 
11.36.010 - Parking and roadway areas designated. 
A.  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21107.6 of the Vehicle Code, the city council finds and declares that there are privately owned and maintained roads, as described in this subsection, within the city which are generally held open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel to serve commercial establishments. The roads are within and as described in the areas set forth respectively as follows and, therefore, the provisions of the California Vehicle Code apply to them: 
Exhibit 1. 	Ponderosa Shopping Center 
Exhibit 2. 	Central Plaza Shopping Center 
Exhibit 3. 	Las Posas Village Shopping Center 
Exhibit 4. 	Ponderosa North Shopping Center 
Exhibit 5. 	Las Posas Plaza Shopping Center 
Exhibit 6. 	Carmen Plaza Shopping Center 
Exhibit 7. 	Pleasant Valley Recreational Park and Parks District Area 
Exhibit 8. 	Pleasant Valley Hospital 
Exhibit 9. 	Paseo Camarillo Shopping Center 
Exhibit 10. 	Mission Oaks Plaza Commercial Center 
Exhibit 11. 	Mission Oaks Center 
Exhibit 12. 	Santa Rosa Plaza 
Exhibit 13. 	Woodside Village Shopping Center 
Exhibit 14. 	Camarillo Plaza Shopping Center 
Exhibit 15. A, B 	Pardee Plaza Shopping Center 
Exhibit 16. 	Camarillo Factory Stores 
Exhibit 17. 	Edwards Cinemas 
Exhibit 18. 	Camarillo Town Center 
Exhibit 19. 	Plaza Auto Care Center 
Exhibit 20. 	Paseo Del Sol Shopping Center 
 
B.  Pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 21107.8, the city council finds and declares that there are privately owned and maintained off-street parking facilities as described in this subsection that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular parking. Sections 22507.8, 22350, 23103, 23109, and Division 16.5, commencing with Section 38000 (all of the Vehicle Code of the state), shall apply to such facilities provided the owner or operator has caused to be posted, in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such off-street parking facility, a notice of not less than seventeen by twenty-two inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, and providing to the effect that such off-street parking facility is subject to public traffic regulation and control. The parking facilities are as follows: 
Exhibit 1. 	Ponderosa Shopping Center 
Exhibit 2. 	Central Plaza Shopping Center 
Exhibit 3. 	Las Posas Village Shopping Center 
Exhibit 4. 	Ponderosa North Shopping Center 
Exhibit 5. 	Las Posas Plaza Shopping Center 
Exhibit 6. 	Carmen Plaza Shopping Center 
Exhibit 7. 	Pleasant Valley Recreational Park and Parks District Area 
Exhibit 8. 	Pleasant Valley Hospital 
Exhibit 9. 	Paseo Camarillo Shopping Center 
Exhibit 10. 	Mission Oaks Plaza Commercial Center 
Exhibit 11. 	Mission Oaks Center 
Exhibit 12. 	Santa Rosa Plaza 
Exhibit 13. 	Woodside Village Shopping Center 
Exhibit 14. 	Camarillo Plaza Shopping Center 
Exhibit 15. A, B 	Pardee Plaza Shopping Center 
Exhibit 16. 	Camarillo Factory Stores 
Exhibit 17. 	Edwards Cinemas 
Exhibit 18. 	Camarillo Town Center 
Exhibit 19. 	Plaza Auto Care Center 
Exhibit 20. 	Paseo Del Sol Shopping Center 
Exhibit 21. 	Camarillo Metrolink Station 
 
C.  Pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 21107.5, the city council finds and declares that there are privately owned and maintained roads as described in this subsection within the city that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel and which so connect with highways that the public cannot determine that such roads are not highways. The roads are within and as described in the areas set forth respectively, as follows, and, therefore, the provisions of the California Vehicle Code apply to them: 
Exhibit A. Capeheart Military Housing 
(Ord. 927 § 1, 1999; Ord. 926 § 1, 1999; Ord. 913 § 1, 1999; Ord. 849 § 1, 1996; Ord. 662 § 1, 1988; Ord. 657 § 1, 1988: Ord. 557 § 1, 1983: Ord. 551 § 1, 1983: Ord. 542 § 1, 1983: Ord. 517 § 1, 1982; Ord. 464 § 1, 1980; Ord. 275 § 1, 1974.) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
Chapter 11.44 - COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 
 
11.44.010 - Defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, "commercial vehicles" means any vehicle exceeding a gross weight of six thousand pounds and used for or in conjunction with picking up or collection of rubbish, trash or other waste material or the delivering of goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Ord. 184 § 1 (part), 1971: prior code § 4700.)  
11.44.020 - Residential zones. 
Within that portion of the city zoned for residential use as designated in this code no person shall use any commercial vehicle except between the hours of seven a.m. of one day and seven p.m. of the same day. 
(Ord. 184 § 1 (part), 1971: prior code § 4701.)  
11.44.030 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit the following uses: 
A.  The driving through of a commercial vehicle without making any pickup or delivery; 
B.  The use of any commercial vehicle for the delivery of milk, dairy products or other food product to any resident for the use by such resident when such vehicle is used upon a fixed route within the area and delivery reasonably cannot be made between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m.; 
C.  The use of a commercial vehicle at any time when such use is necessary by reason of an emergency condition which endangers the public peace, health, safety or general welfare; 
D.  The use of commercial vehicles from which foodstuff ready to eat is sold directly to the consumer; provided, however, that no such commercial vehicle shall use any sound equipment or device in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance and in no event shall such vehicle used be used later than ten p.m. 
(Ord. 184 § 1 (part), 1971: prior code § 4702.)  
Chapter 11.48 - VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY AND BICYCLE PATHS 
 
11.48.010 - Vehicle propelled by internal combustion engines. 
For the purposes of this chapter, "vehicles propelled by internal combustion engines" means any vehicle designed as its principal function to carry an operator, which vehicle has two wheels or more which are designed to operate in contact with the ground, the basic purpose of which vehicle is to provide transportation for one or more persons, and which vehicle is propelled or derives its source of power from an internal combustion engine. 
(Ord. 268 § 1, 1974: prior code § 4309.)  
11.48.020 - Operation on private property without permission prohibited. 
No person shall operate any vehicle propelled by an internal combustion engine on private property without the prior express consent of the owner and person in lawful possession of the real property. Upon demand to leave given to the operator of any such vehicle by the owner, or authorized representative of the owner, or person in lawful possession of the real property, no person to whom such demand is addressed shall thereafter operate a motor vehicle as described in this chapter on such private property except as is necessary to immediately quit the said property by the shortest route and time reasonably available. 
(Ord. 268 § 2 (part), 1974: prior code § 4309.1.)  
11.48.030 - Equipment and noise control. 
A.  No person shall operate any vehicle propelled by an internal combustion engine on private property within the city without a United States Forestry Service-approved or state-approved spark arrestor or a noise-muffling device approved by the state. 
B.  No person shall operate any vehicle propelled by an internal combustion engine on private property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries on any residential property, except where reasonably necessary upon his own property or property of others over which a lawful easement right is owned for purposes of ingress or egress. 
C.  No person shall operate within the city any vehicle propelled by an internal combustion engine beyond three hundred feet of the exterior boundary of any residential property, whether on his own property or that of others with equipment on such vehicle, or in such a manner, that the volume of the exhaust, sound, or motor noise is audible to the extent that such noise volume is so loud, raucous, or jarring as to be disturbing or a nuisance to the peace or quiet of any adjacent neighborhood or a person residing in an adjacent neighborhood or conducting a lawful business therein. There shall be a rebuttable presumption of compliance with the equipment requirements of this subsection if the vehicle is determined to be in compliance with the provisions of subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 268 § 2 (part), 1974: prior code § 4309.2.)  
11.48.040 - Operating motor vehicles on vacant property and parking lots. 
Any person who operates a motorcycle, trail bike, minibike, dune buggy, motor scooter, jeep or other motor-driven vehicle on any vacant lot, parking lot, railroad tracks, railroad right-of-way, or railroad property adjacent to the right-of-way, vacant property or acreage within the city and disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or person by noise, dust, smoke, or fumes caused by such vehicle is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 268 § 2 (part), 1974: prior code § 4309.3.)  
11.48.050 - Bicycle paths. 
No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle, as defined by the Vehicle Code of the state, upon any public property, right-of-way or easement designated by the city council as a bicycle path. It is the intention and purpose of the city council that paths established and designated as bicycle paths be used primarily for the purpose of operation thereon of bicycles as the same are defined in Section 21200 of the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 268 § 2 (part), 1974: prior code § 4309.4.)  
Chapter 11.52 - BICYCLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1041, § 2, adopted September 23, 2009, repealed Ch. 11.52, §§ 11.52.010—11.52.190, which pertained to bicycles. See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
 
Chapter 11.56 - PUBLIC BUS SYSTEM REGULATIONS 
 
11.56.010 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to the use of the public transportation buses owned or operated by or on behalf of the city; "bus" as used in this chapter shall refer to any such bus. 
(Ord. 286 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 4600.)  
11.56.020 - Fares. 
The city council may from time to time adopt, by resolution, a schedule of fares for the city's municipal public bus transportation system. 
(Ord. 286 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 4601.)  
11.56.030 - Passenger location. 
Passengers shall keep themselves and all packages transported by them to the rear of the driver of the bus while the bus is in motion or transit. Demarcation of the passenger and package area may be indicated by a line on the floor of the bus. 
(Ord. 286 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 4602.)  
11.56.040 - Conversation with bus driver. 
Passengers shall refrain from unnecessary conversation with the driver while the bus is in motion or in transit. 
(Ord. 286 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 4603.)  
11.56.050 - Playing of radios. 
Passengers shall not play radios, tape recorders or other mechanical devices on the bus in such a manner that the sound therefrom is audible to other passengers. 
(Ord. 286 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 4604.)  
11.56.060 - Passenger conduct. 
The driver of the bus may order a passenger to leave the bus for cause where he is either in violation of a provision of this chapter or by his conduct is creating a disturbance to the passengers or the driver that interferes with the safe operation of the bus. A passenger so ordered by the driver to leave the bus shall leave immediately. 
(Ord. 286 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 4605.)  
11.56.070 - Prohibitions for passengers. 
No passengers, while on a bus, shall smoke, eat or drink. 
(Ord. 286 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 4606.)  
Chapter 11.60 - PARADE PERMITS 
 
11.60.010 - Permit required. 
No person shall hold or be a participant in any parade, procession or other assemblage or demonstration upon any public street unless a permit therefor has been granted by the city council. Such permits may be granted by the city council upon written application filed with the city manager in such form as he may prescribe. 
(Ord. 96 § 1, 1967: prior code § 3145.)  
Chapter 11.64 - INTERSTATE TRUCKS 
 
11.64.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth, and if any word or phrase used in this chapter is not defined in this section, it shall have the meanings set forth in the California Vehicle Code; provided, that if any such word or phrase is not defined in the Vehicle Code it shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage. 
A.  "Caltrans" means the State Department of Transportation or its successor agency. 
B.  "Director of engineering services" means the director of engineering services of the city or his authorized representative (hereinafter "director"). 
C.  "Interstate truck" means a truck tractor and semitrailer or truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer with unlimited length, as regulated by the Vehicle Code. 
D.  "Terminal" means any facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped or where full load consignments may be loaded and off-loaded, or at which the vehicles are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured. 
(Ord. 576 § 1 (part), 1985.)  
11.64.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for terminal designation and truck route designation to terminals for interstate trucks operating on a federally designated highway system and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 576 § 1 (part), 1985.)  
11.64.030 - Application. 
A.  Any interested person requiring terminal access for interstate trucks from the federally designated highway system shall submit an application, on a form as provided by the city, together with such information as may be required by the director and appropriate fees to the city. 
B.  Upon receipt of the application, the director will cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether or not the proposed terminal facility meets the requirements for an interstate truck terminal. Upon his approval of that designation, he will then determine the capability of the route requested and alternate routes, whether requested or not. Determination of route capability will include, without limitation, a review of adequate turning radius and lane widths of ramps, intersections and highways, and general traffic conditions such as sight distance, speed and traffic volumes. No access off a federally designated highway system will be approved without the approval of Caltrans. 
C.  Should the requested route pass through the city to a terminal located in another jurisdiction, the applicant shall comply with that jurisdiction's application process as well. Coordination of the approval of the route through the city will be the responsibility of the entity which controls the terminal's land use. Costs for trailblazer signs shall be as provided in Section 11.64.040. 
(Ord. 576 § 1 (part), 1985.)  
11.64.040 - Fees and costs. 
A.  The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee, as established by the city council by resolution, sufficient to pay the cost of the review of the terminal designation and the review of the route and alternate route. The council shall also set, by resolution, an appeal fee to pay the costs of processing an appeal pursuant to Section 11.64.070. 
B.  Upon the approval of the terminal designation and route by the city and by Caltrans, the applicant shall deposit with the city sufficient funds as estimated by the director to pay for the purchase and installation of terminal trailblazer signs. Trailblazer signs will be required at every decision point in the city on route to the terminal. Upon completion of the installation of the signs, the actual cost shall be computed and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, whichever the case may be. No terminal or route may be used until such signs as may be required are in place. Costs for trailblazer signs may be proportioned in accordance with the procedures in Section 11.64.050C. 
(Ord. 576 § 1 (part), 1985.)  
11.64.050 - Retrofitting. 
A.  If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are found unsatisfactory by the director, the applicant may request retrofitting the deficiencies. All costs of engineering, construction and inspection will be the responsibility of the applicant. Except when the retrofitting of deficiencies is within the jurisdiction of Caltrans, the actual construction will be done by the city or by a contractor acceptable to it. 
B.  When the work is to be done by the city, the applicant shall deposit with the city the estimated cost of retrofitting. Adjustments between the estimated and actual cost shall be made after completion of the work, and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant as the case may be. 
C.  If at any time within five years from the date of completion of the retrofitting by the applicant, should any applicant seek terminal approval which would use the route upon which such retrofitting was accomplished, any such applicant's fee may include that applicant's proportionate share of the retrofitting, as determined by the director, which fee shall be disbursed by the city to the applicant who paid for the retrofitting, as well as to any applicant who contributed to the cost of retrofitting under this subsection. 
(Ord. 576 § 1 (part), 1985.)  
11.64.060 - Revocation of route. 
The director may revoke any approved terminal or route if the terminal or route becomes a traffic hazard for vehicular traffic. A safety hazard includes the inability of interstate trucks to negotiate the route, or said vehicles causing unsafe driving conditions for other vehicular traffic or pedestrians. 
(Ord. 576 § 1 (part), 1985.)  
11.64.070 - Appeal process. 
A.  If the director denies terminal designation, route feasibility, or revokes a previously approved terminal or route, the director shall notify the applicant thereof in writing. The applicant or terminal owner, within ten days following the date of the decision of the director, may, in writing, appeal the decision to the city manager. An appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the director and shall be filed with the city clerk, together with the payment of the appeal fee. The appeal shall state specifically wherein there was an error or abuse of discretion by the director, or wherein the decision not supported by the evidence in the record. Within five days of the filing of an appeal, the director shall transmit to the city clerk the terminal application, the sketches of the revoked route and all other data filed therewith, the report of the director, the findings of the director, and the decision on the application. 
B.  The city clerk shall make copies of the data provided by the director available to the applicant and to the appellant (if the applicant is not the appellant) for inspection. The city manager shall set the matter for hearing and give not less than ten calendar days written notice to all interested parties of the time and place of the hearing. The decision of the city manager shall be final and conclusive, subject only to timely judicial review pursuant to Section 1094.5 et seq. of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
C.  If Caltrans and not the director denies or revokes terminal access from federally designated highways, no appeal may be made to the city manager; all such appeals must be made as may be permitted by Caltrans' regulations. 
(Ord. 912 § 2, 1999: Ord. 576 § 1 (part), 1985.)  
Chapter 11.68 - TRAFFIC IMPACT MITIGATION FEES 
 
11.68.010 - Findings. 
The city council finds and determines as follows: 
A.  Based on the staff reports, documentation and oral presentations made by city staff, the city council originally enacted this chapter in 1989, imposing a traffic mitigation fee program ("program"). 
B.  Pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as originally adopted, a computerized traffic modeling study was to be prepared in order to update the program. 
C.  A computerized traffic modeling study ("study") was prepared by the city's traffic engineering consultants and has been adopted by resolution of the city council. 
D.  Based upon the study and other evidence presented to the city council, the city council has concluded as follows: 
1.  All types of new development within the city will cause a burden on the city's circulation system as well as on certain portions of the adjacent county circulation system, will contribute to a reduction in levels of service below those which currently exist, will result in unacceptable traffic congestion and related adverse impacts, and in some cases will result in traffic volumes that exceed the street capacity at acceptable levels of service; and 
2.  A failure to expand the capacity of the existing circulation system will cause a reduction in levels of service, unacceptable levels of congestion on streets and intersections, traffic accidents, air pollution, noise, and restrictions on access for emergency vehicles; and 
3.  In the absence of this program imposing a fair share traffic mitigation fee upon new development, existing and future sources of revenue will be inadequate to fully fund the circulation system improvements necessary to avoid a reduction in levels of service and unacceptable levels of congestion and related adverse impacts; and 
4.  All types of new development in the city will directly benefit from circulation system improvements; and 
5.  It is necessary to impose a traffic mitigation fee ("fee") on all types of new development within the city in an amount equal to the new development's share of needed traffic improvements; and 
6.  The public, interest, convenience and necessity require the adoption and implementation of the provisions of this program. 
(Ord. 779 § 1, 1993: Ord. 696 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
11.68.020 - Purpose. 
A.  The adoption of this chapter will raise additional revenues for construction of necessary circulation system improvements to accommodate traffic that will be generated by development of land within the city consistent with the Camarillo general plan. 
B.  This chapter contains a fair and equitable method of determining the extent to which the development of land will generate traffic volumes impacting the roadway system and establishes a fair and equitable method for distribution of unfunded costs of circulation system improvements necessary to accommodate the traffic volumes generated by such development. 
C.  This chapter and the actions taken pursuant to its terms are necessary to assure that development takes place in a manner consistent with the city's general plan. 
D.  This chapter and the actions taken pursuant to its terms are necessary to provide a fair and equitable method of mitigating the significant cumulative environmental impacts of traffic generated by development within the city. This chapter shall not preclude the imposition of additional mitigation measures to address significant direct impacts of any development, or to address otherwise unfunded roadway improvements, nor shall this chapter preclude the city from adopting statements of overriding considerations where desirable and appropriate or from denying any discretionary development based on traffic impacts. 
(Ord. 696 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
11.68.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "Development" means any discretionary or ministerial action by the city resulting in the issuance of grading, building, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical permits, conditional use permits, other land use entitlement permits or certificates of occupancy issued by the city to construct, change, or make lawful the use of a building or property. 
B.  "Future growth" means the level of new development anticipated in Camarillo consistent with the general plan and shall be expressed in terms of square footage for commercial and industrial uses and in terms of dwelling units for residential uses. 
C.  "Level of service" means the different operating conditions which occur at an intersection or on a roadway when accommodating various traffic volumes. It is a qualitative measure of the effect of traffic flow factors, such as speed and travel time, interruptions, freedom to maneuver and driver comfort and convenience. 
D.  "Nexus routine" means the computerized accounting program, developed by the city's traffic engineering consultant and adopted by resolution of the city council, which traces trip ends from each category of land use of new development to a traffic impact, excluding passby trips, and then determines the pro rata share of each impact attributable to the new development. 
E.  "Passby trip" means a trip end that is actually a stopping off point along a trip on the way to another destination. Passby trips are not included in the calculation of traffic mitigation fees. 
F.  "Roadway improvements" means those improvements necessary to implement the traffic circulation improvement plan, including but not limited to, paving, grading, roadway substructure, curb and gutter, sidewalks, medians with landscaping, drainage facilities, bridges, traffic signals, street lighting, signing, striping, noise walls, utility relocations, rights-of-way and other improvements or actions necessary to mitigate adverse environmental impacts. 
G.  "Traffic circulation improvement plan" means the program for maintaining and upgrading the city's traffic circulation system consistent with the general plan. The plan will contain the improvements necessary to construct the traffic circulation system and all estimated associated costs, including by way of example, but not limited to, engineering, right-of-way acquisitions, and necessary legal fees. The traffic circulation improvement plan shall be adopted by resolution of the city council, and shall be revised as necessary. 
H.  "Trip" means a one-direction vehicular movement with an origin, destination, and no stops in between. 
I.  "Trip end" means the beginning or ending point of a trip. 
(Ord. 779 § 2, 1993: Ord. 696 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
11.68.040 - Establishment of traffic mitigation fee. 
A.  Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new development which will generate additional vehicle trips. 
B.  Basis of Fee. A traffic mitigation fee shall be based upon the unfunded roadway improvement costs attributable to new development and the number of trips attributable to new development in each traffic mitigation fee district. The resultant traffic mitigation fee for each category of new development in each traffic mitigation fee district shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Calculation. Traffic mitigation fees will be calculated in accordance with the following procedures: 
1.  The unfunded traffic improvement costs shall be determined as follows: 
a.  The computerized traffic modeling study shall be used to identify future traffic volumes and the resulting future traffic impacts based on the build-out of the city's general plan, 
b.  A traffic circulation improvement plan shall be established by resolution of the city council for the purpose of mitigating the traffic impacts identified by the computerized traffic modeling study, 
c.  An estimate shall be made of the costs associated with the traffic circulation improvement plan, 
d.  An estimate shall be made of the current and anticipated funding available to finance the improvements identified in the traffic circulation improvement plan, 
e.  A determination shall be made of the difference, if any, between the estimated costs and estimated funding, 
f.  The extent to which the estimated cost exceeds the estimated funding will be the unfunded costs of the improvements to be funded by the traffic mitigation fee; 
2.  Traffic mitigation fee districts ("districts") shall be established by resolution of the city council based on geographic areas within the city where new development generally impacts the same locations; 
3.  The Nexus Routine shall be used to determine the share of each impact caused by each new development in each district; 
4.  The unfunded traffic improvement costs for each improvement will then be distributed to each land use category of new development in each district in accordance with the same pro rata share developed by the Nexus Routine in determining the percentage of impact attributable to that land use category of new development; 
5.  New Mixed Use Buildings. Where there are multiple uses within a new building (mixed use building), the following shall apply: 
a.  For each new mixed use building where there are multiple uses proposed, the traffic mitigation fee shall be in an amount equal to the combined total of the traffic mitigation fees for each of the uses proposed within the building. 
b.  For each mixed use building where the various proposed uses cannot clearly be segregated into separate categories, the traffic mitigation fee for the entire building shall be based on the mixed use traffic mitigation fee formula. 
6.  Change in Use. 
a.  For any change in use or uses, if the new use or uses are in a higher traffic mitigation fee category than the existing use or uses, then the additional traffic mitigation fee shall be in an amount equal to the difference between the traffic mitigation fee for the new use or uses and the traffic mitigation fee for the former use or uses. 
b.  For any of the uses in subsection (C)(6)(a) of this section, that cannot clearly be segregated into separate categories, the traffic mitigation fee for the unsegregative uses shall be based on the mixed use traffic mitigation fee formula. 
(Ord. 850 §§ 1, 2, 1996; Ord. 798 § 2, 1993; Ord. 779 § 3, 1993: Ord. 696 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
11.68.050 - Payment of fee. 
Except as is otherwise provided by law, the required traffic mitigation fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building permit, except that in the case of a development which is not required to secure a building permit, the traffic mitigation fee shall be paid at the time application is made for approval of a change in use. 
(Ord. 837 § 2, 1995: Ord. 696 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
11.68.060 - Credit. 
A.  Credit for Certain Developer Installed Road Improvements. In connection with the construction of "roadway improvements" designated for improvement as part of the traffic circulation improvement plan, where a developer dedicates and/or installs "roadway improvements" identified in the plan beyond the following minimums, in-lieu improvement credit will be given against the traffic mitigation fee as hereafter provided. 
1.  If the developer is required to make roadway improvements more than that required by the adopted pave out policy of the city council, an in-lieu improvement credit will be given for the cost of the excess improvements constructed, as determined by the director of engineering services, against, but not to exceed, the amount of the traffic mitigation fee due. 
2.  No in-lieu credit shall be allowable for dedication of right-of-way. 
3.  In-lieu credit will be subject to the prior approval of the director of engineering services. In-lieu credit for the fee is applicable only to the improvements identified in the traffic circulation improvement plan. 
B.  Credit Spread Among Parcels. The amount of credit due with respect to any property will be spread on the basis of dwelling units for residential projects and net acreage for nonresidential project. 
C.  Burden of Establishing Entitlement to Credit. The city will utilize its best efforts to maintain records for purposes of determining credits that may be due to any particular property. However, except as otherwise specifically provided by law, the ultimate burden and responsibility for establishing entitlement to any credit shall rest with the person claiming entitlement to a credit. 
(Ord. 696 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
11.68.070 - Exemption. 
A.  This chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  A second residential unit permitted pursuant to Section 19.62.162 of this code; 
2.  Any remodeling and/or expansion of a single-family dwelling unit, so long as the unit remains a single-family dwelling unit; 
3.  Any residential unit for lower income households as defined in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
4.  Any residential building permit for which an allotment has been received for calendar year 1989 or prior. 
B.  The city council may, upon written request from the developer, modify the fee for residential units for moderate income households as defined in Section 50093(b) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
C.  For any exemption or modification granted pursuant to subsections A or B above, the city may require the developer or applicant to enter into an appropriate agreement with the city, guaranteeing the affordability and use of the units. 
(Ord. 850 § 3, 1996; Ord. 696 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
11.68.080 - Use of funds. 
A.  Except for the study surcharge fee imposed pursuant to Section 11.68.045, the fees paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be set aside by the city in a fund to be used solely for the purpose of funding and construction of roadway improvements necessary to complete implementation of the Traffic Circulation Improvement Plan. During budget review, the city council will review fund balances and required roadway improvements and make determination for use of the funds for the coming fiscal year. 
(Ord. 837 § 3, 1995; Ord. 779 § 5, 1993; Ord. 696 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
11.68.090 - Supplementary provisions. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided, it is the intent of the city that the fees required by this chapter shall be supplementary to the fees and conditions imposed upon projects pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, California Environmental Quality Act, and other state and local laws, ordinances, or administrative policy which may authorize the imposition of conditions on or contributions from development. 
(Ord. 696 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
Chapter 11.72 - COST RECOVERY OF POLICE SERVICES FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSES FROM DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE ACCIDENTS 
 
11.72.010 - Findings/purpose. 
A.  Driving under the influence of alcohol and drugs leads to accidents and other situations in which there arises a need for emergency responses by the city's police department. 
B.  The legislature has provided statutory authority for the city to recover costs incurred for emergency responses by police for incidents resulting from the negligent operation of a motor vehicle when said negligent operation is caused by the person being under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or drug. 
C.  The municipal court judges of Ventura County have formally adopted a procedure for ordering defendants to pay for emergency responses resulting from driving under the influence accidents. 
D.  The Ventura County sheriff's department, which provides police services to the city on a contract basis, has established a procedure to track the costs of police emergency responses. 
E.  The intent and purpose of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Camarillo and to ensure that citizens of the city do not incur costs for police emergency responses to driving under the influence accidents. In order to do so, it is necessary to implement procedures to recover costs for police emergency response services. 
(Ord. 700 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
11.72.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Costs" means reasonable costs incurred by the city in making an emergency response to the incident that directly arise because of the incident and shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  The costs of providing police services at the scene of the incident; 
2.  The salaries of the personnel responding to the incident; 
3.  Materials used in responding to the incident; and 
4.  Any damage to property of the city, the county, or the police officer as a result of responding to the incident. 
B.  "Driving under the influence" means when as a result of drinking an alcoholic beverage or using a drug, or both, a person's physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree that he or she no longer has the ability to operate a motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of a sober person of ordinary prudence under the same or similar circumstances. For purposes of the chapter, the presumptions described in Sections 23152 and 23155 of the California Vehicle Code shall apply, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
C.  "Emergency response" means immediate action by a police officer of the city necessary for the preservation of peace and safety. 
D.  "Motor vehicle" means any vehicle which is self-propelled. 
E.  "Responsible party" means that person who is found to be driving under the influence. 
(Ord. 700 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
11.72.030 - Cost recovery. 
A.  The city shall be reimbursed by the responsible party for all costs incurred for emergency response police services rendered as a result of the responsible party driving under the influence. 
B.  A responsible party's liability shall not exceed one thousand dollars for the costs of an emergency response for a particular incident. 
C.  The method by which the city shall be reimbursed will be through those procedures set forth in this chapter as well as through the procedures adopted by the judges of the Ventura County municipal court, and the Ventura County sheriff's department, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 700 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
11.72.040 - Department of finance—Responsibility. 
A.  The contact person for the city shall be the director of finance. 
B.  Payments shall be made to the department of finance of the city of Camarillo. 
C.  The director of finance or his designee shall be responsible for developing a payment tracking program to follow each case to its conclusion and shall also handle all notification and paperwork required for each case. 
D.  Whenever a defendant is forty-five days late with his payment, the director of finance, or his designee, shall notify the corrections service agency in writing. The notice shall be addressed to the probation officer and sent in care of Mr. Tom Forgea, or his successor. This notice shall include the balance owing. 
(Ord. 700 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
11.72.050 - Sheriff's department—Responsibility. 
A.  The contact person for the Ventura County sheriff's department shall be the commander or authorized designated agent. 
B.  The Ventura County sheriff's department, which provides police services to the city on a contract basis, shall use its established procedures to track costs of police emergency responses, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 700 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
Chapter 11.76 - BICYCLE, SKATEBOARD, ROLLERSKATE AND INLINE SKATE REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1045, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 2009, amended Ch. 11.76 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 11.76, §§ 11.76.010—11.76.040, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1041, § 1, adopted Sept. 23, 2009. 
 
11.76.010 - Bicycling, skateboarding, rollerskating and inline skating prohibited where posted—Public property. 
A.  No person may ride, propel or in any manner operate a bicycle, skateboard, rollerskates or inline skates on, along, or over any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public property of the city where the city council has prohibited the same by resolution. 
B.  The prohibition set forth in this section will not apply until notice has been provided in accordance with this section. 
1.  Notices must be provided in and about the area where the activity is to be prohibited. Notices must be placed in locations and in sufficient numbers so that they are reasonably likely to be seen by those engaging in the prohibited activities. The notice may be stenciled directly onto the sidewalk or other paved surface. 
2.  The notice must provide in capital letters or symbols at least two inches high, which activities are prohibited, and must provide in print at least one inch high, "Camarillo M.C. § 11.76.010." 
(Ord. No. 1045, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
11.76.020 - Bicycling, skateboarding, rollerskating and inline skating prohibited where posted—Private property. 
A.  No person may ride, propel or in any manner operate a bicycle, skateboard, rollerskates or inline skates on, along or over any privately owned property in the city where the owner, manager or other person in charge has prohibited the same. 
B.  The prohibition set forth in this section will not apply until notice has been provided in accordance with this section. 
1.  Notices must be provided in and about the area where the activity is to be prohibited. Notices must be placed in locations and in sufficient numbers so that they are reasonably likely to be seen by those engaging in the prohibited activities. Notices may be stenciled directly onto the sidewalk or other paved surface. 
2.  Each notice must provide in capital letters or symbols at least two inches high, which activities are prohibited, and must provide in print at least one inch high, "Camarillo M.C. § 11.76.020." 
3.  For purposes of this section, "private property" includes property owned by other public agencies within the City of Camarillo. 
(Ord. No. 1045, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
11.76.030 - Law enforcement personnel exemption. 
The provisions of Chapter 11.76 do not apply to law enforcement personnel riding bicycles as part of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 1045, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
11.76.040 - Violation—Infraction. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed an infraction and may be punished as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1045, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
Title 13 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PARKS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.02 - USE OF SIDEWALKS 
Sections: 
 
13.02.010 - Use of sidewalks. 
Prohibition. No person shall use any portion of any public sidewalk for any purpose other than for the passage of pedestrians, except as is otherwise expressly authorized or provided for in this code or by other applicable law. 
(Ord. 924 § 1, 2000.)  
Chapter 13.04 - ENCROACHMENT PERMITS 
Sections:  
I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS 
 
13.04.005 - Title and scope. 
This chapter is known and may be cited as the "encroachment ordinance." The provisions of this chapter shall operate as a supplement to all applicable California Code sections concerning encroachments on city highways. In the event of conflicting provisions the most restrictive shall prevail. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases apply in this chapter: 
"Actual cost" means the amount determined by applying the provisions of the encroachment fee resolution as adopted by the city council. 
"Applicant" means any person or legal entity who proposes to encroach upon a right-of-way and has applied for a permit for the proposed encroachment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Base course" means that portion of the highway structural section located between the pavement and the native soil. 
"Department" means the Public Works Department of the city of Camarillo. 
"Driveway" means that portion of the road right-of-way between the property line and curb, or between the property line and the pavement if no curb exists, where vehicles enter or leave the highway onto adjacent property. 
"Encroachment" means any obstruction, tower, pole, pole line, pipe, fence, wire, cable, conduit, drop-off box for mail and/or packages, stand or building, or any structure or object of any kind not particularly mentioned in this chapter which is placed on, in, along, under, over or across the highway. "Encroachment" does not include the temporary use of the highway for roll-off services as defined in Section 9.04.020; the temporary use of the highway for ordinary maintenance of any existing authorized or permitted encroachment; or the suspension or stringing on existing pole lines of additional cables, wires, transmission lines, conduits or service connections solely for temporary telephone or electric power purposes. 
"Encroachment work" means the work of constructing, placing or installing an encroachment in a right-of-way. 
"Engineer" means the city engineer or the engineer's designee. 
"Excavation" means any opening in the surface of a public place made in any manner, except an opening into a lawful structure below the surface of a public place, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage to the public place. The term also includes any excavation on private property, which removes or imperils lateral support of a public place. 
"Height" means that dimension measured from the level surface upon which the vehicle stands to the highest protrusion in a vertical line. 
"Highway" means any public highway, public street, public way or public place in the incorporated territory of the city, either owned by the city or dedicated to the public for the purpose of travel. "Highway" includes any part of the entire width of a right-of-way, and above and below the same, whether or not such entire area is actually used for highway purposes. 
"Load" means any object or thing which, when transported by a vehicle or combination of vehicles over, upon, along or across any highway, would be required to have a special permit in accordance with provisions of the Vehicle Code and includes, but is not limited to, any house, vessel, machine, missile, equipment, transformer, tree, girder, boat or airplane. 
"Moving contractor" means any person who for himself or herself or for another moves or causes to be moved any load over, upon, along or across any highway. 
"Native soil" means the compacted native material. 
"Overhead structure" means any structure, other than franchise utility poles and their facilities, extending over the dedicated portion of a highway, including canopies but excluding such projections from buildings as are enumerated in the building code. 
"Pavement" means the surfaced portion of the highway structural section, which is composed of various size aggregates mixed with portland cement or asphaltic compounds. 
"Permittee" means any person or legal entity who proposes to encroach upon a right-of-way and has been issued a permit for the proposed encroachment by the department pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Public" means any person as defined in this chapter other than the city road maintenance division and includes the United States and the state of California. 
"Public works director" means the director of the city's public work department or the director's designee. 
"Right-of-way" means any land or property interest which, by deed, conveyance, agreement, dedication, usage or other process of law, has been reserved for or dedicated to the city for use of the general public. 
"Section" means a section of this code unless some other ordinance or statute is expressly cited. 
"Vehicle" means a vehicle or combination of vehicles as described in the Vehicle Code, which: 
Whether laden or unladen is required by the Vehicle Code to have a special permit to be on any highway; or is so laden that it is required to have such special permit. 
"Vehicle Code" means the California Vehicle Code as it may be amended. 
"Width" means that dimension measured at right angles to the anterior-posterior axis of the conveyance upon which the load or a portion of it is, or is to be, loaded or moved, or to the median line of the highway over which the same is being, or is to be moved. 
(Ord. 1020 § 1, 2008: Ord. 742 § 1, 1991; Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.015 - Applicability. 
Unless the provisions or the context otherwise require, these general provisions, rules of construction, and definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.020 - Exception. 
This chapter shall not apply to any officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his official duties. Work performed by any person under contract with or at the request of the city is exempt from the fee and bond requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.025 - Masculine to include the feminine. 
Any time the masculine "he" or "him" are used they are deemed to include the feminine "she" or "her." 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
II. - APPLICATION FOR AND ISSUANCE OF PERMITS 
 
13.04.035 - Permit required. 
Every person except as otherwise provided in this chapter shall obtain a permit from the engineer before he: 
A.  Moves or causes to be moved on, over, along or across any highway, any load or vehicle as defined in Section 13.04.010 above; 
B.  Makes or causes to be made any excavation or encroachment in any highway; 
C.  Places, changes or renews an encroachment; provided, however, that an owner, lessee or person in control of property under active agricultural use and immediately abutting the right-of-way may, without obtaining a permit, use the untraveled portion of the right-of-way abutting such property for the growing and maintenance of agricultural crops and the burning of weeds so long as such use does not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or drainage of the right-of-way. Encroachments for which permits are not required are subject to removal under the procedure and penalties provided in Sections 1481 through 1485 of the Streets and Highways Code; 
D.  Places, constructs or repairs any curb, gutter, sidewalk, driveway, pavement, base course, retaining or garden wall, storm drain, culvert, pipe, conduit, cable or other work of similar nature in, over, along, across or through any highway; 
E.  Constructs, reconstructs or repairs any highway light, or highway lighting system in any highway which is open to public travel. This subsection does not apply if any agreement with the city exists for the construction, reconstruction or maintenance of such installation; 
F.  Constructs, reconstructs, repairs or maintains any overhead structure or other appurtenant facility; 
G.  Places or leaves any impediment to travel upon any highway, including trash or debris; 
H.  Erects or maintains any post, sign, banner, pole, fence, guardrail, wall, loading platform or any other structure on, over, under or within a right-of-way; 
I.  Plants or removes any tree, shrub, or growing thing within a right-of-way; 
J.  Lights or builds a fire for the purpose of disposal of weeds, brush or debris on a right-of-way; 
K.  Uses the right-of-way in any manner for purposes of seismological exploration; 
L.  Conducts land-surveying operations or makes traffic counts in such a way that it is necessary to excavate within a right-of-way or in any way interfere with the normal flow of traffic on a public highway; 
M.  Causes or permits water (other than water from natural sources) to flow onto or upon any street or road wherein the water is contained within the improved section by curbs or berms. 
N.  Placement of chairs, tables or other street furniture within the public sidewalk area of the Camarillo Old Town Zone. 
(Ord. 940 § 1, 2001; Ord. 726 § 7, 1990; Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.040 - Permit—Denial when. 
The engineer may refuse to issue a permit under the following conditions: 
A.  When he finds that it is not in the best interest of the general public to do so; 
B.  When he finds that it will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare; 
C.  When the permit is for excavation in newly renovated (capped, overlayed, or sealed) streets for three years after completion of street renovation. Public agencies and public utilities shall determine alternate methods of making necessary repairs. Exceptions to the above are: 
1.  Emergencies which endanger life or property, 
2.  Interruption of essential utility service, 
3.  When repairs must be made by a public agency or public utility to failed pipelines and conduits or when a new connection which could not have been anticipated must be made, 
4.  Work that is mandated by city, state, or federal legislation, 
5.  Service for buildings or areas where no other reasonable means of providing services exists, 
6.  Where boring is not feasible due to technical engineering reasons, or 
7.  Any other situation in which the engineer has deemed excavation to be in the best interest of the general public. 
If a permit is issued to open any pavement which is less than three years old, an additional charge in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council, shall be made for such opening notwithstanding Section 13.04.315. However, such charge may be waived by the city council when a public agency or public utility can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city council that the excavation is occasioned by circumstances beyond its control. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.045 - Permit—Cancellation. 
A.  A permit may be cancelled by the engineer for any of the following reasons: 
1.  When permitted work is not started within the time specified and/or is started but not diligently prosecuted to completion; 
2.  By failure on the part of the permittee to comply with all of the requirements of the permit; 
3.  By failure on the part of the permittee to provide for public safety; 
4.  For cause as may be determined by the engineer for public health and safety reasons. 
B.  Action taken under this section shall not constitute a bar to criminal proceedings provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.050 - Application in writing. 
Application for a permit shall be made in writing to the department, on the forms provided by the department. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.055 - Application requirements. 
An applicant for a permit shall state in the application his name and address, such other information as is required by this chapter and such other information as the engineer may require. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.060 - Save harmless agreement. 
On each application, the applicant or his agent shall sign a statement that the applicant agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees from any claim, demand, damage, liability, loss, cost or expense for any damage whatsoever, including but not limited to death or injury to any person, damage to property arising out of the encroachment or any activities taken pursuant to the encroachment permit. 
(Ord. 742 § 2, 1991: Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.065 - Changes in application. 
The engineer may make such changes or additions in any application for a permit as in his opinion are necessary for the protection of the highways, for the prevention of undue interference with traffic, and for the safety of persons using such highways, as to the route over which to move any overheight, overwidth, overlength or overweight load; as to the location, depth, dimensions, character and number of excavations; as to encroachments made or placed; and, as to other permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.070 - Exhibits. 
When required by the engineer, the applicant shall attach to or enclose with the application four copies of a map, plat, sketch, diagram or similar exhibit which plainly shows any and all infor-mation necessary to locate, delineate, illustrate or identify the proposed encroachment. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.075 - Additional requirements. 
The engineer may establish additional requirements for the work to be done under the permit, including equipment to be used, type of backfill, compaction, paving, traffic control plans, hours of work, flagmen, lights, inspection and other similar requirements. He also may require whatever advance notice he deems proper for requests for inspection. The engineer may add these requirements and conditions by attachments to the permit and they shall be an integral part thereof. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.080 - Permittee bound by all terms. 
By accepting the permit, the permittee agrees to be bound by all the terms and conditions set forth in the permit and in this chapter. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.085 - Permit—Expiration and extension. 
Each permit shall specify the time the permit becomes null and void and the permit shall become null and void on the date so specified unless the engineer extends the time. The engineer may extend the time if in his opinion the work for which the permit was issued was delayed in completion because of inclement weather, strikes, an act of God, or other causes not within the control of the permittee. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.090 - Blanket permits. 
Blanket permits, renewable annually, may be issued to any city, municipal utility district, municipal water district, public utility or metropolitan water district, subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. The Public Works Director may revoke any such blanket permit if the permittee fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. The issuance of a blanket permit does not relieve the permittee from making such reports of activity under the blanket permit as may be required by the Public Works Director and for paying for inspection, repairs and other costs incurred by the department due to the permittee's activity. Blanket excavation permits will be limited to utility trenches not exceeding two feet in width and sixty feet in length, dug at a right angle to the centerline of the road, or an excavation not exceeding thirty square feet in area. Except as expressly approved by the public works director under Section 13.04.245, no road may be closed, and two-way traffic must be maintained at all times. 
(Ord. 1020 § 2, 2008: Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.095 - Permits nontransferable. 
Permits issued under the authority of this chapter are nontransferable. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.100 - Work performed with or without permit. 
Whenever this chapter requires a permittee to perform any work, take any action, or be liable for any fees or costs, such requirement also applies to any person who commences any work for which a permit is required by this chapter whether such person obtains such permit or not. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.105 - Work without required permit unlawful. 
Any person who commences any work for which a permit is required by this chapter without first having obtained a permit therefor, shall stop work and apply for such permit. Failure on the part of such person to stop the work and to obtain a proper permit shall make him in violation of this chapter and subject to all penalties thereof. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.107 - Removal of nonpermitted encroachments. 
A.  Ownership/Control of Encroachment Unascertainable. The city may remove and dispose of any encroachment placed in the highway without a permit for which ownership cannot be reasonably identified. Prior to disposal, the city shall store the encroachment for thirty days. 
B.  Ownership/Control of Encroachment Ascertainable. 
1.  If ownership or control of the unpermitted encroachment can be reasonably identified, the city shall notify the owner or individual in control that the encroachment is in violation of this chapter and that application must be made for an encroachment permit. 
2.  If no application is made for the encroachment permit within three working days after notification, or if such application is denied, the city may remove the encroachment. 
3.  If the encroachment constitutes an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare as determined by the city engineer or his designee, the city may order that the encroachment be immediately removed. If such order is made and the encroachment is not moved by the end of the next working day, the city may remove the encroachment. If the encroachment constitutes an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare as determined by the city engineer or his designee, and the city is not able to contact the owner, the city may immediately remove the encroachment without notification. 
4.  Upon removal of the encroachment, the city shall supply written notification to the owner or individual in control that the encroachment will be disposed of at the end of thirty days if it is not claimed by the owner. 
C.  Return of Encroachment. No encroachment shall be returned to the owner or individual in control unless and until a fee is paid to the city in an amount equal to the cost of removal and storage of the encroachment. 
(Ord. 742 § 3, 1991.)  
13.04.110 - Permit availability and display. 
The permittee shall make the permit available for inspection by the engineer or his representative or by any peace officer or other person having responsibility for safety or maintenance of the highway. Each permit for moving must be in or on the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.115 - Sign at work site. 
During the progress of the work the permittee shall maintain a sign at such work site bearing the name, address and telephone number of the permittee. This section shall not be applicable to utilities doing their own maintenance, repairs or installation by their own employees. However, if a utility uses an outside contractor to do such work, the contractor must post a sign in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.120 - Subsequent owners bound. 
All obligations, responsibilities and other requirements of the permittee as described in this chapter shall be binding on subsequent owners of the encroachment. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
III. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS  
A. - Safety, Inspection, and Liability 
 
13.04.125 - Safety devices, lights and barricades. 
In the conduct of the encroachment work, supplies and excavated material shall be properly placed and the permittee shall provide and maintain such safety devices including, but not limited to, lights, barricades, signs, flagmen and watchmen, as are necessary to protect the public and as ordered by the engineer or his representative. Any omission on the part of the engineer to specify in the permit what safety devices shall be provided by or preventive action required of the permittee shall not excuse the permittee from complying with all laws, regulations and ordinances relating to the protection of persons or property under the circumstances. If the engineer finds that suitable safeguards are not being provided, he may provide, maintain and relocate such safety devices or take such action as is deemed necessary, charging the permittee in accordance with the schedule of charges as adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.130 - Warning lights. 
A permittee making any excavation or leaving any obstruction which could be a hazard to persons using a right-of-way shall provide and maintain warning lights far enough away from the excavation or obstruction to give adequate warning to such persons, and at not more than fifty-foot intervals along the excavation or obstruction, from one-half hour before sunset of each day to one-half hour after sunrise the next day, until the work is completed and the right-of-way made safe for use. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.135 - Safety device standards. 
All safety devices, including warning lights discussed in Section 13.04.130, shall conform to the requirements of the manual of Traffic Controls for Construction and Maintenance Work Zones issued by the Department of Transportation of the state and of the California Vehicle Code, so far as such manuals and codes are applicable. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.140 - Inspector on job. 
If in the judgment of the engineer it appears desirable to maintain an inspector to determine whether work is being done in compliance with the permit, the engineer shall assign an inspector and the permittee shall pay the city in accordance with the schedule of charges as adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.145 - Inspection not to be obstructed. 
A person shall not obstruct the engineer or his representative, in making any inspection authorized by this chapter or in taking any sample or in making any test. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.150 - Permittee liability. 
The permittee shall investigate and be aware of all existing facilities lawfully within the highways which are within the limits of his activity. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing public or private facility without consent of its owner. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by its owner or to the satisfaction of its owner. The cost of moving publicly and privately owned facilities shall be borne by the permittee unless he makes other arrangements with the owner of the facility or unless the owner is required by his franchise or agreement to move his facility without cost. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.155 - Protection and repair of facilities and adjoining property. 
The permittee shall support and protect all wires, cables, pipes, conduits, poles, and other apparatus, both aerial and underground, by a method satisfactory to the owner. The owner has the right to support or protect any of its facilities at the sole expense of the permittee. In case any of the wires, cables, pipes, conduits, poles or apparatus should be damaged (and for this purpose, pipe coating or other encasement of devices are considered as part of a structure), they may be repaired by the owner at the expense of the permittee or, if authorized by the owner, may be repaired by the permittee under the supervision of the owner. The expense of repairs to any damaged facilities shall be borne by the permittee. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.160 - Interference with utility. 
No moving contractor shall interfere in any manner whatsoever with any property of any public utility. When any load requiring a special permit is moved along or across any highway, and it is determined that the height, width or weight of the load exceeds height, width, or weight as stated in the permit and property damage results therefrom, the engineer is authorized to withhold any other moving permit from the violator until he produces evidence satisfactory to the engineer that each additional permit load complies with all dimensions and weights as shown upon the application and the load will not interfere with a public utility. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.165 - Aids to visibility. 
When the location or position of an encroachment impairs visibility to vehicular traffic, the engineer may require that the encroachment be painted or equipped with reflectors or other aids to visibility prescribed or authorized by the Public Utilities Commission of the state, or the engineer may require the encroachment to be relocated at the sole expense of the permittee. No encroachment shall be maintained across any sidewalk area or shoulder of a public highway. No encroachment of any nature shall be permitted or maintained which impedes, obstructs, denies or impairs the sight distance for safe pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.170 - Liability insurance. 
A.  The permittee shall maintain adequate public liability insurance, including motor vehicle insurance, to protect him from any claims for damages for personal injury, including death, and for damage to property, which may arise from the encroachment work or other operations under the permit, whether such encroachment work or other operations be by himself or by any agent or by anyone directly or indirectly employed by him or his agent. The city shall be named as an additional insured and the policy shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the state. The amount shall be as prescribed by city council resolution. In the absence of such a resolution, the minimum liability shall be five hundred thousand dollars. Certificates of insurance shall be filed with the engineer. The insurance policy shall contain a provision that the policy cannot be cancelled except upon ten days written notice to the city of the fact of such cancellation. 
B.  This section shall not apply to any work done by utility companies by their own employees. However, if a utility company uses an outside contractor to perform any work, the contractor must maintain adequate insurance in accordance with subsection A of this section, or the utility company must provide evidence that its own insurance policy covers the contractor. 
(Ord. 742 § 4, 1991: Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
B. - Performance of Work 
 
13.04.175 - Proof of right to use highway. 
Every permit issued under this chapter for activity or work in, along, on, over, across or under the highway shall be granted subject to the right of the city or any other person entitled thereto, to use that part of such highway for any purpose for which such highway may lawfully be used. Proof of the applicant's right to use the highways for the purposes set forth in the application shall be filed with the engineer. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.180 - Clearance for emergency facilities. 
All work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, and any other emergency facilities designated by the engineer. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.185 - Work in accordance with plans. 
All work shall be performed in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction including revisions or according to the plans and specifications referred to in the permit and, in addition, to any special requirements or specifications which are made a part of the permit. In case of conflict between two specifications, the stricter specification shall apply. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.190 - Prompt completion of work/notice. 
A.  After work is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with diligence all work covered by the permit. The permittee shall promptly complete such work and restore the site to satisfactory condition so as not to obstruct the public place or travel more than is reasonably necessary. 
B.  If the work is not completed in a reasonable and diligent manner the department shall notify the permittee to complete the same within a specified period of time. If the work is not completed within that time the department shall have full power to do the work or may contract for the performance of the work and the reasonable cost thereof, including administrative expense, shall be deducted from the deposit or other security made by the permittee. If the permittee has no deposit or other security, the city may bill the permittee directly for work performed. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.195 - Noise, dust and debris. 
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out encroachment work in such a manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. In the performance or the work, the permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest possible extent, noise, dust and unsightly debris. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.200 - Changes. 
No changes may be made in the location, dimensions, character or duration of the encroachment or use as granted by the permit except on authorization by the engineer. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.205 - Restoration of right-of-way. 
Upon completion of the encroachment work authorized by a permit, the permittee shall restore the right-of-way, including bridges and any other structure thereon, by replacing, repairing or rebuilding in accordance with the specifications or any special requirement but not less than to its original condition before the encroachment work was commenced. The permittee shall remove all obstructions, materials and debris upon the right-of-way, and shall do any other work necessary to restore the right-of-way to a safe and usable condition, as directed by the engineer. Where excavation occurs within areas already paved, the engineer may require temporary paving to be installed within twenty-four hours after the excavation area is backfilled. In the event that the permittee fails to act promptly to restore the right-of-way as provided in this section, or should the nature of any damage to the right-of-way require restoration before the permittee can be notified or can respond to notification, the engineer may, at his option, make the necessary restoration. The permittee shall reimburse the city in accordance with the schedule of charges as adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.210 - Base and pavement thickness. 
Unless otherwise determined by the engineer, where the pavement or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness one inch greater than that of the surrounding pavement or surface, and, in no event, to a thickness less than three inches; the base course removed shall be replaced to the same thickness as that of the surrounding base course. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.215 - Seal or slurry. 
When the street surface has been treated with a seal or slurry prior to the work under permit, the seal and/or slurry shall be replaced upon the portion repaired, unless otherwise determined by the engineer. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.220 - Equivalent section. 
When the structural section removed varies from or exceeds the average existing section, the engineer may elect to require the replacement of an equivalent section which would meet the average structural section requirements. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.225 - Resurfacing waived when. 
In those instances where the permittee's excavation is within an area of highway to be reconstructed by the city and the resurfacing of the excavation is an integral part of the general city improvement, the engineer may waive such resurfacing. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.230 - Compliance required. 
All persons shall obey and comply with every order, decision, direction or rule made or presented by the engineer in the matters specified on the permit or by attachments, or by any other matter in any way relating to or affecting their use of the highway, and shall do everything necessary or proper to secure compliance therewith by all of its officers, agents and employees; except in the case of a public utility regulated by the Public Utilities Commission when such order, decision, direction or rule is contrary to or in conflict with any order, decision, direction or rule made or prescribed by the Public Utilities Commission applicable to such public utility. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.235 - Encroachment removal—Generally. 
The city may require the removal or relocation of any encroachment, lawful or unlawful, on a finding that the encroachment is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. Removal and relocation of encroachments under this section shall be in accordance with the procedure and penalties provided in Sections 1481 through 1485 of the California Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.240 - Encroachment removal without replacement. 
When an encroachment is removed and not replaced, the entire encroachment shall be removed from the right-of-way and the hole backfilled and compacted and returned to its pre-existing condition or better, unless the engineer permits otherwise. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.245 - Road closure or interference with highway use. 
All encroachments must be planned and executed in such a manner that they will not unreasonably interfere with the safe and convenient travel of the general public or unreasonably interfere with or cause inconvenience to the occupants of adjoining property. At no time may a public highway be temporarily closed or its use denied to the general public, except: (a) by permission of the city council or in the event the council is unable to act in the time required by law, by the city manager; or (b) by permission of the city manager or public works director for periods of less than one day with respect to highways that are designated as non-arterial and non-collector highways. 
(Ord. 1020 § 3, 2008: Ord. 726 § 8, 1990; Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.250 - Records of installations. 
Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, or other such similar structure under the surface of any right-of-way for supplying or conveying gas, electricity, communication facilities, water, steam, ammonia or oil, or for any other purpose, shall file in the office of the engineer within sixty days after the complete installation, a corrected set of maps or atlas sheets drawn to a scale of not more than one inch to two hundred feet showing the complete installation of all such substructures. The same is required showing location in detail of such substructures when such are abandoned. Maps and atlas sheets submitted periodically by public utilities shall cover the intent of this section. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.255 - Notice before commencing work. 
A.  Before commencing any encroachment work authorized by any permit the permittee shall notify the underground service alert ("USA") and the engineer of the time of commencing work and provide the name, address, telephone number and license number of the contractor, if any, who will perform the work. 
B.  Before commencing any encroachment work authorized by any permit where the adjoining or abutting property has access to the highway within one hundred linear feet of the encroachment work, the permittee shall give written notice at least forty-eight hours prior to commencing any work to the property owner and occupant of the dates and times of the encroachment work. Such notice shall include the telephone number of the permittee who will perform the work. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.260 - Tree and structure relocation. 
The engineer may require the permittee to make proper arrangements for, and bear the cost of the relocation of any structure, publicly owned facility, tree, or shrub, where such relocation is made necessary by the proposed work for which a permit is issued. The engineer may elect to do the necessary relocation at the permittee's expense. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.265 - Relocation where right-of-way improved. 
If any city highway improvement to the right-of-way necessitates the relocation of an encroachment, the permittee shall relocate or remove the encroachment at his sole expense, except as provided by state statute. When relocation is required, the engineer shall give the permittee a written demand specifying that the encroachment must be relocated within the right-of-way to a satisfactory location provided by the engineer and a reasonable time within which the encroachment must be relocated or removed. If the permittee fails to comply with such instructions, the city may relocate the encroachment at the expense of the permittee in accordance with the schedule of charges as adopted by the city council. In determining what is a reasonable time under this section the engineer shall take into consideration the nature of the encroachment, the urgency of the need for its removal, the cost of its removal, the difficulty of its removal, the value of the intact property to the owner, and other facts peculiar to the particular situation. The provisions of this section apply to all permittees, including public agencies and public utilities having authority to occupy city rights-of-way pursuant to a franchise or an express provision of the California Code. However, this section shall not apply to the public agencies and public utilities if such improvement of the highway right-of-way is required due to the construction of a state freeway. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.270 - Encroachment not a hazard. 
The engineer may require that evidence be submitted with the application to satisfy him that the proposed overhead structure or encroachment will not, insofar as he can foresee, create a hazard of any kind. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.275 - Defects appearing after completion. 
A.  In case the pavement or surface of the highway over said openings should become depressed or broken at any time after the work has been performed for any reason other than natural wear of the surface or improper work of another permittee, the permittee for whom the work was performed shall immediately proceed to repair and restore the pavement upon written notice from the department. The repair and restoration shall be to the satisfaction of the engineer. The fact that the original work was subject to the inspection of, inspected by, or under the authority of the engineer as provided for in this chapter shall not excuse the permittee from its duty and obligation imposed by this section. 
B.  When the work was done pursuant to Section 13.04.020 (Exception), the written notice shall be sent to the person or firm who actually opened the highway and it shall be the responsibility of such person or firm to make the repair and restoration. 
C.  In case the pavement is not completely restored within thirty days after such notice has been given, the department of engineering shall do the work at the expense of the delinquent person, firm or permittee. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
C. - Fees and Costs 
 
13.04.280 - Issuance fee and other costs. 
All applicants, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall pay an issuance fee and all other costs and charges as established for the work described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.285 - Deposit of fees. 
Issuance fees and charges for repairs, inspection, or engineering collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in the respective funds from which the corresponding disbursements were made. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.290 - Exemptions and waivers of fees. 
A.  The following shall be exempt from paying all fees: the United States and all departments of the city. 
B.  The engineer may grant a permit without an issuance fee if he finds that the work to be done has been requested by the city in connection with proposed public works. 
C.  If the engineer determines that the waiver of any part of the fees is necessary to promote the safety and public welfare he may in specific instances waive all fees and deposits. 
D.  In cases where the fee is waived, the permittee shall be liable for the actual cost of any work required to be done by the department in restoring the highway to be in as good a condition as before any such work was commenced. Furthermore, the engineer may, in the future, require such deposit from any such permittee if a bill rendered in accordance with this chapter becomes delinquent. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.295 - Permit copy fee. 
The fee for each true copy of a permit to the permittee is twenty-five cents per page. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.300 - Charges for curbs, walks or surfaces. 
The engineer shall not charge for any engineering or permits for the construction of curbs, gutters, walks and highway surfaces when the construction of curbs, gutters, walks and highway surfaces is in connection with subdivision activity. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.305 - Schedule of fees. 
The schedule of fees or charges will be those recommended by the engineer and adopted by the resolution of the city council from time to time. Where work for which a permit is required by this chapter is started or proceeded with, prior to obtaining the permit, the specified fees shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.310 - Permittee to pay for all costs. 
The permittee is liable for and shall pay for all the department's costs related to the permit, including, but not restricted to, the following: 
A.  The permit issuance fee if that has not otherwise been paid; 
B.  Engineering, which includes design, inspection, survey, and tests; 
C.  The cost of any inspection, transportation, or test made; 
D.  The cost of repairing or restoring the highways and all appurtenant facilities to the same or equal condition that they were in before being cut or damaged as a result of the permittee's activities; 
E.  The cost of furnishing and/or maintaining any lights, barricades or warning devices; 
F.  The cost of alteration, removal, replacement, and/or repair to traffic signals and devices, the removal of temporary and/or permanent traffic stripes and any other expense for traffic control; 
G.  The cost of removing or remedying any hazardous condition; 
H.  The cost of tree-trimming; 
I.  Any other cost to the city caused by the permittee's activity. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.315 - Costs to be actual costs. 
Except as provided in subsection C7 of Section 13.04.040, whenever in the provisions of this chapter, any costs are to be charged to any permittee and no other method for the calculation of such costs is specified, such costs are the actual costs including overhead and depreciation in accordance with current practice in charging for work performed for the public and as defined in the encroachment fee resolution as adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.320 - No fee when inspected by governmental agency. 
The engineer may issue a permit without any inspection fee or deposit for work which will be inspected by a qualified governmental agency which will furnish evidence to the effect that the work will be inspected and will comply with the minimum standards required by the city. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.325 - Engineer inspection when. 
If an applicant receives a permit pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.04.320 and the governmental agency fails to make the inspection or fails to file evidence as required, the engineer may inspect the work and the permittee shall pay the actual cost of such inspection to the engineer. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.330 - Deposit required. 
Unless exempted from this section by law or by the engineer, each applicant shall, before obtaining a permit, deposit with the department a cash deposit, consisting of cash or a certified or cashier's check in a sum to be fixed by the engineer as sufficient to reimburse the city in accordance with the schedule of charges as adopted by the city council for restoring the right-of-way to its original condition, or for correcting any condition occasioned by or arising out of any failure of the permittee to comply with any and/or all conditions of the permit. Where the size and nature of the project warrant, the engineer may require the additional deposit of one thousand dollars to indemnify and reimburse the city for work done by or for the city in correcting traffic hazards, unsafe conditions and any emergency condition occasioned by or arising out of the doing of any work under any permit issued to the permittee. This section shall not apply to any work done by utility companies by their own employees. However, if a utility company uses an outside contractor to perform any work, the contractor or the utility company must file a deposit in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.335 - Cash deposit—General or special. 
A cash deposit may be in the form of a special deposit to be maintained as security for a specific permit issued to the applicant or may be in the form of a general deposit to be maintained as a security for all the permits issued to an applicant. If an applicant maintains a general cash deposit it shall be with the understanding that he will pay all bills sent him by the engineer for work described in this chapter. The amount of the general deposit shall be sufficient to cover all costs connected with the permit. An applicant making a general deposit need not make a special deposit. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.340 - Deposit of bonds and insurance. 
In lieu of a cash deposit the engineer may accept from an applicant other types of security as specified in Sections 13.04.350 through 13.04.365. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.345 - Return of deposit. 
Any deposit required by the engineer pursuant to this chapter shall be payable to the city and filed or deposited with the engineer. Deposits returned are to be less any costs authorized to be deducted pursuant to this chapter. 
A.  Excavation Deposits. Thirty days after the satisfactory completion of all authorized work and fulfillment of all conditions of the permit, the engineer will release fifty percent of a special deposit upon application of the permittee. The balance of the deposit shall be released to the permittee upon the expiration of a twenty-four month period from the date of completion. Each general deposit made pursuant to this chapter may be returned at any time upon application of the permittee; provided, however, that the city shall retain of each general deposit such amounts and for such period of time as would have been required if the general deposit had been paid as a special deposit for any permits issued during the time the general deposit was in effect. 
B.  Other Deposits. Except as specified in subsection A of this section, thirty days after the satisfactory completion of all authorized work and fulfillment of all conditions of the permit, the engineer will release the deposit upon application of the permittee. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.350 - Surety bond. 
The engineer may accept a surety bond in a sum of not less than one thousand dollars on a form supplied by the department and executed by a corporation authorized to engage in surety undertakings in the state. It shall guarantee the payment of all fees and other charges required by this chapter which may become due because of any permits issued during the life of the surety bond. This section shall not apply to any work done by utility companies by their own employees. However, if a utility company uses an outside contractor to perform any work, the contractor or the utility company must file a surety bond in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.355 - Certificate of deposit. 
The engineer may accept a certificate of deposit or pass books made payable to order of the city in lieu of a surety bond. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.360 - Insurance. 
As security on moving permits only, the engineer may accept a certificate of insurance and endorsement on the standard forms provided by the department. Such certificate and endorsement shall show that an insurance policy of not less than five hundred thousand dollars has been issued to the applicant and is in full force and effect; and, in which policy the insurer directly agrees to reimburse the city for all sums due it from the permittee for damage to highway facilities. The insurance policy must name the city as an insured. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.365 - Additional securities. 
The engineer may require any type of security that has, in his opinion, become insufficient for protection of the public interest, to be increased to such an amount as he has determined will be sufficient to protect the public interest. He may require special deposits or other security. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.370 - Acceptance of negotiable paper. 
The engineer may accept negotiable paper in payment of any permit fee, including engineering and inspection fees, deposit or other payment required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.375 - Expiration date of security. 
No bond, insurance certificate, certificate of deposit, savings and loan share assignment or other form of indemnification is acceptable which bears an expiration date not determined by the city. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.380 - Billing. 
The engineer shall bill the permittee for all fees and costs chargeable under this chapter. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.385 - Costs to be deducted. 
If, within thirty days after a bill has been sent, the permittee does not pay the same in full, such amount may be deducted from his deposit, or the engineer may recover the amount due from any security the permittee has filed under Sections 13.04.350 through 13.04.365. When amounts are deducted from a general deposit, the permittee must restore the deposit to its original amount within fifteen days. If the deposit or security is insufficient to pay the amount due, the city may enforce collection by legal means. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.390 - Monthly billing of issuance fee. 
At the request of a permittee who maintains with the engineer adequate security as provided in this chapter and to whom ten or more permits have been issued monthly, for three consecutive months, the engineer may waive the requirement covering prepayment of the issuance fees and bill the permittee for issuance fees covering permits issued subsequent to such request. The engineer may revoke such waiver at any time. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.395 - Permits not issued if bill unpaid. 
The engineer may elect not to issue further permits to the permittee and may hold any deposits, guarantees, or bonds of the permittee as long as any bill remains unpaid. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.400 - Issuance fee refunded when. 
An issuance fee may be refunded when a permit has been issued as the result of an error not made by the permittee. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.405 - Inspection fee refunded when. 
The fee deposited for driveway inspection or any other unit fee established may be refunded if such fee was erroneously collected or if the work was not constructed by the permittee and no inspection requests were made. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.410 - Plan check fee refunded when. 
If other refunds are in order, the plan check fee may be refunded also, provided that the plan check has not been made. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
IV. - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 
 
13.04.415 - Provisions for construction permits. 
The provisions of this chapter apply to permits for the laying, constructing, reconstructing, or repairing of curbs, sidewalks, gutters, driveways, highway surfaces, retaining walls, storm drains, culverts, highway light or lighting system, or other appurtenant structures. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.420 - Plans may be required. 
If in the opinion of the engineer the work proposed to be done requires the making of plans or the setting of stakes, or both, the engineer may require the application be accompanied by the necessary plans, which plans shall be prepared by a competent engineer. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.425 - Approved lines and grades for work. 
Before a permittee performs any work prescribed in this chapter he shall obtain from the engineer approval of the lines and grades therefor. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.430 - Driveways. 
Driveways shall be constructed of portland cement concrete. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.435 - Driveway not to be constructed for parking. 
A driveway shall not be constructed or maintained where fences, buildings, natural grade, or any other obstacle will prevent a vehicle from being stored entirely off the public right-of-way after entering such driveway. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.440 - Width of driveways. 
The width of an individual driveway shall be considered as being the net width thereof, exclusive of side slopes and returns, measured along the line of the curb or centerline of the highway. The width of an individual or aggregate widths shall be as prescribed in the city street standards. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.445 - Distance between driveways. 
The minimum intervening distance between the side slopes or returns of adjacent driveways serving the same lot or parcel shall be in accordance with the current revision of County of Ventura Public Works Agency, Plate E-1, available at the department of engineering services. In the case of adjacent driveways serving two adjoining lots or parcels, the intervening distance between the side slopes or returns shall be at least one foot, otherwise a common or continuous driveway will be required. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.450 - Driveway deviations. 
Where topographical or traffic conditions are such that a modification of the provisions of Sections 13.04.430 through 13.04.445 are necessary for the promotion of traffic safety, and the engineer so finds, he may permit a deviation from the provisions of such sections to the extent which he finds necessary. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.455 - Certificate of acceptance. 
If the engineer by survey or by inspection or by both ascertains that the work has been completed according to the requirements of the permit issued therefor, and of all the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue, if requested to do so by the permittee, a certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location, nature, and extent of the work performed under the permit. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.460 - Offers of dedication and lighting. 
If any person offers to dedicate as a highway any land upon which any highway light or highway lighting system has been installed, the clerk of the city council, before presenting such offer to the city council, shall refer such offer to the engineer for investigation and report as to whether such highway light or highway lighting system conforms with the requirements of city standards. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.465 - Investigation of lighting. 
Upon reference to him, the engineer shall make an adequate investigation of such highway light or highway lighting system, and the construction and installation thereof, and shall report, in writing to the city council advising it as to whether or not such highway light or highway lighting system so complies, and if not, what changes or alterations are necessary so that such light or system will conform. If such light or system does not conform the city council shall not accept such offer of dedication unless and until such light or system shall have first been made to conform to the provisions of this chapter and to the specifications. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.470 - Additional stakes. 
If any stakes set for any work covered by this chapter are disturbed or destroyed by cause directly attributable to the permittee's delay in making use of the stakes, the permittee shall reset the additional stakes and shall bear the cost thereof. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
V. - EXCAVATION AND ENCROACHMENT PERMITS 
 
13.04.475 - Provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter apply to permits for the making or causing to be made, in any highway, of excavations, and for the placing, constructing, repairing, changing or removing of encroachments. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.480 - Requirements for plat. 
Each applicant for an excavation or encroachment permit shall file with the application four copies of the plan showing the highways in which the proposed excavation or encroachment will be placed, together with the exact location and dimensions of the proposed excavation(s) or the specifications and characteristics of the encroachment, together with any other details which the engineer requires. When excavations are made for service connections or for the location of trouble in conduits, cable or pipe, or for making repairs thereto, the engineer may waive the filing of a plat. Approved plats shall become public records. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.485 - Maintenance of work area. 
All materials excavated from trenching or other encroachment operations in the right-of-way shall be piled compactly, kept trim, and maintained in such a manner as not to endanger either the workers or the general public and to cause as little inconvenience as possible to those using the right-of-way or adjacent property. In areas too narrow to permit proper storage of material, the engineer may require that the permittee remove the material from the encroachment site. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.490 - Preservation of survey monuments. 
A monument set for the purpose of preserving survey points, lines or elevation shall not be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission from the engineer. Replacement of a removed or disturbed monument shall be done by a registered civil engineer who is licensed to survey or a licensed land surveyor and shall be at the expense of the permittee. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.495 - Amount of open trench. 
In any trenching operation, the open trench shall not be in excess of one day's work ahead of the trench work proper, unless specifically authorized by the engineer. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.500 - Preservation of drainage. 
If the encroachment work interferes with the established drainage, the permittee shall provide for proper drainage in a manner approved by the engineer. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.505 - Services to be jacked or bored. 
Laterals, utility services and utility conduits shall be jacked, bored or driven beneath a paved surface per city standards, unless other methods are approved by the engineer. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.510 - Minimum cover. 
The minimum cover over any pipe or conduit installed under any public highway shall be thirty inches of material measured vertically from the existing or proposed flow line of the nearest gutter to the top of the pipe or conduit. If a gutter flow line is not established, the cover shall be thirty inches of material measured from the surface of the nearest outermost edge of the travelled way to the top of the pipe or conduit. Where there are existing curbs and gutters or where curbs and gutters are under construction, utilities may maintain a minimum sixteen inches of cover starting one foot back of the curbline in the parkway or sidewalk areas. The engineer may permit the installation of pipes or conduits at lesser depths where the required cover cannot be provided. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.515 - Repaving by city. 
With the permittee's concurrence or as an emergency measure, the engineer shall have the power to order the paving by city forces of any excavation. The permittee shall reimburse the city in accordance with the schedule of charges as adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.520 - Cleanup. 
As the work progresses, all highways shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris. All cleanup operations at the location shall be done on a daily basis and be accomplished at the expense of the permittee. From time to time as may be ordered by the engineer, and in any event immediately after completion of the work, the permittee shall clean up and remove all materials, earth and debris of any kind. If the permittee fails within twenty-four hours after having been notified to do so by the engineer or his designee, the work may be done by the department and the permittee charged in accordance with the schedule of charges adopted by the city council. When a pole, guy-stub or similar timber is removed and not replaced, the entire length thereof shall be removed from the ground and the hole backfilled and compacted. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.525 - Backfilling and compaction. 
Backfilling and compaction of an excavation shall be in accordance with standards established by the engineer and adopted by resolution of the city council, both as to material and method. Backfilling shall commence within forty-eight hours after work in a trench is completed. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.530 - Agreement to relocate. 
Every application shall contain a statement, signed by the applicant, that if any tank, pole, pipe, cable, conduit, duct, obstruction or tunnel placed in the excavation or the encroachment for which a permit is issued, interferes with the future surface use of the highway by the general public, then the applicant and his successors or assigns will at his own expense remove or relocate to a location satisfactory to the engineer such tank, pole, pipe, cable, conduit, duct, tunnel or obstruction. The statement signed by the applicant will not apply in cases when the applicant has an easement superior to the highway easement at the time of application and can furnish evidence when required of such superior easement. Utilities operating under franchises granted by the city shall relocate their facilities in accordance with the terms of such franchise. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.535 - Cable television lines. 
The engineer shall require all lines for the transmission and distribution of standard television or audio signals to be placed underground in highways when all power and telephone lines are underground and shall also require underground installation in all instances except where the applicant provides satisfactory proof of permission to use existing pole lines or where the engineer finds that the remoteness of the area or other conditions render underground installation impractical or infeasible. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.540 - No interference with others. 
The engineer may establish such requirements as he may find necessary to apply to the work to be done by any person in order to prevent interference with users of the highway and with holders of other permits. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.545 - Emergency excavations. 
Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person from maintaining by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, any pipe, cable, or conduit in any highway, or from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making repairs, provided that the person making such excavation applies for a permit not later than the next business day after such work is commenced. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
VI. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR MOVING PERMITS 
 
13.04.550 - Provisions generally. 
The provisions of this chapter apply to the use of the highway by a vehicle or load, or to any combination. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.555 - Planking. 
When so required by the engineer, a moving contractor shall place under each dolly or wheel used in moving a building or structure, or under each wheel of a vehicle, boards or planks of adequate width and strength to carry the load without being broken, to serve as a runway for such dolly or wheel during such moving along or across any portion of any highway which has a surface other than natural soil. The moving contractor shall prevent such dolly or wheel from ever revolving on or resting on such surface except upon such board, plank or runway. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.560 - Relocation permit. 
In all cases where the Building Code requires the owner of any premises to which it is proposed to move any building or structure to obtain a relocation permit, the engineer shall not grant a permit to move such building or structure until the applicant furnishes to the engineer evidence that such owner has such relocation permit. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.565 - Overweight approval. 
The engineer shall not issue a permit to move any load when the weight of load, plus the weight of the vehicle or other equipment exceeds the weight permitted by the Vehicle Code, except that if it appears to the engineer that the size, shape or physical characteristics of the load or portion thereof, to be moved, makes it impossible or impracticable to keep within such weight limits, the engineer may issue a permit to move a load on a vehicle every wheel of which is equipped with pneumatic tires where the engineer has determined that such movement will not cause injury to the highways, bridges, and appurtenances installed therein or thereunder. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.570 - Compliance with other laws required. 
When authorized by a permit issued by the State Division of Highways, or the engineer, to move a vehicle or combination of vehicles or load of dimension or weight or other characteristic generally prohibited by law, the permittee shall comply with the general law regulating travel over a public highway, including posted signs or notices which limit a speed or direction of travel, or weight which may be placed upon a structure, or the width or height that may be moved on, over or across, or otherwise exempt by special permit. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.575 - Inspection by engineer of load or vehicle. 
The engineer may require that the moving of any load or vehicle be under the supervision of any inspector to be appointed by the engineer, with reimbursement to the city at the set fee or hourly rate as prescribed by the city council. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.580 - Permit—Withheld when. 
The engineer is authorized to issue or withhold the permit at his discretion, or, if the permit is issued, to limit the number of trips, or to establish seasonal or other time limitations within which the vehicle or vehicles described may be operated on the highways indicated, or otherwise to limit or prescribe conditions of operation of the vehicle, when necessary to assure against undue interference with traffic or damage to the road foundations, surfaces or structures, and may require the undertaking of other security measures as may be deemed necessary to protect the highways and bridges from injury, or to provide indemnity for any possible injury resulting from the operation of the vehicle. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.585 - Evidence of clearance. 
Before issuing a permit for the movement of a vehicle or object with a rolling height of over sixteen feet, the engineer shall require evidence or notice of approval of height clearance from the public utility companies having overhead lines crossing the proposed route. Utilities may give notice by telephone. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.590 - Overhead structure—Height. 
Each overhead structure which extends over the portion of the highway used by vehicles shall be not less than fifteen feet above the highest portion of the highway surface. Pedestrian crossing structures shall not be less than seventeen feet. If the engineer finds that traffic conditions are such that it is necessary for highway safety for such structure to be at a greater height, then such structure shall be at such greater height as specified by the engineer. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.595 - Overhead structure—Construction. 
Each overhead structure used primarily for a covered shelter for ingress or egress into a doorway shall not exceed ten feet in width and shall have a vertical clearance of not less than eight feet at every point. Each structure shall be supported by metal posts on a line two feet back from the face of the curb, if any, otherwise from the edge of the portion of the highway designated for use by motor vehicles, and shall be constructed in such a manner that no portion thereof shall extend toward the roadway more than six inches beyond the metal posts. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.600 - Overhead structure—Maintenance. 
Any permit to erect or maintain an overhead structure shall be treated as and deemed to be a permit to maintain such structure until expiration or revocation of the permit. This section does not apply to agencies operating under approved franchise. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.605 - Removal after expiration. 
Upon the effective date of the expiration or revocation of the permit, the person maintaining the overhead structure shall remove same, and restore any highway facility damaged or removed. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
VII. - FLAGPOLE 
 
13.04.610 - Permit for flagpole. 
The engineer may grant a permit to drill a hole not exceeding four inches in diameter in a public sidewalk or in that portion of a public highway not used for vehicular traffic for the purpose of inserting a flagpole therein upon which the flag of the United States, the flag of the state, the flag of Ventura County, or the city flag is displayed. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.615 - Hole to be plugged or refilled. 
Except when such hole is being used to support the flagpole of the flag of the United States, state of California, Ventura County, or city of Camarillo, the permittee or his successor or assign shall plug such hole with wood, metal, plastic or concrete plug, which shall be so constructed as to completely cover such hole, level with the surrounding surface, or shall refill such hole and restore the highway to a condition equivalent to that in which it was prior to the excavation. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
VIII. - PROVISIONS FOR TREE PLANTING 
 
13.04.620 - Requirements for planting. 
The applicant for a permit to plant trees or other plants in the right-of-way shall show in his application or by sketch the proposed location and the kind of plants. No change shall be made in either the location or kind without approval of the director of community services. Upon planting trees or other plants in the right-of-way, they become the property of the city. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.625 - Denial of planting permit. 
The director of community services may refuse to issue a permit authorizing the planting of trees or other plants in the right-of-way when, in his opinion, the location, the nature of growth, or the kind of tree, shrub or other plant will be deleterious to the public highway, will reduce sight distance, will unduly disturb the right-of-way or will in any way impede construction or maintenance of facilities. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.630 - Removal and/or trimming of trees. 
Trimming of trees shall be permitted only when and in the manner authorized by a permit so that the shapeliness of the tree may be preserved. Removal of live trees shall be in accordance with subsection D of Section 13.12.060. Dead trees may be removed at the discretion of the director of community services. When a tree is removed, the entire stump shall be taken out at least one foot below the existing or proposed subgrade unless otherwise specified in the permit, and the hole backfilled and compacted. All debris from trimming or removal shall be removed from the site and the right-of-way restored to its former condition. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.635 - Lawn or ground cover in right-of-way. 
It is permissible to plant and maintain a lawn or similar ground cover not prohibited by law within the right-of-way of a public highway without a permit. However, the lawn or similar ground cover shall not extend into the travelled way of the public highway nor into the drainage ditches, gutters or other improved facilities. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.640 - Use not denied. 
The public may not be denied the use of the planted area for pedestrian or other lawful use. The city may use the planted area for any purpose and may issue a permit to any applicant to perform encroachment work pursuant to this chapter. If the lawn or similar ground cover is damaged in the course of an authorized encroachment, the permittee who caused the damage will be responsible for the replacement thereof unless the permit specifically states otherwise. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.645 - Sight distance. 
No hedge, shrub or other planting and no fence or other structure shall be planted, erected or maintained in a right-of-way without a permit, upon any sidewalk or shoulder, or in such manner which impedes, obstructs, denies or impairs the sight distance for safe pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.650 - Plantings neat and orderly. 
The permittee shall maintain hedges, shrubs or other plantings, and fences or similar structures in a neat and orderly condition. If the encroachment is not so maintained, the engineer may direct the permittee to remove the encroachment and restore the right-of-way to its former condition at the expense of the permittee. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
IX. - APPEAL AND VIOLATION 
 
13.04.655 - Provision for appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the refusal or revocation of a permit may appeal to the city council within thirty days after the date of such action. The appeal shall be in the form of a written notice filed with the city clerk, signed by the applicant, and accompanied by an administrative fee in an amount set by city council resolution. The notice shall have attached a copy of the application as filed with the engineer, shall recite such other items as have been filed, and shall state clearly and concisely the grounds upon which the applicant relies in his appeal. 
(Ord. 950 § 6, 2002: Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.660 - Time of hearing. 
The city clerk shall set the matter for hearing and shall notify the applicant and the engineer of the setting. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.665 - City council action. 
At the hearing, the applicant shall establish to the satisfaction of the city council that he is entitled to issuance of a permit under this chapter or to reinstatement of a permit previously revoked. The engineer may present his grounds for denial or revocation of the permit. The decision of the city council is final. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
13.04.670 - Violation. 
Every person who performs any work regulated by this chapter, either without first obtaining a permit therefor from the engineer or having a permit, fails or refuses to comply with any applicable provisions of this chapter or with any condition of the permit or performs work contrary to any of the general or special requirements or specifications of the permit is deemed in violation of this chapter. Each and every day in which there is a violation constitutes a separate offense. Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 663 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
Chapter 13.08 - UNDERGROUND FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
13.08.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state. 
B.  "Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric energy or communications, television cable service, or similar or associated service. 
C.  "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.08.040. 
D.  "Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric energy or communication, television cable service, or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7500.)  
13.08.020 - Public hearings by council. 
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric energy or communication, television cable service, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify by mail all affected property owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7501.)  
13.08.030 - Report by city engineer. 
Prior to holding such public hearing, the city engineer shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities' participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7502.)  
13.08.040 - Designation of districts by council resolution. 
If, after any such public hearing, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council, by resolution, shall declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7503.)  
13.08.050 - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.08.040, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.08.100, and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7504.)  
13.08.060 - Emergencies or unusual circumstances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed thirty days, without authority of the city council in order to provide emergency service. For a limited period of time the city engineer may grant special permission, on such terms as he deems appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use, or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7505.)  
13.08.070 - Additional exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.08.040 unless otherwise provided in such resolution, shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
B.  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, where such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-three thousand volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment, and supporting structures for furnishing communication services for the utility company use; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7506.)  
13.08.080 - Notices to property owners and utility companies. 
Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.08.040, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district thereby created, of the adoption of the resolution. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, television cable, communication, or similar or associated services, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7507.)  
13.08.090 - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.08.040, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7508.)  
13.08.100 - Responsibility of property owners. 
A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.08.090 and the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served. 
B.  In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.08.040, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty days thereafter may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. 
C.  The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail, the notice shall be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll and, when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Camarillo, California. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on such premises. 
D.  The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and shall state that if such work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer shall provide the work for such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof shall be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. 
E.  If, upon the expiration of the thirty day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric, television cable service, or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer may, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
F.  The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in subsection C of this section for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
G.  Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify, or reject the assessment. 
H.  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. Such lien shall be due and payable, and, if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7509.)  
13.08.110 - Responsibility of city. 
The city shall remove at its own expense all city owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7503. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7510.)  
13.08.120 - Extension of time. 
In the event any act required by the provisions of this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.08.040 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act shall be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7511.)  
13.08.130 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The council finds and determines that the public interest requires, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, that all facilities and wires for the supply and distribution of electric energy and service, television cable service, and telephone and telegraph service for all new construction and land developments shall be placed underground in order to promote and preserve the health, safety, and general welfare of the public and to assure the orderly development of the city. 
B.  The council also finds that the public interest requires, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, that all facilities and wires for the supply and distribution of electric energy and service, television cable service, and telephone and telegraph service shall be placed underground in order to promote and preserve the health, safety and general welfare of the public, and to assure the orderly development of the city under the following circumstances: 
1.  When such facilities are located in a public easement or public right-of-way adjacent to new construction or land development; 
2.  When such facilities are in a public utility easement adjacent to new construction or land development and service to the proposed new construction or land development is to be provided by such facilities; 
3.  When such facilities are on the site of the proposed construction or land development to the nearest existing suitable pole off-site; 
4.  When such facilities are in a utility easement and any portion of which easement, aerial, surface or underground, is over or on the site of the proposed new construction or land development. It is the intent of this subsection to require undergrounding of such facilities in the event such easement consists of contiguous parcels, separated only by a property line. 
In the event such facilities are in a public utility easement adjacent to new construction or land development but no part of which easement lies upon the site of the proposed new construction or land development and service to the proposed new construction or land development is not to be provided by such facilities, the planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council on the utility undergrounding requirements therefor, and prior to any permit being issued for such construction or development, the city council shall take final action and determine whether such facility shall be undergrounded as a condition to a permit being issued for such development or construction. 
Facilities as used in this subdivision shall include poles, wires and any other appurtenances for the supply and distribution of the service referred to herein. 
(Ord. 478 § 1, 1980; Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7512.)  
13.08.140 - Underground utilities in new construction or building. 
The subdivider, land developer or property owner is responsible for complying with the requirements of this chapter, and he shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of such facilities subject to the utilities' rules, regulations, and tariff schedules on file with the State Public Utilities Commission. This chapter shall apply to all property for which any development permit or approval for development by the city is required, including all property within subdivision maps and parcel maps hereinafter filed with the county recorder, except as provided for in this section. For the purposes of this chapter, appurtenances and associated equipment such as but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed above ground. 
The city council after review and recommendation by the planning commission, may waive the requirements of this chapter if topographical, soil or any other conditions make such underground installations unreasonable or impractical. 
A.  The city engineer may accept a bond to guarantee later undergrounding of facilities if on the following criteria he finds undergrounding to be unfeasible at the time of construction or modification: 
1.  The project is not within an established underground utility district, but is within or adjacent to a proposed district; 
2.  The location, topography, soil condition, or other factor(s) make undergrounding not technically or economically feasible at the time of construction or modification. 
An estimate of the cost of the undergrounding shall be prepared by the subdivider and shall accompany the improvement. Cost estimates shall include a separate item for contingencies in the amount of ten percent of the estimated actual cost. Based on the estimate submitted by the subdivider, the city engineer shall determine the final estimated cost for the undergrounding. Security posted for the undergrounding shall be for the full amount of the estimated costs as determined by the city engineer. Security shall be of the type specified in Section 66499 of the Government Code and before acceptance by the city engineer, shall be approved by the city attorney as to form and legal sufficiency. 
This section shall not apply to: 
a.  Overhead facilities approved by the city engineer to be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed thirty days in order to provide emergency service; and 
b.  Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated structures used, or to be used, in conjunction with construction projects; and 
c.  Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at voltages in excess of thirty-three thousand volts. 
B.  Except as provided for in this section, all utility facilities, including service laterals shall be installed in the ground prior to the paving of streets. The city engineer may authorize installation of utility facilities after street improvements are installed if the installation will not require reconstruction or repair of the street improvements or if unusual circumstances warrant. At the time of recommending approval of the tentative map for a proposed subdivision, the planning commission may recommend modification of the requirement for all or part of a subdivision where, due to physical conditions, it would cause undue hardship. 
Both transformers and access points must be placed so as to safeguard the public against any hazard created by said equipment and to preserve good neighborhood appearance. 
All utilities to be installed shall be installed within the street, alley, or walkway dedication as approved by the city engineer, or in easements obtained by the utility company adjacent thereto. The city engineer may allow deviations from this requirement of placement when compliance is deemed impractical, or where any conflicting paramount laws would allow such deviation. 
The subdivider shall make all necessary arrangements for underground installations and for relocation of existing facilities with the utility companies involved. There shall be provided in each subdivision by the subdivider trenching, conduit and miscellaneous substructures necessary for the installation of cable television and its appurtenant electronic gear. 
C.  In the development of a residential single-family lot or in any land division in an existing established built up family residential area, which results in four or less separate single-family residential lots that are in an existing overhead area where future undergrounding or extension of undergrounding to the surrounding areas is not contemplated within the foreseeable future, undergrounding of utilities shall be imposed as a condition; provided, however, that if such a condition is imposed, the owner in lieu thereof may pay a fee in the amount established by the city council by resolution. 
In the event the application of the provisions of this subsection would be inequitable or would create a hardship and relief from this subsection would not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter, the city council upon application being made may provide relief from this subsection on such terms and conditions as it may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 478 § 2, 1980: Ord. 431 § 1, 1979: Ord. 367 § 1, 1977; Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7513.)  
13.08.150 - Plans required. 
Plans detailing the location of all underground utilities hereinafter installed shall be prepared by the subdivider making the installation and submitted to the public works department of the city for approval in accordance with standards adopted by the city council. The public works department shall provide inspection services to ensure the installation of all underground utilities in accordance with city approved plans. The subdivider making the installation shall bear the cost to the city of the inspection services. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7514).  
13.08.160 - Appeal. 
A.  When any condition for undergrounding is imposed by the planning commission, or by any administrative officer of the city as a condition to the issuing of any permit or the approving of any development, such determination may be appealed to the city council upon payment of such fee as may be determined from time to time by action of the city council. Any appeal shall be made by filing written notice thereof with the city clerk within thirty days from the date of the determination. 
At least ten days prior to the time the appeal is to be heard by the city council, the city clerk shall give written notification to such utility of the time and place of hearing. 
The city council may affirm, reverse, or modify the recommendation of the planning commission or staff member and may waive or conditionally waive the provisions of this chapter when it finds that the requirements of an undergrounding installation of utility lines would be unreasonable or impractical considering but not limited to the following: 
1.  Geological or soil conditions; 
2.  Topographical conditions; 
3.  When the development of commercial, industrial or residential property which is in an existing overhead area and where undergrounding or extension of undergrounding to surrounding areas is not contemplated within such length of time as the council deems reasonable so as to require immediate undergrounding and the city council determines that the area is unique and of special circumstances. 
The city council in relation to such other relief as it may afford may require the developer or permittee to make a cash deposit in lieu of actual construction or undergrounding; the amount shall be determined by resolution of the city council. Such fee shall be deposited and maintained in an undergrounding fund, and the proceeds of such fund may be used from time to time for undergrounding projects anywhere within the city at such time and in such manner as the city council may determine. 
B.  In addition to such other relief as the city council may grant, it may provide for the apportionment of costs of undergrounding between two developers when it finds that to do so would be equitable. In considering whether such costs shall be apportioned, the council may give consideration to the following: 
1.  The developments are adjacent to each other; 
2.  They are required to underground a common facility which traverses portions of each of the developments; 
3.  The time of development will be approximately the same. 
In the event the city council determines that the cost of undergrounding shall be apportioned between two or more developers, the council in determining the pro rata share of each developer shall give consideration to, but is not bound by, the portion of the facility within each development and the benefit to be derived. Likewise, the city council may determine whether the initial cost shall be borne by one developer, or whether funds shall be deposited with the city for disbursement to the affected utility. 
(Ord. 478 § 3, 1980: Ord. 431 § 1 (part), 1979: Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7515.)  
13.08.170 - Compliance with provisions prerequisite to issuance of building permits. 
No building permit shall be issued for any new construction or land development unless the applicant's plans comply with the provisions of this chapter or until the applicant has obtained a waiver of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7516.)  
13.08.180 - Aboveground equipment. 
For the purposes of this chapter, appurtenances and associated equipment, including, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system, may be placed aboveground. 
(Ord. 353 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 7517.)  
Chapter 13.12 - CITY TREES AND OTHER PLANTINGS* 
Sections: 
 
13.12.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purposes of this chapter include to: 
1.  Establish and maintain a cohesive street tree planting program designed to provide an expression of neighborhood identity through distinctive plantings; 
2.  Establish and maintain the maximum sustainable amount of tree cover and other plantings on streets and other public property in the city; 
3.  Maintain city trees and other plantings in a healthy and nonhazardous condition through good arboricultural practices; 
4.  Establish and maintain appropriate diversity in tree species to provide a stable and sustainable urban forest. 
(Ord. 999 § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.12.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as follows: 
"Comprehensive plan" means the comprehensive plan for the identification, planting and maintenance of approved trees and other plantings in city streets and public areas of the city. 
"Department" means the department of public works. 
"Director" means the director of public works or the director's designee. 
"Maintain" or "maintenance" means and includes clipping, pruning, spraying, fertilizing, propping, treating for disease or injury, and any other similar acts which promote the life, growth, health or beauty of trees and other plantings except watering unless specifically so stated. 
"Other plantings" means any shrubs, grass or ground cover planted within a street or public area. 
"Planting strip" means the area between the curb or the place where the curb should be and the edge of the city right-of-way, as well as the divider strip down the center of divided streets. 
"Public area" means areas other than streets under the control of the city. 
"Specimen tree" means a tree planted or existing in a street or public area which has been found by the planning commission to be of high value because of its type or age, and has been so designated by resolution of the commission to be a specimen tree. 
"Street" means and includes any public street, avenue, boulevard, lane, road, parkway, alley, walk, planting strip, right-of-way, easement, and other public way within the city. 
"Top" means to damage a tree by the practice of severely cutting back large diameter branches or the trunk of a tree which results in substantially reducing the overall size of the tree or destroying the symmetrical appearance or structural shape of the tree. 
Tree, Approved. "Approved tree" means any tree planted within a street or public area that conforms to the comprehensive plan or has otherwise been approved by the city. 
Tree, Historic. "Historic tree" means a tree planted or existing in a street or public area and which has been found by the planning commission to be a tree of notable historic interest because of its age, type or historic associations, and has been designated by resolution of the commission as an historic tree. 
Tree, Memorial. "Memorial tree" means a tree procured, planted in an approved location, and deeded to and accepted by the city, by a private person, group or organization in memorial to a deceased person or noteworthy event, and has been so designated by city council resolution. 
Tree, Unapproved. "Unapproved tree" means any tree planted within a street or other public area that does not qualify as an approved tree. 
(Ord. 999 § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.12.030 - Comprehensive plan. 
A.  The department, in cooperation with the department of community development, must cause to be prepared a list of approved street trees containing the botanical and common names of all trees authorized to be planted in streets or public areas. The list must be approved by resolution of the planning commission. The list will be on file with the department and may be revised from time to time to include other suitable trees, trees to be planted for evaluation purposes only, or to exclude trees deemed to be unsuitable. All trees planted in any street or public area must conform to the approved street tree list, except as may be specifically approved under Section 13.12.050(A). 
B.  The department, in cooperation with the department of community development, must cause to be prepared and maintained a plan for the planting and maintenance of trees in city streets and public areas of the city. The plan must include a series of maps of city streets and any desired public areas upon which is designated a scheme for the planting of trees. The plan must show the location and species of all approved street trees presently growing in city streets and public areas and the planned location and types of approved trees to be planted in those streets and public areas not presently planted. The plan must also indicate all trees planted in city streets and public areas which have been designated as specimen, historic or memorial trees. 
C.  The list of approved street trees described in subsection (A) and the plan described in subsection (B) constitute the city's "comprehensive plan" for the planting and maintenance of trees and other plantings in public areas and streets within the city. 
(Ord. 999 § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.12.040 - Permits required for the planting, trimming or removal of approved trees. 
A.  Planting Permit. No person may plant or cause to be planted any tree in any city street or public area without first obtaining a written permit from the director. The permit must specify the location and variety of trees or other plantings to be planted. Street trees or other plantings which are required to be planted by a subdivider or developer in accordance with any plans and specifications approved by the city, or as part of a project, may be planted without a permit; provided, however, that such trees and other plantings must conform to the city-approved plans and specifications. 
B.  Trimming Permit. No person other than city personnel or city contractors may trim, top, prune or cut any approved tree without first obtaining a permit from the director. The permit will only be issued if the director finds that the trimming is necessary and that the proposed method is satisfactory. A permit is not required for removing sucker growth, watersprouts, minor limbs causing obstructions, or for the removal of less than ten percent of the tree canopy. 
C.  Removal Permit. No person other than city personnel or city contractors in the performance of their duties may remove any approved tree without first applying for a permit from the director. Where trees are removed, all stumps, including underground portions to a depth specified by the department must be removed during such operation. The director may determine that a tree authorized for removal be replaced by the permittee through the compensation methods described in Section 13.12.100(B). 
D.  Permit Conditions. 
1.  In general, no fee will be charged for any of the permits issued under this section. However, the department may impose upon the applicant the obligation to pay partial or full costs for any non-standard expenses incurred by the city as result of the issuance of a permit such as overtime or after hours costs for staff or contractors performing inspections. 
2.  The city may require as a condition of permit issuance that the work is performed under the supervision of a certified arborist. 
3.  Applicants must provide evidence of reasonable public liability and property damage insurance in an amount to be determined by the director and appropriate policies or certificates of insurance must be filed with the city clerk. Where deemed advisable, the posting of a performance bond in an amount equal to the cost of the proposed work may be required, which bond will guarantee the completion of the job in accordance with procedures established by the department. 
4.  All work performed under a permit must be done in a neat and professional manner under the general supervision of, and in accordance with the rules and specifications established by the department. 
5.  All permits will include an automatic expiration date. 
6.  A permit may be revoked if its terms are violated. 
7.  Permits are not transferable. 
(Ord. 999 § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.12.050 - Requirements for the planting of trees and other plantings. 
A.  All new and replacement trees and other plantings must be consistent with the comprehensive plan; provided, however, that owners or developers of property fronting on any street or public area may petition the planning commission to request that other trees or other plants be used in such streets or public areas be of a certain kind or variety. Any action on such petition is subject to the discretion of the commission. 
B.  The planning commission may require that the planting of street trees be included in all building plans that appear before the commission for approval, and that all related costs be borne by the property owner. The selection or approval of species and the specifications for planting will be the responsibility of the department of community development. 
C.  The planning commission may require the planting of trees and other plantings within any street or public area within any new development or subdivision seeking an approval from the commission and such trees or other plantings must be in conformity with the comprehensive plan or project-specific landscape plan covering the area involved. 
D.  Any proposed change in a public street right-of-way, direction, width, or configuration, or any proposed street improvement must, where feasible, include allowances for planting strips. Plans and specifications for planting such areas must be integrated into the plan of improvements. The department must coordinate the design of such improvements with the community development department prior to final approval of the overall plans. When the planting strips are situated between the inside edge of sidewalk and the property line, adequate space or an easement must be retained or obtained to accommodate the desired plantings in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. 999 § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.12.060 - Maintenance and removal of trees and other plantings. 
A.  Except as may be provided in any applicable land use entitlement, or where the underlying fee title is vested in a person other than the city and the city so elects, the city will, at its own cost and expense, inspect, maintain and, when it desires, remove or replace approved street trees and other plantings in city streets and public areas. 
B.  The director is responsible for the inspection, maintenance, removal and replacement of all approved, specimen, historic and memorial trees within city streets and public areas as defined in this chapter, except that no tree designated as an historic or specimen tree may be removed without prior approval of the planning commission and no tree designated as a memorial tree may be removed without prior approval of the city council. 
C.  The director may cause the roots of approved trees to be cut to prevent sidewalk, curb, street or utility damage. Overhead limbs may be pruned or cut back to compensate for loss of root area. 
D.  The director may cause the removal or replacement of any unapproved tree or other planting with city streets or public areas. 
E.  The city is not responsible for maintaining unapproved trees or other plantings in or adjacent to or overhanging any street. Maintenance of such trees is the responsibility of the property owner. 
F.  Unless otherwise prohibited by this code, or addressed by other city approval or specific action, in consideration of the right of access to the city street across city property, it is the responsibility of the property owner to maintain any planting strip adjacent to or upon such owner's property. This maintenance obligation includes keeping such strips free from weeds, debris, or any obstruction deemed contrary to public safety. The use of materials or chemicals intended to permanently sterilize the soil in these strips or areas is prohibited. 
G.  Any tree or other planting growing upon private property but overhanging, or interfering with the use of any street or public area, or constituting an obstruction to clear vision along the street, which in the opinion of the director, endangers the life, health, safety or property of the public is a public nuisance. The department must notify the owner of the existence of the nuisance and give a reasonable time for its correction or removal. If not corrected or removed within the time allotted, the director may cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed, and the cost assessed to the owner as provided by this code. 
(Ord. 999 § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.12.070 - Protection of trees and other plantings. 
A.  No person may interfere, or cause any person to interfere with any work being done under this chapter by any employee of the city or any city contractor. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to injure or destroy any approved tree planted or maintained by the city in city streets or public areas by any means, including, but not limited to the following: 
1.  Construction of a concrete, asphalt, brick or gravel sidewalk or otherwise filling up the ground area around any tree so as to shut off air, light or water from its roots; 
2.  Piling building equipment, material or other substance around any tree so as to cause injury to it; 
3.  Pouring or spreading any deleterious matter on or around any tree or on the surrounding ground, lawn or groundcover; 
4.  Posting any sign, poster, notice, or by fastening any guy wire, cable, rope, nails, screws or other device to any tree, tree stake or guard; 
5.  Cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come in contact with any tree without having first obtained a written permit from the director; 
6.  Cause or encourage any fire or burning near or around any tree. 
C.  No plantings, construction or excavating which endangers pedestrians or vehicular traffic is permitted in planting strips. No surfacing materials, such as asphalt, gravel, or brickwork, may be used without prior approval of the department. The placing of temporary protection for new lawns, ground cover or trees or the provisions of watering basins or temporary construction or excavating necessary for the providing or repairs of utilities will not be considered a violation of this provision. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person to cut, prune, damage, injure or destroy other plantings located in or adjacent to any street or public area including, but not limited to, vines, shrubs or other plant material which is placed in or upon the surface of the street side surface of a wall which separates the public street from a privately owned lot. Nothing contained in this subsection may be deemed to prohibit a lot owner or occupant from trimming, cutting or removing landscaped materials from any portion of a wall which separates a lot from a public street, which portion of the wall does not directly face the public street. 
(Ord. 999 § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.12.080 - Appeals. 
Any person dissatisfied with a decision of the director on a permit application under this chapter may appeal such decision to the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days after such action is taken. The appeal must specify the reasons for which a hearing is requested. The appeal must be accompanied by any administrative fee established by city council resolution. The city clerk will then promptly schedule a hearing before the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(Ord. 999 § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.12.090 - Liability. 
Nothing in this chapter imposes any liability upon any member of the city council or the city or any of its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner and occupant of any private property from the duty to keep such private property, sidewalks, planting strip and easements in front of or through such private property, in a safe condition and so as not to be hazardous to public travel and safety. 
(Ord. 999 § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.12.100 - Fines and penalties. 
A.  Violations of the provisions of this chapter will constitute a misdemeanor and will be punishable as set out in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
B.  Replacement or Compensation. In lieu of being prosecuted or fined for unlawfully removing or causing damage to any approved tree or other planting in violation of this chapter, a person may be allowed to do any of the following at the discretion of the director: 
1.  Replace the unlawfully removed tree or other planting with one or more trees or other plantings, which, in the opinion of the director, will provide comparable economic, aesthetic, or environmental value at the site; 
2.  Reimburse the city the value of the removed or damaged tree or other planting as determined by an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture utilizing the current edition of the "Guide for Plant Appraisal, International Society of Arboriculture." 
(Ord. 999 § 1 (part), 2006.)  
Chapter 13.14 - NEWSRACKS* 
Sections: 
 
13.14.005 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the enactment of the provisions of this chapter, is to establish a comprehensive set of regulations applicable to the placement and usage of newsracks within public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Blinder rack" means a device described in Section 313.1(d) of the Penal Code. 
"Director" means the director of community development of the city. 
"Harmful matter" is defined as set forth in Section 313 of the Penal Code. 
"Matter" is defined as set forth in Section 313 of the Penal Code. 
"Newsrack" means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser, installed, used or maintained for the display or sale of any matter. 
"Parkway" means that portion of any dedicated public street, other than the area included within a traveled roadway. 
"Registration" means the act of filing the information required by this chapter with the director. 
"Roadway" means that portion of a public street improved, designed and/or customarily used for vehicular travel. 
"Street" means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and includes but is not limited to roadways and parkways. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.015 - Registration requirement. 
A.  Registration with the director shall be accomplished not later than the end of next business day, after installation or placement of a newsrack in or upon a parkway. Such registration and amendments thereto, shall be in writing, shall be signed by the owner, or an authorized agent of the owner, of each such newsrack ("owner"), and filed with the director. Each such registration shall contain the following information: 
1.  The location of each newsrack to be installed or maintained in the city by the owner; and 
2.  The name, home and business address and home and business telephone number of the owner or the responsible designated agent of the owner. Should any of such information change as to any newsrack, the owner shall, with five consecutive calendar days following such change, file an appropriate written amendment to such registration with the director. 
B.  No encroachment permit shall be required under the provisions of Chapter 13.04 for a newsrack, if the registration required hereunder is on file, and is current. 
C.  Should any newsrack fail to be registered by the end of the next business day following its placement, the director shall notify the owner of the newsrack, if known, by telephone, that the newsrack will be impounded three business days after such verbal notification unless the registration requirement is met. The director shall confirm such verbal notice to the owner in writing, expeditiously. If the owner cannot be reached by telephone and a telephonic message cannot be left, the director shall remove and impound the newsrack five business days after written notice of the registration requirement is given to the owner, unless the registration requirement is met. 
D.  Registration shall be denied by the director of any newsrack which does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. Denial of registration shall be subject to the appellate process set forth in Section 13.14.050 et seq., of this chapter. 
(Ord. 748 § 2 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.020 - Newsrack and registration information. 
A.  If a newsrack meets the requirements of this chapter, the director shall issue to the owner a metal identification tag, indicating the date of registration and the location of the newsrack. 
1.  The identification tag shall be permanently affixed to the newsrack not later than ten consecutive calendar days from the date of the tag's issuance. 
2.  Should the identification tag fail to be placed on a newsrack within the said ten day period, the director shall notify the owner by telephone that the newsrack will be impounded the next business day after such verbal notification unless the tag is so placed. The director shall confirm such verbal notification to the owner, expeditiously, in writing. If the owner cannot be reached by telephone and a message cannot be left, the director shall remove and impound the newsrack three days after written notification is given to the owner, unless the tag is so placed. 
B.  In addition to the identification tag issued by the director, a newsrack shall have permanently affixed to it, in a place where it is easily observable, the name and address of the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.025 - Fees. 
A.  Each application for registration of a newsrack shall be accompanied by a filing and processing fee in an amount set by the city council, for each such newsrack located or proposed to be located in the city, such fee shall be sufficient to cover administrative costs, including but not limited to review and inspection of the newsrack in place. 
B.  No fee shall be required for updating the information required by this chapter. 
C.  The fee will be refunded if for any reason the registration is not approved. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.030 - Blinder racks. 
Blinder racks shall be placed and maintained on all newsracks at all times when such newsracks contain harmful matter. 
(Ord. 748 § 2 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.035 - Display of certain matter prohibited. 
Matter which is offered for sale from any newsrack placed or maintained on or projecting over the public parkway shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner which exposes to public view from the parkway any of the following: 
A.  Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs, or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront; 
B.  Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineums, anuses or anal regions of any person where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront; 
C.  Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront; 
D.  "Explicit sexual acts" as used in this chapter, means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism, or excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation, or lewd exhibition of the genitals, whether any of the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other act of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person's genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.040 - Standards for maintenance and installation. 
A.  Any newsrack which is located, in whole or in part, upon, in or over any parkway, shall comply with each of the following standards: 
1.  No newsrack shall exceed five feet in height, thirty inches in width, or two feet in thickness. 
2.  Newsracks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to a wall of a building. Newsracks placed near a curb shall be placed no less than eighteen inches nor more than twenty-four inches from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed parallel to a wall or building shall be placed not more then six inches from the wall or building. No newsracks shall be placed or maintained in a parkway opposite one or more other newsracks. 
3.  Each group of newsracks shall be separated from another group of newsracks by a distance of at least one hundred feet extending along a curb or wall. 
4.  Not more then four newsracks shall be grouped together on any one support post. 
5.  No newsrack shall be used for advertising material other than that dealing with the name of the publication offered for sale, in the newsrack. 
6.  Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times. 
7.  Every newsrack shall be installed on a single pedestal or a multiple post which shall be securely anchored to the ground and shall be constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with written design standards adopted by resolution of the city council. 
8.  Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of newsracks shall extend more than fifteen feet along a curb or wall and no more than one section of newsracks shall be allowed at each corner on a street intersection. 
B.  No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained in any of the following locations: 
1.  Within five feet of any marked crosswalk; nor 
2.  Within fifteen feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk; nor 
3.  Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire callbox, police call box, or other emergency facility; nor 
4.  Within five feet of any vehicular driveway; nor 
5.  Within five feet ahead of, or twenty-five feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop; nor 
6.  At any location whereby the space left for passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than three feet except as provided in subdivision 15 of this subsection; nor 
7.  Within three feet, except as provided in subdivision 15 of this subsection, of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees; provided, however, that if the planting area and the adjacent parkway area are separated by a wall or fence in excess of three feet in height, and the planting area and the parkway area are on substantially the same grade, the provisions of this subdivision, shall not apply; nor 
8.  Within three feet, except as provided in subdivision 15 of this subsection, of any display window, or any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway in such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes; nor 
9.  At any location where the newsrack causes, creates or constitutes a traffic hazard; nor 
10.  At any location where the newsrack unreasonably obstructs or interferes with access to, or the use and enjoyment of abutting property; nor 
11.  Where the newsrack will endanger persons, vehicular traffic or property; nor 
12.  Where newsracks will unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the safe sight distance and flow of pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic; nor 
13.  In a parkway which abuts a lot classified in Zone AE, RE, R-1, RPD, MHPD or OS, as such zones are defined in Title 19 of this code; this subdivision shall not prohibit the location of newsracks in such a parkway if such parkway is located adjacent to a building, other than an elementary, junior high or high school, which is open to and used by members of the public; nor 
14.  Where the placement of a newsrack can reasonably be expected to interfere with or obstruct pedestrian use of the parkway; 
15.  Provided that the dimensions referred to in subdivisions 7, 8 and 9 above, shall be four feet or all newsracks placed in the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
C.  In the event that any newsrack is removed, the public property shall be repaired and restored to the same condition which existed prior to the installation of the newsrack. 
D.  If the type or size of newsrack is changed after the registration has been issued by the director, the owner shall be required to notify the director, in writing, of such change. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.045 - Impounding of newsracks not maintained in conformity with chapter. 
Whenever the director determines that a newsrack is being maintained in a manner contrary to the provisions of the chapter, the director shall notify the owner thereof, if known, of such purported violation. The notice shall state therein the nature of the violation and give the owner of the newsrack a reasonable period of time, not to exceed ten consecutive calendar days, to remedy the violation or remove the newsrack. The determination of the director, as set forth in the notice shall, in the absence of a timely perfected appeal, as set forth below, be deemed to be an order of removal as to the newsrack affected thereby; such orders shall be effective on the next day following the expiration of the time for filing an appeal, as set forth in Section 13.14.050. If the order of removal is not complied with within two consecutive calendar days following its effective date, the director shall take the steps necessary to cause the newsrack to be removed and impounded. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.050 - Appeals. 
Any person who is aggrieved by a determination made by the director pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may, within ten consecutive calendar days after the giving notice by the director of such determination, file with the city manager a written appeal, appealing the director's determination to the city manager. Such an appeal must be accompanied by an administrative fee in an amount set by city council resolution. When a timely filed appeal has been made appealing the decision of the director to the city manager, the city manager shall set a time and a place for an informal hearing to allow the appealing party, any other interested person and the director, to present such relevant evidence as they may have relating to the determination made by the director. Based upon the submission of such evidence and the city manager's review of the files and inspection of the newsrack and/or the site, if appropriate, the city manager shall issue an order upholding, overturning or modifying the director's determination. The city manager's determination shall be final and conclusive in the absence of a timely filed appeal. 
(Ord. 950 § 8, 2002: Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.055 - Appeal from city manager's decision. 
Any person who is aggrieved by a determination made by the city manager relating to an appeal from a decision by the director, and who appeared, in person or in writing, at the hearing before the city manager, may file a written appeal with the city clerk appealing the manager's decision to the city council. Any such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk, within ten consecutive days following the giving of notice of decision by the city manager and must be accompanied by an administrative fee in an amount determined by city council resolution. Upon receiving a timely filed appeal, appealing the decision of the city manager to the city council, the city clerk shall set the matter for consideration at the next most convenient meeting of the city council. The city clerk shall give at least five days written notice, to the appealing party, any other person requesting the same, and to the director of the time and place of such hearing. At the time of such hearing, the city council shall allow any interested person to present any relevant evidence bearing upon the city manager's decision. Based upon the evidence presented and the records and files in the case including, if deemed appropriate by the city council, an inspection of the newsrack and the location thereof, the city council shall confirm, modify or disapprove the city manager's decision. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 950 § 9, 2002: Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.060 - Perfecting appeals. 
No appeal shall be accepted, filed, processed or acted upon, unless it is in writing, and filed within the times permitted pursuant to this chapter. Nor shall any such appeal be accepted, filed, processed or acted upon unless all filing and processing fees, as required by this chapter, are fully paid. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.065 - Abandonment of newsrack. 
The owner, or other person entitled to possession of an impounded newsrack, who fails, within thirty days of the giving of notice by the director of the fact of such impounding, to make application to the director and to pay the impound fees required pursuant to this chapter, shall be deemed conclusively to have abandoned such newsrack and the same shall be disposed of in the manner prescribed by law for the disposal of abandoned personal property. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.070 - Restoration of impounded newsrack. 
No newsrack shall be restored to the owner thereof, or other person entitled to possession, unless and until such owner, or person entitled to possession, has paid to the city a fee in an amount equal to the cost of removal and storage of the newsrack, as determined by the director. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.075 - Unmarked machines. 
Immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter, the director shall take such steps as may reasonably be necessary to ascertain the name and address of the owners of all newsracks located within the city which do not have thereon the name, address and telephone number of such owner. The director shall advise such persons, as are known to the director, of the requirement of said Section 17570 of the Business and Professions Code and of the result of the failure to comply with said code, as set forth in this section. Where the director finds that a newsrack located in any public area does not have the name, address and telephone number of the owner thereof placed upon such newsrack, in compliance with Section 17570 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code, and this chapter, the director shall make every reasonable effort to ascertain the owner thereof. If the director is unable to determine ownership, the director shall impound such newsrack. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.080 - Notice. 
Notices required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be given by personal service, or by United States Postal Service, or its lawful successor, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his/her last known address, and deposited in the course of transmission of the United States Postal Service. Notice under this chapter shall be deemed to have been given as of the date and hour of personal service, or two consecutive calendar days following the date of deposit of the written notice in the course of transmission of the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.085 - Conditions of installation. 
At the time of registration, the owner of each newsrack shall: 
A.  Execute and file with the director, a document, approved as to form by the city attorney, agreeing to hold the city, its appointed and elected officers, employees and agents free and harmless from any claim, demand or judgment in favor of any person and agreeing to defend the city, its appointed and elected officers, employees and agents from any such claim, demand or judgment in favor of any person, arising out of the use of any newsrack at that location. Such indemnification shall be effective from the time the newsrack is placed in the parkway; and 
B.  Have on deposit with the director, at all times during which a newsrack is placed in any parkway, a certificate or certificates of insurance evidencing that a liability insurance policy, in minimum amounts and companies as approved by the director, is in effect, naming the city and its appointed and elected officers, agents and employees as coinsureds, and containing a provision that the policy cannot be cancelled except upon ten days written notice to the city of the fact of such cancellation. If such insurance coverage is canceled at any time during the time the newsrack is installed in a parkway, said newsrack shall be removed forthwith by direction of the director. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.090 - Application to existing newsracks. 
Any person owning, or entitled to possession of any newsrack located within the city as of the effective date of this chapter shall within thirty days thereafter remove the newsrack, or file registration of such location in the event such registration has not previously been filed. If any such newsrack remains in place without such notice having been filed, the director shall notify the owner of such violation. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.100 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word or portion of this chapter is, for any reason held to be invalid, or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council of the city declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, words or portions, be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
13.14.110 - Violation of chapter. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 748 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
Title 14 - WATER AND SEWERS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 14.04 - WATER SYSTEM POLLUTION CONTROL* 
Sections: 
 
14.04.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the city council in adopting this chapter is to: 
A.  Protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within a user's private water system(s) such contaminants or pollutants that could backflow into the public water system; and 
B.  To promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the customer's water system(s) and nonpotable water systems; and 
C.  To meet the mandates of public health law concerning drinking water supplies as outlined in the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act and in Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations; and 
D.  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control that will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the city's potable water system. 
(Ord. 809 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
14.04.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall apply to the provisions of this chapter except where the context otherwise requires: 
"Administrator" means the administrator of the program. 
"Air-gap separation" means a physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch. 
"Approved backflow-prevention assembly" means an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the latest standards established by the American Water Works Association (AWWA) titled: 
"Standard for Double Check Valve Backflow-Prevention Assembly," and "Standard for Reduced-Pressure Principle Backflow-Prevention Assembly," and have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (FCCHR) of the University of Southern California established by "Specification of Backflow-Prevention Assemblies" - Sec. 10 of the most current issue of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control. 
Said AWWA and FCCHR standards and specifications have been adopted by the city. Final approval shall be evidenced by a "Certificate of Approval" issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with said AWWA standards and FCCHR specifications. Laboratories have been qualified to test and certify backflow preventers. 
Backflow preventers that may be subjected to backpressure or backsiphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval from a testing laboratory and are listed on the laboratory's current list of approved backflow-prevention assemblies may be used without further testing or qualification. 
"Approved check valve" means a check valve that seats readily and completely, which is carefully machined to have free moving parts and assured watertightness. The face of the closure element and valve seat must be bronze, composition, or other noncorrodible material which will seat tightly under all prevailing conditions of field use. Pins and bushings shall be of bronze or other noncorrodible, nonsticking material, machined for each, dependable operation. The closure element, i.e., the clapper, shall be internally weighted or otherwise internally equipped to promote rapid and positive closure in all sizes where this feature is obtainable. 
"Approved double check valve assembly" means an assembly of at least two independently acting approved check valves including tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check valve assembly and suitable leak-detector drains plus connections available for testing the watertightness of each check valve. These devices shall be installed per city's standards. 
"Approved reduced pressure principle backflow-prevention device" means a device incorporating two or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, two shutoff valves and equipped with necessary appurtenances for testing. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves, less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow the pressure between the check valves shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain this reduced pressure by discharging into the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere thereby providing an air gap in the device. To be approved these devices must be readily accessible for maintenance and testing and installed in a location where no part of the valve will be submerged. These devices shall be installed per city's standards. The entire assembly shall meet the specifications and approval of an approved testing agency for backflow-prevention devices. 
"Approved testing laboratory" means testing labs designated by the administrator. 
"Approved water supply" means any water supply, whether public or private, approved by the State Department of Health and acceptable to the public water purveyor supplying a particular premises. 
"Auxiliary water supply" means any water supply on or available to a premises other than an approved water supply as defined in this section. 
"Backflow" means the undesirable reversal of flow in a potable water distribution system as a result of a cross connection. 
"Backflow preventer" means an assembly or means designed to prevent backflow. 
"Backpressure" means a pressure, higher than the supply pressure, caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or another means that may cause backflow. 
"Backsiphonage" means backflow caused by negative or reduced pressure in the supply piping. 
"Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of water to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or the spread of disease. 
"Cross-connection" means any actual or potential unprotected connection between any part of a water system used, intended to be used, or available as a source of water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing water or substance that is not or cannot be approved as potable, safe and wholesome for human consumption. 
Hazard, Degree of. "Degree of hazard" means an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system: 
1.  Hazard, Health. "Health hazard" means a cross connection or potential cross connection involving any substance that could, if introduced in the potable water supply, cause death, illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects. 
2.  Hazard, Plumbing. "Plumbing hazard" means a plumbing-type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by an approved air gap or an approved backflow-prevention assembly. 
3.  Hazard, Nonhealth. "Nonhealth hazard" means a cross connection or potential cross connection involving any substance that generally would not be a health hazard but would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable, if introduced into the potable water supply. 
4.  Hazard, System. "System hazard" means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the customer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination that would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
"Industrial fluids"means any fluid, liquid, emulsion, or solution which may be biologically, chemically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, plumbing, pollution, or system hazard if introduced into the water supply. This may include, but is not limited to, contaminated or polluted used waters, all types of process and used waters originating from the public potable water system which have or may deteriorate in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; acids and alkalis, circulating cooling waters that are biologically or chemically treated or stabilized with toxic substances, contaminated or polluted natural waters as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, seas, irrigation canals or systems, et cetera; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffines, caustic and acid solutions and other liquids or gases used in industrial or other processes and for fire protection. 
"Pollution" means an impairment of the quality of water which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use. 
"Pollution hazard" means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard as defined. 
"Program" means the city's cross-connection control program. 
"Service connection" means the terminal end of the connection from the public potable water system, i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over water at its point of delivery to the consumer's water system. If a meter is installed, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There shall be no unprotected takeoffs ahead of any meter or backflow-prevention device located at the point of delivery to a consumer's water system. 
"Superintendent" means the city's water systems superintendent. 
"Used water" means any water supplied by a water purveyor to the consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor. 
"User" means the owner or occupant of a building or land who utilizes domestic water supplied by a purveyor. 
"Water purveyor" means an agency responsible for operation of a public water system approved pursuant to provisions of the California Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to, the city. 
"Water supervisor" means the user or person on the user's premises charged with the responsibility of maintaining the user's water system free from cross-connections and other sanitary defects as required by regulations and laws. A certificate backflow-prevention device tester may not act as a water supervisor unless he is a full-time employee of the user having the day-to-day responsibility for the installation and use of the pipelines on the premises and for the avoidance of cross-connections on the premises. 
(Ord. 809 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
14.04.030 - Designation of cross-control program administrator. 
The provisions of this chapter, as implemented by the director of community services, constitutes the program. The superintendent is designated as the program administrator. The superintendent shall be a certified cross-connection control specialist and shall administer all aspects of the program, including the examination of backflow-prevention device testers, notification of required testing, and maintenance of files and records. 
(Ord. 809 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
14.04.040 - Establishment of cross-connection control program. 
A.  The program shall provide, within the city's water service area, for the protection of the city's potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. 
B.  If, in the judgment of the administrator an approved backflow-prevention assembly is required at the customer's water service connection for the safety of the water system, the administrator shall give notice in writing to said customer to install such an approved backflow-prevention assembly(s) at specific location(s) on his/her premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved assembly(s) at his/her own expense; and, failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested, and maintain said assembly(s) shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. The time period allowed until water service is discontinued shall be dependent upon degree of hazard. 
(Ord. 809 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
14.04.050 - Requirements of cross-connection control program. 
A.  Water System. 
1.  The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the utility system (external system) and the customer/user system (internal system). 
2.  Utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer/user's system begins. 
3.  The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system. 
4.  The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. 
5.  The customer/user's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system that are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use. 
B.  Policy. 
1.  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulations and this chapter. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow-prevention assembly required by this chapter is not installed, tested, and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow-prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
2.  The customer/user's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the administrator shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with applicable laws relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
3.  If required, an approved backflow-prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line. Installation shall be per standards established by the program. 
a.  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply that is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and that is not acceptable as an additional source by the administrator, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow-prevention assembly in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. 
b.  In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectional substances are handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow-prevention assembly in the service line, appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system that have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
c.  In the case of premises having (1) internal cross connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or (2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved reduced pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly in the service line. This section shall also be applicable to those commercial or industrial buildings that are subdivided into several individual businesses or industries and for which there is a high tenant turnover. 
4.  The type of protective assembly required under subsection B3(a) through (c) of this section shall depend upon the degree of hazard that exists as follows: 
a.  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection B3(a) of this section and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly. 
b.  In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazards to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly. 
c.  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health that is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention. Example of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries, and plating plants. 
d.  In the case of any premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly at the service connection. 
e.  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly on each service to the premises. 
f.  In the case of any premises where, in the opinion of the administrator, an undue health threat is posed because of the presence of extremely toxic substances, the administrator may require an air gap at the service connection to protect the public water system. This requirement will be at the discretion of the administrator and is dependent on the degree of the hazard. 
g.  Fire sprinkler system lines shall have at a minimum a detector check double-check valve backflow-prevention device installed for external system protection, except in such cases where prohibition of such device is mandated by state law. If not restricted by state law and if warranted by degree of hazard, a reduced principle backflow-prevention device with detection meter may be required by the administrator. 
5.  An approved backflow-prevention assembly required herein shall be a model and size approved by the administrator. 
6.  It shall be the duty of the user at any premises where backflow-prevention assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances where the administrator deems the hazard to be great enough, certified inspections may be required at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by a certified tester approved by the administrator. It shall be the duty of the administrator to see that these tests are made in a timely manner. The user shall notify the administrator in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that the administrator may witness the tests if so desired. The customer user shall send copies of test results to the administrator. These assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer-user whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs, and overhaul shall be submitted to the administrator. 
7.  All presently installed backflow-prevention assemblies that do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved assemblies for the purpose described herein at the time of installation and that have been properly maintained shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under subsection B6, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the administrator is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing assembly is moved from the present location, requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the administrator finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow-prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 809 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
14.04.060 - Certification of backflow-prevention device testers. 
A.  No person shall be deemed to be qualified to inspect, maintain, and repair backflow-prevention devices unless his/her qualifications have been established to the satisfaction of the administrator. 
The administrator shall have authority to establish qualifications and conduct examinations in order to certify individuals that are qualified to inspect and maintain backflow-prevention devices. Upon successful completion of such examination and training as deemed necessary pursuant to provisions of this section, the person so examined shall receive a certificate of competence. Any limitations or conditions imposed on the examinee in the inspection and maintenance of backflow-prevention devices shall be stated upon the face of said certificate issued to such examinees. 
The administrator shall make available to all owners of property upon which backflow-prevention devices are installed or required a list of persons qualified to install and maintain such devices. 
Every person after receiving a certificate of competence shall be issued such identification as deemed appropriate and such identification shall be kept in the immediate possession of every person engaged in inspecting, maintaining, or repairing any backflow-prevention device. 
B.  Every person desiring to qualify to inspect, maintain, or repair backflow-prevention devices shall make application to the administrator on forms provided. 
C.  Every person holding a certificate of competence issued under provisions of this section shall be required to renew the certificate every three years. 
D.  Every person receiving a certificate of competence under the provisions of this section shall be responsible for the competency and accuracy of all inspections and maintenance performed on any backflow-prevention device by any person under his authority and control. 
E.  Every person issued a certificate of competence who fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly and willingly falsifies inspection and maintenance reports submitted to the administrator shall have such certificate immediately revoked, and shall not be considered for recertification for a period of two years. 
(Ord. 809 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
14.04.070 - Booster pumps—Regulation. 
When it becomes necessary, on account of low pressure or special operating conditions, to install a booster pump on the service to any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff switch designed to shut off the pump when the pressure on the inlet side is twenty-five p.s.i.g. or lower. It shall be the duty of the water user to maintain the cutoff device in proper working order, and to certify to the administrator at least once a year that the device is operable. 
(Ord. 809 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
14.04.080 - County health department responsibility for water systems on customer premises. 
A.  The county health department shall be responsible for internal water system protection. The International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Official Uniform Plumbing Code shall be utilized regarding cross-connection control within each customer/user's premises. 
B.  With the permission of the administrator, internal cross-connection control protection may be utilized for external (utility system) protection if such devices and/or means of protection are equivalent to that required for external protection; if such devices are inspected and maintained in accordance with this chapter; and if related test/maintenance/ repair reports are supplied to the administrator on at least an annual basis. Failure to comply with these requirements shall mandate the customer installation of a device or devices for external system protection. Failure of the customer to install this device or devices shall initiate the discontinuance of water service to the customer's premises. 
C.  Water systems for fighting fire, derived from a supply that cannot be approved as safe or potable for human consumption shall, wherever practicable, be kept wholly separate from drinking water pipelines and equipment. In cases where the domestic water system issued for both drinking and firefighting purposes, approved backflow-prevention devices shall be installed to protect such individual drinking water lines as are not used for firefighting purposes. 
D.  Potable water pipelines connected to equipment for industrial processes or operations shall be disconnected therefrom if practicable. Where disconnection is not practicable, an approved backflow-prevention device, the type or kind depending on the degree of hazard, shall be located in the feed line to the process piping or equipment, beyond the last point from which drinking water may be taken. 
In the event the particular process liquid is especially corrosive or apt to prevent reliable action of a mechanical backflow-prevention device, air-gap separation shall be provided. All backflow-prevention devices shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced whenever they are found to be defective. Records of tests, repairs and replacements shall be submitted to the county health department and to the administrator if required. 
E.  Sewage pumps and storm water pumps shall not have priming connections unless the drinking water system is protected as set forth in Section 14.04.050, and no connections shall exist between the drinking water system and any other piping, equipment or tank in any sewage treatment plant, sewage pumping station, or storm water pumping station. 
F.  Backflow protection by an approved backflow-prevention device shall be provided on each drinking water pier-head outlet used for supplying vessels at piers or waterfronts. These assemblies must be located where they will prevent the return of any water from the vessel into the drinking water pipeline or into another vessel at such pier or waterfront. 
G.  Backflow protection consisting of an air-gap or approved reduced pressure principle device shall be provided at all domestic water system outlets used for supplying permanent or portable tanks and vessels used or intended for use in spraying or otherwise disseminating fertilizer, fungicide, herbicides, insecticides, or other toxic substances. 
Comparable backflow protection shall be provided at all domestic water system outlets supplying a field irrigation system of either a sprinkler or subsurface type. 
H.  Where the premises contain dual or multiple water systems and piping, the exposed portions of pipelines shall be painted, banded, or marked at sufficient intervals to distinguish clearly which water is potable and which is not safe for consumption. All outlets from secondary or potentially contaminated systems shall be posted as contaminated and unsafe for drinking purposes. All outlets intended for drinking purposes shall be plainly marked to indicate the fact. 
When color marking is used, potable water lines shall be painted green and nonpotable water lines shall be painted yellow. This requirement may be met by painting three-inch wide bands green or yellow at intervals of not more than twenty-five feet and at points where piping passes through walls, floors or roofs in which case the bands shall be applied on both sides of the walls and both above and below the floor or roof. Points of outlets for nonpotable water shall be marked with a tag or color coded. 
When tags are used, potable water lines shall be identified by three-inch diameter metal tags bearing the legend "safe water" in letters not less than one-half inch in height. 
Nonpotable water lines shall be identified by firmly attached, metal tags having the shape of a four-inch equilateral triangle bearing the legend "unsafe water" in letters not less than seven-sixteenth inch in height. 
As in the color bands, tags shall be attached to pipes at intervals of not more than twenty-five feet and at either side of walls and above and below points where pipes pass through floors and roofs. 
I.  The county health department and the city shall be kept informed of the identity of the person responsible for the water piping on all premises concerned with this chapter. At each premises where it is necessary in the opinion of the health department or the city a water supervisor shall be designated. The water supervisor shall be responsible for the installation and use of pipelines and equipment for the avoidance of cross-connections, compliance with this chapter and for reporting to the water purveyor any changes in water usage. 
In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the county health department and the city shall be promptly advised by the person responsible for the water system so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination or pollution. 
(Ord. 809 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
14.04.090 - Cross-connection survey required. 
A.  Building plans shall be examined by the administrator to insure that the plumbing system does not contain cross-connections or potential cross-connections and meets the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The administrator shall have the authority to conduct a survey of new premises to determine the status of cross-connections or the cross-connection potential. Denial of entry upon such premises shall require customer installation of external system protection as determined by the administrator. Customer failure to install external system protection shall initiate the discontinuance of water service to the customer's premises. 
C.  Those commercial buildings or industrial buildings or other businesses that change ownership or type of business or type of process shall be required to undergo a cross-connection survey. The administrator shall direct the level of survey required. If entry upon the premises is requested by the administrator and this request denied, said administrator may require customer installation of external system protection. Customer failure to install external system protection shall initiate discontinuance of water service to the customer's premises. 
(Ord. 809 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
14.04.100 - Penalties for noncompliance. 
The water purveyor shall have the authority to immediately discontinue service to any premises where cross-connection or other hazards to the water system are found to exist, and shall not again render service to the premises until such hazards are eliminated in accordance with this chapter. Any water user who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who alters, bypasses, or renders inoperative any backflow-prevention device installed under the provisions of this chapter shall in addition to penalties provided by law, be subject to immediate discontinuance of water service. Service shall not again be rendered until such violation or noncompliance has been corrected. Charges for discontinuance of water service and reconnection of water service shall be applied in an amount as established by city ordinance. 
(Ord. 809 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
14.04.110 - Violation declared misdemeanor. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of failing to comply with any mandatory requirements of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 809 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
14.04.120 - Effective date of city cross-connection control program. 
The program shall become effective on July 1, 1994. 
(Ord. 809 § 1 (part), 1994.)  
Chapter 14.08 - WATER WELLS 
Sections: 
 
14.08.010 - Incorporation of Ventura County Code. 
Subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below, the city council incorporates Article 1 in Chapter 8 to Division 4 of the Ventura County Code entitled Groundwater Conservation, consisting of §§ 4811 to 4828, into this code pursuant to Government Code § 50022.9. The provisions of this code will take precedence over any conflicting provisions in the referenced portion of the Ventura County Code. 
(Ord. 944 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
14.08.020 - Purpose. 
Section 4811 of the VCC is amended to read as follows: 
Enacting this chapter is intended to provide, in cooperation with the county of Ventura, for the construction, maintenance, operation, use, repair, modification, and destruction of water wells located within the city; to ensure that the groundwater of the county of Ventura will not be contaminated or polluted; to ensure that water obtained from wells will be suitable for use; and to preserve and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. 944 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
14.08.030 - Definitions. 
Section 4812 of the VCC is amended to read as follows: 
G.  "City inspector" means a person authorized by the director to inspect all work for which a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter; 
H.  "Department" means the city's department of public works; 
J.  "Director" means the director of public works, or designee; 
X.  "County and city" mean the city of Camarillo; 
Y.  "VCC" means Article 1 in Chapter 8 to Division 4 of the Ventura County Code entitled Groundwater Conservation and consisting of §§ 4811 to 4828. 
(Ord.944 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
14.08.040 - Permits. 
Section 4813(A) of the VCC is amended to read as follows: 
It is unlawful for any person to construct, repair, modify or destroy any cathodic protection well that is deeper than fifty (50) feet, any engineering test hold that is deeper than fifty (50) feet, any monitoring well, or any water well unless such work is done pursuant to and in compliance with a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
In Sealing Zone III, as described in the California Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-9, no permit shall be issued pursuant to this chapter for replacing an existing well or constructing a new well unless it is consistent with the current Fox Canyon Groundwater Management Agency (GMA), Groundwater Management Plan, as determined by the GMA. In making this determination, the GMA shall also consider the suitability of the water quality for the intended use of the well. 
Alterations, repairs, modifications, and rehabilitations of existing wells within Sealing Zone III that do not involve a change of the aquifier in which the well is perforated do not require GMA approval, provided the well's original production capacity is not increased. 
(Ord. 944 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
14.08.050 - Enforcement. 
Section 4823 of the VCC is amended to read as follows: 
It is unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter. The city attorney, or designee, may enforce this chapter in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 944 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 750 § 1 (part), 1991.)  
Chapter 14.12 - WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1126, § 3(Exh. A), adopted July 27, 2016, amended Ch. 14.12 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 14.12, §§ 14.12.010—14.12.060, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1039, § 2, 7-22-2009; Ord. No. 1040, § 2, 8-26-2009; Ord. No. 1116, § 3(Exh. A), 11-4-2015. 
 
14.12.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter have the meaning defined in this section: 
"GSP" means the current Groundwater Sustainability Plan adopted by the Fox Canyon Groundwater Management Agency in accordance with the State's Sustainable Groundwater Management Act. 
"Irrigation system" means an irrigation system with pipes, hoses, spray heads, or sprinkling devices that are operated by hand or through an automated system. 
"Potable water" means water that is suitable for drinking. 
"Recycled water" means the reclamation and reuse of non-potable water for beneficial use as defined in Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations. 
"Significant new development project" means a project that proposes five or more new residential units or 10,000 or more square feet of new commercial or industrial space. 
"Single pass cooling systems" means equipment where water is circulated only once to cool equipment before being disposed. 
"Water conservation administrator" means the person designated by the city manager to administer the provisions of this chapter or the administrator's designee. 
(Ord. No. 1126, § 3(Exh. A), 7-27-2016)  
14.12.020 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter apply to any person in the use of water provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1126, § 3(Exh. A), 7-27-2016)  
14.12.030 - Permanent water conservation measures. 
The following water conservation measures are in effect at all times: 
A.  Watering Hours and Duration. Except for testing an irrigation system for a reasonable period of time, watering is prohibited between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., and irrigation systems are limited to no more than 15 minutes of watering per day per station. These restrictions do not apply to the use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, an irrigation system that uses stream rotor sprinklers that meet a 70% efficiency standard, to very low-flow drip type irrigation systems where no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour, or to commercial nurseries and growers. In addition, irrigation for the purpose of installing and germinating new lawns or landscaping is exempt from these restrictions for a period not to exceed three weeks, unless the water conservation administrator gives written permission to a water user for an extension beyond three weeks due to a longer installation and germination period. 
B.  Excessive Water Flow or Runoff. Watering in a manner that results in overspray or excessive runoff onto paved or hardscaped areas is prohibited. 
C.  Washing Hard or Paved Surfaces. Washing of hard or paved surfaces, including sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or alleys, is prohibited except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards or as surface preparation for the application of any architectural coating or painting. All such permitted washing must be done by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off device, a low-volume, high-pressure cleaning machine, or a low-volume high-pressure water broom. 
D.  Obligation to Fix Leaks. Leaks in distribution, irrigation, or plumbing systems must be promptly corrected after discovery, and in no event more than 72 hours after receiving notice from the city. 
E.  Water Fountains and Decorative Water Features. Water fountains and decorative water features must have a water recirculation system. 
F.  Limits on Washing Vehicles. Washing any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or any other vehicle is restricted to the use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device. This provision does not apply to a commercial car washing facility. 
G.  Drinking Water Served Upon Request. Eating or drinking establishments, including restaurants, hotels, cafés, cafeterias, bars, or other public places where food or drinks are sold are prohibited from providing drinking water to any customer unless expressly requested. 
H.  Commercial Lodging Establishment Daily Linen Services. Hotels, motels, and other commercial lodging establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently display notice of this option in each guest room. 
I.  Single Pass Cooling Systems. The installation of single pass cooling systems is prohibited in buildings requesting new water service. 
J.  Restaurants Required to Use Water Conserving Spray Valves. Food service establishments, such as restaurants and cafés, must utilize water conserving nozzles on pre-rinse spray valves. 
K.  Commercial Car Wash Facilities. Commercial car wash facilities may not use or permit the use of any water to wash any car, truck, boat, trailer, bus, recreation vehicle, camper, or any other vehicle, or any portion thereof, except by the following methods: 
1.  Use of mechanical automatic car wash facilities utilizing water recycling equipment; or 
2.  Use of a bucket and hand washing; or 
3.  Use of a hose equipped with an automatic positive self-closing valve that requires the person using the hose to apply and maintain pressure at the outlet end of the hose to activate and maintain the flow of water. 
L.  Watering During or Immediately After Measurable Rainfall. The application of potable water to outdoor landscapes is prohibited during and within 48 hours after measurable rainfall. As used in this section, "measurable rainfall" means at least one-quarter inch of rain in the city within a 24-hour period as measured by the California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS) Weather Station #152 located in Camarillo (http://ipm.ucanr.edu/calludt.cgi/WXDESCRIPTION?STN=CAMARILLO.A) or such other weather station as may subsequently be identified by the City and the information posted on the city's website. 
M.  Watering of Turf on Public Street Medians. The irrigation with potable water of ornamental turf on public and private street medians is prohibited. 
N.  Compliance with Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. The irrigation with potable water of landscapes outside of homes and buildings must be done in a manner consistent with the applicable regulations or other requirements established under the city's water efficient landscape ordinance as set forth in Chapter 14.14 of this code. 
O.  New Potable Water Service Impact Study. Applicants for new potable water service for a significant new development project must cause to be prepared a water impact study to the satisfaction of the public works director demonstrating the project's total water demand at build out. 
P.  Water Demand Offset Requirement. In order for an application for new potable water service to be approved and a will-serve letter issued for a significant new development project, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed project will not create additional demand on the city's water system. To satisfy this requirement an applicant for a significant new development project must provide, to the satisfaction of the city and in accordance with the city's water demand offset program or water demand credit program, as applicable, substantial evidence of an enforceable commitment that the water demand for the project will be offset prior to the provision of a potable water will-serve letter. The applicant may satisfy this requirement through any one or a combination of the following methods: (i) modifications to the project to provide non-required water savings features, (ii) agreements with existing city water users to retrofit existing improvements and facilities with water savings features in accordance with the city's water demand offset program, (iii) by transferring groundwater pumping rights or allocations that comply with GSP strategies adopted by the Fox Canyon Groundwater Management Agency and are immediately available for use by the city; or (iv) by credit for historic water use by a municipal or industrial customer served water prior January 1, 2014. 
(Ord. No. 1126, § 3(Exh. A), 7-27-2016)  
14.12.040 - Additional water conservation measures. 
The following additional water conservation measures apply upon the effective date of the city council's establishment of the relevant water supply condition stage. 
A.  Stage 1 (Water Supply Condition - 10% Reduction Goal). The following additional water conservation requirements apply during a declared stage 1 water supply condition: 
1.  Watering Days. Watering is limited to four days per week and is restricted to Monday, Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday. (The exemptions set forth in Section 14.12.030(A) also apply to this provision.) 
B.  Stage 2 (Water Supply Condition - 20% Reduction Goal). In addition to the restricted uses of water in subsection (A), the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared stage 2 water supply condition: 
1.  Watering Days. Watering is limited to three days per week. Watering days will be determined by the last number of the account address. Addresses ending with an even number will be permitted to water on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday only. Addresses ending with an odd number will be permitted to water on Monday, Wednesday and Friday only. (The exemptions set forth in Section 14.12.030(A) also apply to this provision.) 
2.  Obligation to Fix Leaks. Leaks in distribution, irrigation, or plumbing systems must be promptly corrected after discovery, and in no event more than 48 hours after receiving notice from the city unless other arrangements are made with the city. 
3.  Limits on Filling Ornamental Lakes or Ponds. Filling or refilling ornamental lakes or ponds is prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life, provided that such aquatic life is of significant value and have been actively managed within the water feature prior to declaration of the stage 2 water supply condition. 
4.  Agricultural Irrigation: Agricultural water deliveries will be reduced to three days per week. Irrigation days will be on Monday, Wednesday and Friday only. 
5.  Construction Water. Recycled water must be used if available. 
C.  Stage 3 (Water Supply Condition- 30% Reduction Goal). In addition to the restricted uses of water in subsections (A) and (B), the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared stage 3 water supply condition: 
1.  Watering. Watering is limited to two days per week. Watering days will be determined by the last number of the account address. Addresses ending with an even number will be permitted to water on Tuesday and Friday only. Addresses ending with an odd number will be permitted to water on Monday and Thursday only. (The exemptions set forth in Section 14.12.040(A) also apply to this provision.) 
2.  Agricultural Irrigation. Irrigation for commercial nurseries and growers is not permitted unless the city determines that recycled water is available and can be applied to the use. 
D.  Stage 4 (Water Supply Condition - 40% to 50% Reduction Goal). In addition to the restricted uses of water under subsections (A) through (C), the following additional water conservation requirements apply during a declared stage 4 water supply condition: 
1.  Watering. Watering with potable water is prohibited. If the city determines that recycled water is available, it may be applied for the following uses: 
(a)  Maintenance of vegetation, including trees and shrubs (but excluding turf), that is watered using a hand-held bucket or similar container, hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device. 
(b)  Maintenance of existing landscape necessary for fire protection. 
(c)  Maintenance of existing landscape for soil erosion control. 
(d)  Maintenance of plant materials identified to be rare or essential to the well-being of protected species. 
(e)  Maintenance of landscaped areas within active public parks and playing fields, day care centers, golf course greens, and school grounds, provided that such irrigation does not exceed two days per week according to the schedule and times established in Section 14.12.030(A). 
(f)  Actively irrigated environmental mitigation projects. 
2.  Obligation to Fix Leaks. Leaks in distribution, irrigation, or plumbing systems must be promptly corrected after discovery, and in no event more than 24 hours after receiving notice from the city unless other arrangements are made with the city. 
3.  Limits on Washing Vehicles. Washing any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat, or any other vehicle is prohibited except by use of a commercial car wash facility. 
4.  Limits on Filling Residential Swimming Pools and Spas. Refilling of more than one foot and initial filling of residential swimming pools or outdoor spas with potable water is prohibited. 
5.  No New Potable Water Service Connections: No new potable water service connections will be provided, no new temporary meters or permanent meters will be provided, and no statements of immediate ability to serve or provide potable water service (such as will-serve letters or letters of water verification) will be issued, except under any of the following circumstances: 
(a)  A valid, will-serve letter has been issued; 
(b)  A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued for the project; 
(c)  The project is city capital project; 
(d)  The project is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; and 
(e)  The project is a temporary use that will not cumulatively use more than one-quarter acre foot of water. 
6.  No New Annexations. The city will suspend consideration of annexations to its service area. This provision does not apply to boundary corrections and annexations that will not result in any increased use of water. 
(Ord. No. 1126, § 3(Exh. A), 7-27-2016)  
14.12.050 - Penalties. 
A.  Penalties. In addition to any other penalties or remedies provided by this code, the following civil fines and penalties may be assessed for any violation of this chapter and made payable as part of the applicable customer's water bill. 
1.  First Violation. The city will issue a written warning for a first violation and provide a copy of this chapter by mail. 
2.  Second Violation. A second violation within the 12 calendar months following the first violation is punishable by a fine not to exceed $100. 
3.  Third Violation. A third violation within the 12 calendar months following the first violation is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500. 
4.  Fourth and Subsequent Violations. A fourth and any subsequent violation need not be within the 12 calendar months following the first violation is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000. 
5.  Water Flow Restrictor. In addition to the fines for the fourth and subsequent violations, the city will install a flow restriction device of 1 GPM capacity for services, for a period of at least 48 hours, up to one and one-half inch size, and comparatively sized restrictions for larger services, on the service of the customer at the premises at which the violation occurred. A charge for installing and removing such flow restricting device will be assessed based on the actual cost. 
6.  Termination of Service. 
(a)  The city may disconnect a customer's water service for willful violations of this chapter. 
(b)  When water service is disconnected, it will only be reconnected upon: 
1.  Proof of correction of the condition or activity; and 
2.  Payment of the estimated reconnection charge, including the cost of any inspection fees or staff time. 
B.  Notice. The city will provide notice of each violation to both the customer's billing address and the service address by regular mail. For purposes of this section, notice will be deemed served 72 hours after deposit in the United States mail. All notices will contain, in addition to the facts of the violation, a statement of the possible penalties for each violation, a statement of the right to appeal the penalty, a brief summary of the appeal process, and if the penalty is termination of service, the date and time termination will occur. 
(Ord. No. 1126, § 3(Exh. A), 7-27-2016)  
14.12.060 - Administrative review and appeals of penalties. 
A.  Administrative Review Procedure. 
1.  Persons may request an administrative review of any penalty imposed under this chapter within 10 days of the issuance of the notice of violation. This request must be made in writing to the city clerk and set forth with particularity the reasons the person believes a violation did not occur or that the person was not responsible for the violation and contain the address to which the conclusions of the city's review should be mailed. A request for an administrative review is a mandatory prerequisite to a request for an administrative hearing. Penalties, including termination of water service, will be stayed until such review is conducted and a written decision is made by the water conservation administrator. 
2.  Upon receiving a request for an administrative review, the water conservation administrator will review the request and within 10 business days provide the person with a written determination as to whether the penalty was properly assessed. 
3.  The administrator must mail a copy of the notification to the person at the address on the request for administrative review along with notice establishing the penalty date and the procedure for requesting an appeal hearing. 
B.  Appeal Hearing Procedure. 
1.  Any person dissatisfied with the conclusion of the initial administrative review may contest the penalty by requesting an administrative appeal hearing. A person must file a request for an administrative appeal hearing with the city clerk within 10 days after the date the city served the person with notice of the administrative review decision. The request must be accompanied by the appeal hearing fee, if any, established by city council resolution. Pending receipt of a written appeal or pending a hearing pursuant to an appeal, the city may take appropriate steps to prevent any further unauthorized use of water as appropriate to the nature and extent of the alleged violations and the current declared water supply condition. 
2.  The appeal hearing will be scheduled to occur within a reasonable period of time following the receipt of the request for a hearing not to exceed 15 business days unless consented to by the appellant. 
3.  The appellant may present any evidence that would tend to show that the alleged violation did not occur. Formal rules of evidence will not apply and all relevant evidence will be admissible, unless a sound objection warrants its exclusion by the city hearing officer designated by the city manager. The decision of the hearing officer will be final and conveyed in writing to the appellant within five business days of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1126, § 3(Exh. A), 7-27-2016)  
Chapter 14.14 - WATER EFFICEINT LANDSCAPES[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1117, § 2, adopted Nov. 4, 2015, amended Ch. 14.14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 14.14, §§ 14.14.010—14.14.060, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1050, § 2, 1-13-2010. 
 
14.14.010 - Water efficient landscape ordinance adopted. 
Except as hereinafter provided, the model water efficient landscape ordinance of the State of California, as contained in the California Code of Regulations Title 23, Waters; Division 2, Department of Water Resources; Chapter 2.7, Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance; and as amended from time-to-time by the State of California, is hereby adopted by reference as the water efficient landscape ordinance of the City of Camarillo. A copy of the model water efficient landscape ordinance of the State of California will be maintained in the Department of Community Development of the City of Camarillo and will be made available for public inspection during regular business hours." 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 2, 11-4-2015)  
Title 16 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION  
Chapter 16.04 - UNIFORM BUILDING CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1132, § 2, adopted Nov. 16, 2016, amended Ch. 16.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 16.04, §§ 1604.010—16.04.400, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1082, § 2, 11-20-2013. 
 
16.04.010 - Building regulations and codes adopted. 
Pursuant to Government Code section 50022.1 and following, and subject to the amendments, additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter, the city adopts the most current edition of the following codes by reference and all subsequent amendments to such codes. 
A.  The California Building Code (CBC), Volumes 1 & 2, and Appendices B, C, I and J; 
B.  International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC); 
C.  The California Electrical Code (CEC); 
D.  The California Plumbing Code (CPC); 
E.  The California Mechanical Code (CMC); 
F.  The California Energy Code; 
G.  The California Administrative Code; 
H.  The California Reference Standards; 
I.  The California Existing Building Code (CEBC); 
J.  The California Residential Code (CRC) and Appendices G and H; and 
K.  The California Green Buildings Standard Code (CGBSC). 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.015 - Adoption of regulations referenced in the California Building Code (CBC). 
The following regulations referenced in the CBC are adopted by reference and incorporated into this code: 
(1)  Gypsum Association Fire Resistive Design Manual, Nineteenth Edition, GA-600-09. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.020 - Special definitions. 
The following words used in any of the codes have the following meanings: 
A.  "Board of appeals", "appeals board" or any other reference to any appeals board, means the city manager. 
B.  "Building official" means the person or entity designated as such by the city council or that person or entity's designee. 
C.  "Authority having jurisdiction" means the person or entity designated as such by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.025 - Scope. 
Section 101.2 of Chapter 1, Division II of the CBC is amended to read as follows: 
 101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code apply to the construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.028 - Liability. 
Section 104.8 of Chapter 1, Division II of the CBC is added to read as follows: 
 104.8 Liability. The provisions of this section apply if the Building Official, or the Official's authorized representative, are employees of this jurisdiction and also apply if the Building Official, or authorized representative, is acting under contract as agents of this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.030 - Time limitation of application. 
Section 105.3.2 of Chapter 1, Division II of the CBC is amended to read as follows: 
 105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application. An application for a permit for any proposed work will be deemed abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued: except that the Building Official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days each. The extension must be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
 An application may not be extended if applicable provisions of this code, or any other pertinent laws, have been amended subsequent to the date of application. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant must resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.035 - Expiration. 
Section 105.5 of Chapter 1, Division II of the CBC is amended to read as follows: 
 105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued will become invalid, unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time of work is commenced. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit must first be obtained to do so, and the applicable fee will be one half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made, nor will be made, in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. If the suspension or abandonment has exceeded one year, the permit will be considered expired. In order to renew a permit after expiration, the permittee must pay a new full permit fee. 
 The Building Official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension must be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. A permit may not be extended if any applicable provisions of this code or any other pertinent laws have been amended subsequent to the date of permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.040 - Plan review fees. 
Section 109.7 of Chapter 1, Division II is added to the CBC to read as follows: 
 109.7 Plan Review Fees. When a plan or other data is required to be submitted by Section 106.1, the plan review fee, established by city council resolution, must be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. 
 The plan review fee specified in this subsection is a separate fee from the permit fees specified in Section 109.2. Where plans are incomplete, or changed, so as to require additional plan review, an additional plan review fee will be charged at the same rate as charged upon submittal of plans and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.045. - Investigation fees: Work without a permit. 
Section 109.8 of Chapter 1 Division II is added to the CBC to read as follows: 
 109.8. Investigation Fees: Work without a Permit. 
 109.8.1 Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation will be made before a permit may be issued. 
 109.8.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, may be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee must be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code and will be established by City Council resolution. The payment of such investigation fee will not exempt an applicant from compliance with all other provisions of either this code or the technical codes, nor from the penalty prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.050 - Fee refunds. 
Section 109.9 of Chapter 1, Division II is added to the CBC to read as follows: 
 109.9 Fee Refunds. The Building Official may authorize a refund of any fee that was erroneously paid or collected. 
 The Building Official may authorize a refund of not more than 80 percent of the applicable permit fee paid when no work has been done under the permit. 
 The Building Official may authorize a refund of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended. 
 The Building Official may not authorize a refund of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee no later than 180 days after date of fee payment. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.055 - Reinspection fees. 
Section 109.10 of Chapter 1, Division II is added to the CBC to read as follows: 
 109.10 Reinspection Fees. A reinspection fee may be imposed for each inspection or reinspection, when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when required corrections are not made. 
 This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of the technical codes, but as a method of controlling the practice of calling inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection. 
 Reinspection fees may be imposed when the inspection record card is not posted, or otherwise not available on the work site; the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector; for failure to provide access on the date for which the inspection is requested; or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. 
 To obtain a reinspection, the applicant must file an application in writing upon a city-approved form and pay the applicable reinspection fee. 
 In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, additional inspection of the work will not be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.060 - Building official and occupancy definitions. 
Section 202 of the CBC is amended as follows: 
 BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official is the designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, except Appendix J, which will be enforced by the City Engineer. 
 OCCUPANCY. Occupancy is the purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. The term also includes the building or room housing such use. Change of occupancy is intended to include change of tenants or proprietors. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.065 - Fire classification—General. 
Table 1505.1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows: 
 Minimum roof covering classifications for all types of construction is Class B.  
16.04.070 - Foundation and soils investigations—General. 
Section 1803.1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows: 
 1803.1. Foundation and soils investigations must be conducted in conformance with section 1803.2 and reported in accordance with 1803.6. The classification of the soil at each building site must be determined in a manner set by the Building Official. Such determination must be made by a California-licensed engineer experienced in soil engineering. The Soil Expansion Index must be listed in all soils investigation reports. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.075 - Expansive soils. 
Section 1803.5.3 of the CBC is amended to read as follows: 
 1803.5.3. Expansive soils. In areas likely to have expansive soil, the Building Official must require soil tests to determine where such soils do exist. 
 A test to determine the soil expansion index must be conducted for each building site except that in subdivisions, the frequency of testing need not exceed one test per five contiguous lots, or one test per five acres, whichever area is smaller. Such tests must be made after rough grading is completed. Tests must include a determination of the expansion index for the most expansive soil encountered within the top four feet at each test location, whether in cut or fill, or combination thereof. The expansion index for soil on subdivision lots which have not been individually tested are assumed to correspond to the highest reading determined by tests on proximate lots. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.080 - Investigation. 
Section 1803.3 of the CBC is amended to read as follows: 
 1803.3. Basis of Investigation. Soil classification will be based on observation and any necessary tests of the materials disclosed by borings, test pits, or other subsurface exploration made in appropriate locations. Additional studies may be required by the Building Official to evaluate slope stability, soil strength, position, and adequacy of load-bearing soils, the effect of moisture variation on soil-bearing, capacity, compressibility, liquefaction and expansiveness. 
 Whenever, in the opinion of the Building Official, the adequacy and stability of a building site cannot be determined by the test borings or excavations required by this section, the Building Official may require a special geologic, hydrologic, seismic, or other investigation and report. Geologic investigations, such as those for hillside stability or seismic hazards, must be conducted by a California-certified engineering geologist. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.085 - Drainage. 
Section 1803.8 is added to the CBC to read as follows: 
 1803.8. Drainage. Provisions must be made for the control and drainage of surface water around buildings. The Building Official must require that all storm and excess irrigation water be directed to a street storm drain, natural drainage course, or other approved location in approved non-erosive devices. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.090 - Buildings on expansive soil. 
Section 1803.9 is added to the CBC to read as follows: 
 1803.9. Buildings on Expansive Soil. When buildings are located on expansive soil having an expansion index greater than 50, gutters, downspouts, piping, or other non-erosive devices must be provided to collect and conduct rain water to an approved disposal area. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.095 - Foundation design. 
Section 1806.5 of the CBC is added and TABLE 1809.7 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
 1806.5. Foundation design when buildings are located on expansive soil having an expansion index greater than 50, gutters, downspouts, piping, and other non-erosive devices must be provided to collect and conduct rain water to pervious areas, such as yards, open channels, or vegetated areas. Routing rooftop runoff via yard drains to the roadway or the storm water conveyance system is not permitted. 
Table 1809.7 Foundations for stud bearing walls—Minimum requirements 1, 10, 11, 12 
Weighted expansion index 	Foundation for slab and raised floor systems 2, 5, 7 	Concrete slabs 	Pre-moistening of soils under footings, piers and slabs 5, 6 	Restrictions on piers under raised floors 
	No. of 
stories 	Stem thickness 8 	Footing width 9 	Footing thickness 	All 
perimeter 
footings 6 	Interior footings for slab and raised floors 6 	Reinforcement for continuous foundations 3, 8 	3-½? minimum thickness 
4? with E.I. over 51 		
					Depth below natural surface of ground and finish grade 		Reinforcement 4 	Total thickness of sand 		
		Inches 					
0-20 Very low non expansive 	1 	6 	12 	6 	12 	12 	1-#4 Top and bottom 	#4 @ 48? o/c. each way or #3 @ 36? o/c. each way 	2? 	Moistening of ground prior to placing concrete is recommended. 	Piers allowed for single floor loads only 
	2 	6 	15 	7 	18 	18 					
	3 	10 	18 	8 	24 	24 					
21-50 Low 	1 	6 	12 	6 	15 	12 	1-#4 Top and bottom 		4? 	3% over optimum moisture required to a depth of 18? below lowest adjacent grade. Testing required. 	Piers allowed for single floor loads only 
	2 	8 	15 	7 	18 	18 					
	3 	10 	18 	8 	24 	24 					
51-90 
Medium 	1 	6 	12 	8 	21 	12 	1-#4 Top and bottom 	#3 @ 24? o.c. each way 	4? 	3% over optimum moisture required to a depth of 18? below lowest adjacent grade. Testing required. 	Piers not allowed 
	2 	8 	15 	8 	21 	18 	# 3 bars @ 24? o.c. each way 12? into footing, 36? into slab 10 			
	3 	10 	18 	8 	24 	24 				
91-130 High 	1 	6 	12 	8 	27 	12 	2- # 4 Top & bottom 	# 3 @ 24? o.c. each way 	4? 	3% over optimum moisture required to a depth of 18? below lowest adjacent grade. Testing required. 	Piers not allowed 
	2 	8 	15 	8 	27 	18 					
	3 	10 	18 	8 	27 	24 	# 3 bars @ 24? o.c. each way 12? into footing, 36? into slab 10 			
Above 130 very high 	Special design by a licensed Architect or Engineer required 
 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.100 - Table 1809.7 footnotes. 
The Footnotes to Table 1809.7 are amended to read as follows: 
1.  Pre-moistening is required where specified in Table CBC 1809.7 in order to achieve maximum and uniform expansion of the soil prior to construction and thus limit structural distress caused by uneven expansion and shrinkage. Other systems, which do not include pre-moistening, may be approved by the Building Official, when such alternatives are shown to provide equivalent safeguards against the adverse effects of expansive soil. 
2.  Under-floor access crawl holes must be provided with curbs extending not less than six inches above adjacent grade to prevent surface water from entering the foundation area. 
3.  Reinforcement for continuous foundations must be placed not less than three inches above the bottom of the footing and not less than three inches below the top of the stem. 
4.  Slab reinforcement must be placed at mid-depth and continue to within two inches of the exterior face of the exterior footing walls. 
5.  Moisture content of soils must be maintained until foundations and piers are poured and a vapor barrier is installed. Test must be taken within 24 hours of each slab pour. 
6.  Crawl spaces under raised floors need not be pre-moistened except under interior footings. Interior footings which are not enclosed by a continuous perimeter foundation system, or equivalent concrete or masonry moisture barrier, must be designed and constructed as specified for perimeter footings in Table CBC 1809.7. 
7.  A grade beam not less than twelve-inches-by-twelve-inches in cross-sectional area, reinforced as specified for continuous foundations in Table CBC 1809.7, must be provided at garage-door openings. 
8.  Foundation stem walls which exceed a height of three times the stem thickness above lowest adjacent grade must be reinforced in accordance with Sections 18 and 19 in the CBC, or as required by engineering design, whichever is more restrictive. 
9.  Footing widths may be reduced upon submittal of calculations by a registered civil or structural engineer or licensed architect, but must be a minimum of 12 inches for one- and two-story structures and 15 inches for three-story structures. 
10.  Bent reinforcing bar between exterior footing and slab must be omitted when floor is designed as an independent, floating slab. 
11.  Fireplace footings must be reinforced with a horizontal grid located three inches above the bottom of the footing and consisting of not less than No. 4 bars at twelve inches on center each way. Vertical chimney reinforcing bars must be hooked under the grid. 
12.  Underground utility conduits must be installed prior to foundation inspection and must extend beyond the foundation. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.105 - Swimming pool enclosures and safety devices. 
CBC Section 202's references to "Barrier" and "Swimming Pools" are amended as follows: 
 Barrier. Barrier is a fence, wall, building wall, or any combination of these that completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool. 
 Swimming Pools. Any body of water created by artificial means which is designed, intended for use, or used for swimming or immersion purposes, which has a water depth exceeding 18 inches. The term, "pool," includes swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, above-and below-ground, and vinyl-lined pools; pool does not include plumbing fixtures such as bathtubs nor does it apply to man-made lakes, reservoirs, farm ponds, or ponds used primarily for public park purposes, water conservation purposes, irrigation purposes or for the watering of livestock. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.110 - Residential swimming pools. 
The "exception" to Section 3109.4 of the CBC is deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.115 - Barrier height and clearances. 
Section 3109.4.1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows: 
 3109.4.1 Barrier Height and Clearances. The top of the barrier must be at least 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier must be two inches measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, the barrier is authorized to be at ground level or mounted on top of the pool structure, and the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier must be four inches. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.120 - Gates. 
Section 3109.4.1.7 of the CBC is amended to read as follows: 
 3109.4.1.7 Gates. Access gates must comply with the requirements of Sections 3109.4.1 through 3109.4.1.6 and must be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates must open outward away from the pool and must be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Doors or gates other than pedestrian access gates must have a self-latching device and must be equipped with lockable hardware or padlocks and must remain locked at all times when not in use. Release mechanisms must comply with Sections 1010.1.9 and 1109.13. Where release mechanisms of the self-latching device are located less than 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool, the release mechanism must be located on the pool side of the gate at least three inches below the top of the gate and the gate barrier may have no opening greater than one-half inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.125 - Swimming pools. 
Chapter 36 is added to the CBC to read as follows: 
CHAPTER 36 
SWIMMING POOLS 
 3601. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Chapter certain terms are defined as follows: 
 "Pool" means any body of water created by artificial means which is designed or used for swimming or immersion purposes by men, women, or children and which has a water depth exceeding 18 inches. The term pool includes swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and above- and below-ground vinyl-lined pools but does not apply to plumbing fixtures such as bathtubs; nor does it apply to man-made lakes, reservoirs, or farm ponds used primarily for public park purposes, water conservation, irrigation, or watering of livestock. 
 3602. POOL DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION. 
 (a) GENERAL. Pool design and construction must be accomplished in accordance with accepted engineering practice, in conformity with applicable code provisions, and be structurally suitable for the soil, topographic, and geologic conditions prevailing at the construction site. 
 (b) EXPANSIVE SOIL DESIGN. Pools constructed at grade must be designed on the assumption that their construction is to be in an area of moderately expansive soil having an expansion index of 51-90 and an equivalent fluid pressure of not less than 45 pounds per cubic foot (45 p.c.f.). Exception: Where tests indicate that soils at a pool site are non-expansive or have low expansion characteristics from the ground surface to the full depth of the pool, structural design must be based on an equivalent fluid pressures not less than 30 p.c.f. 
 In highly-expansive soils having an expansion index of 91-130, pools must be designed for not less than 60 p.c.f. equivalent fluid pressure. In very highly- expansive soils having an expansion index over 130, pool design will be subject to special requirements based on a site investigation, soil testing, and engineering analysis by a registered civil engineer to determine appropriate design parameters for the site. 
 (c) HYDROSTATIC UPLIFT. In areas of anticipated high water table, an approved hydrostatic relief system or device must be installed. 
 (d) THERMAL PROTECTION FOR PLASTIC PIPING. Between the inlet of pool water-heating equipment and any plastic water piping connected thereto, a check valve must be installed to prevent thermal damage to such piping due to backflow. Exception: When rapid or high-rate filters are employed, a check valve may be omitted. 
 Between the outlet of pool heating equipment and any plastic water piping connected thereto, not less than five feet of approved metal pipe must be installed for the purpose of dissipating heat. 
 (e) SAFEGUARDING SUCTION DRAINS. Bottom drains and suction intakes in pools and spas must be covered with grated or other protective devices, which cannot be removed except with tools. The slots or openings in these covers must be of such area, shape, and arrangement as to prevent bathers from being drawn thereto with such force as to constitute a safety hazard. 
 (f) GRAB BARS. Wherever egress from a pool by bathers is restricted by the presence of a vertical wall or other barrier, which extends more than 12 inches above the water at the pool's edge, permanent handrail, grab bars, or equivalent device(s) must be installed within 12 inches of the water surface capable of being securely grasped and adequate to support the weight of a user of the pool. 
 3603. DECKS. 
 (a) GENERAL. A deck must be provided around below-grade swimming pools except when special engineering design is furnished which indicates that such deck is not necessary for the purpose of maintaining the structural integrity of the pool, and/or for controlling surface water and moisture content in the soil adjacent to the pool. Decks are not required for spas and hot tubs. 
 (b) DECK DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION. Required decks must be constructed of concrete or other approved impervious material and be sloped to provide positive drainage away from the perimeter of the pool. Except as provided below, decks must have a minimum width of four feet and be at least 3-1/2 inches in thickness. Reinforcement must be No. 3 bars spaced not over 24 inches on center each way, or equivalent reinforcing. 
 Approved joints must be provided in the deck at corners, at maximum 10-foot intervals, and wherever necessary in order to control cracking, to allow for differential movement, and to minimize damage to the deck from such movement should it occur. Joints in decks and coping must be made watertight with an approved permanent resilient sealant. 
 (c) CUTOFF WALLS. At the outer perimeter of pool decks, a cutoff wall of approved material must be installed below-grade to a depth of at least 15 inches to form a permanent and effective vertical moisture barrier. 
 Exceptions: 
 1. A cutoff wall may be omitted when a deck of at least six feet wide is installed. 
 2. Decks less than four feet in width may be installed provided that the required cutoff wall is increased in depth beyond the minimum by an amount directly proportional to the reduction in deck width. 
 (d) PRE-SATURATION, HIGHLY EXPANSIVE SOILS. When the soil below a deck has an expansion index of 91 or greater, it must be saturated with water to a depth of at least 18 inches before installing the deck. 
 (e) DECK BONDING. When a deck is installed, whether structurally required or not, the reinforcing installed in the deck must be electrically bonded together with the pool shell reinforcing and metal parts of electrical equipment associated with the pool water recirculation system and with miscellaneous metal accessories, such as pool slides, diving boards, and spring boards, in accordance with CEC Article 680.26. 
 3604. DRAINAGE AND DISPOSAL. 
 (a) SURFACE WATER. Surface water from pool decks must be collected and conducted through non-erosive subsurface drainage devices to a street, storm drain, or other approved watercourse or disposal area. 
 (b) WASTEWATER. Pool waste must be disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the environmental health officer. 
 (c) DRYWELLS. Drywells cannot be employed for pool wastewater disposal except when specifically approved for the purpose, and when it has been determined that such installation is not likely to have adverse effects on the structural stability of the pool or other structures on the site. The Building Official may require a percolation test, soils report, and/or geological report to make such a determination. 
 3605. SPECIAL INSPECTION. Special inspection, as required by CBC § 1705A.3, must be provided for pneumatically-placed concrete (gunite) in swimming pools. 
 3606. FENCING AND GATES. Any person, firm, or corporation in possession of land—either as owner in fee, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, licensee or any type of legal estate upon which is situated a pool as defined above—must at all times maintain on the lot, or premises, a fence or wall not less than five feet in height which completely surrounds such pool or body of water provided, however, that a dwelling or accessory building may be used as a part of such enclosure. Such fence must be constructed of durable material and must be designed to withstand a horizontal force of at least 20 pounds per lineal foot at the top of the fence or top of the railing. Openings, holes, or gaps therein must be no larger than four inches wide, except for openings closed by doors or gates. Fences may not have a configuration which provides a ladder-like access to the pool area. 
 Each gate or door opening through a pool enclosure must be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device capable of keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in use. 
 Exceptions: 
 1. Doors in Group R, Division 1, 2 and 3 occupancies which form part of a pool enclosure. 
 2. Gates used primarily for ingress and egress of equipment but not persons to the pool area, and which are kept padlocked when not in use. 
 Required latching devices must be installed not less than 60 inches above ground level and on the water side of the gate. 
 The Building Official may make modifications and accept alternatives to the fencing requirements in individual cases upon a showing of good cause with respect to the height, nature or location of the fence, wall, gates, or latches, or the necessity for such alternative, provided that protection is not reduced. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.130 - Scope. 
Section J101.1 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 J101.1. Scope. This appendix regulates excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments; the administrative procedure for issuing permits; and approval of plans and inspection of grading construction. For purposes of this section, the term Building Official means City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.135 - Ministerial and discretionary permits. 
Section J101.1.1 of the CBC Appendix is added to read as follows: 
 J101.1.1. Ministerial and Discretionary Permits. Issuing or denying a grading permit is a ministerial act for the purposes Public Resources Code § 21080 (b)(1) except in the following four circumstances: 
 1. Where the average natural slope within the area to be graded exceeds 109 percent and the amount of excavation or fill exceeds 10,000 cubic yards; 
 2. Where the average natural slope within the area to be graded exceeds 35 percent and the amount of excavation or fill exceeds 1,000 cubic yards; 
 3. Where the proposed graded slopes exceed 25 feet in vertical height; or 
 4. Where the proposed grading would occur within a waterway or wetland. 
 The discretionary powers exercised in conjunction with issuing or denying of discretionary grading permits are exercised by the Building Official, or by the city council on appeal. Those discretionary powers are limited to the issuance of the permit, subject to conditions or changes in the project needed to mitigate significant environmental effects, which would otherwise result from the grading; or denying the permit in order to avoid such effects; or issuing the permit despite such effects upon making appropriate findings. 
 With respect to discretionary grading permits, the Building Official can issue or deny the permit only after holding a public hearing, considering the applicable environmental document, if any, and certifying that such document was prepared in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The Building Official must give at least 15 days written notice of such hearing to the applicant for the permit and to any owner of real property located within 300 feet of the boundaries of the lot to which the application relates and to the property whose interests might be substantially affected by a permit. The notice must specify the time, date, and place of the hearing; give a general description of the grading to which the permit application pertains; give a general description of the property on which the grading would occur; and state that any interested person will be given an opportunity to present relevant evidence at the hearing. 
 Any interested person may appeal the Building Official's decision by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk along with a fee established by city council resolution within 10 days after the Building Official's decision. The hearing on appeal must be noticed and conducted by the city council in the same manner as the original hearing before the Building Official, except that notice must also be given to the appellant. The city council's decision is final and must be in writing. A copy of the decision must be served upon the applicant for the permit and upon the appellant. If the decision is to issue a grading permit previously denied or to modify a grading permit previously issued by the Building Official, the written order constitutes the permit and must include appropriate conditions. 
 A ministerial grading permit is operative immediately upon issuance. A discretionary grading permit becomes operative on the 15th calendar day after being issued or, in the case of an appeal, on the date the city council issues its decision. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.140 - Flood hazard areas. 
Section J101.2 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 J101.2 Flood Hazard Areas. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to grading, excavation and earthworks construction, including fills and embankments, in floodways within flood hazard areas. Grading in these areas is be regulated under Section 16.34.450 of the Camarillo Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.145 - Definitions. 
The terms "Grade, Finished", "Key", and "Isolated, Self-Contained Area" in Section J102.1 of the CBC Appendix are amended to read as follows: 
 GRADE, FINISHED. The final grade of the site that conforms to the approved plan. 
 KEY. A designed compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope. 
 ISOLATED, SELF-CONTAINED AREA is that portion of a parcel of land, or of contiguous parcels of land, under a single ownership which is more than 100 feet from the exterior boundary of such parcel, or parcels, and meets any one of the following three criteria: 
 1. The portion is used for growing crops or raising livestock for sale, but not for building sites or for the construction of earthfills, which will impound water to a depth of more than 5 feet. 
 2. The portion contains water impounding structures constructed under the direct control of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. 
 3. The portion contains oilfield operations, involving the exploration for, or the development or production of oil, which is established under an existing land use entitlement and all of the following criteria are met: 
 (a) The portion is not visible from a publicly maintained street, road or highway within 1.0 horizontal mile of such portion; 
 (b) The portion is not visible from a private residence located within one horizontal mile of such portion, unless the owner and the tenant of such residence have signed a written waiver of this criterion; and 
 (c) The portion is so located and configured that grading cannot cause a significant increase in the volume of silt or debris deposited on downstream property owned by any person other than the owner of the portion.  
16.04.150 - Permits. 
Section J103 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 Section J103. Permits Required. 
 J103.1 Permits Required. Except as specified in Section J103.2 of this code, no person may do any grading without first having obtained a grading permit from the Building Official. 
 J103.2 Exempted Work. A grading permit is not required for the following: 
 1. When approved by the Building Official, grading in an isolated, self-contained area if there is no danger to private or public property. 
 2. An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This does not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation, or exempt any excavation, having an unsupported height greater than 5 feet (1524 mm) after the completion of such structure. 
 3. Cemetery graves. 
 4. Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations. 
 5. Excavations for wells or tunnels or utilities. 
 6. Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay where established and provided for by law, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressure upon, any adjacent or contiguous property. 
 7. Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists. 
 8. An excavation that: (1) is less than two feet (610 mm) in depth, or (2) does not create a cut slope greater than five feet (1524 mm) in height and steeper than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50 percent slope). 
 9. A fill less than one foot (305 mm) in depth and placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than one unit vertical in five units horizontal (20 percent slope), or less than three feet (914 mm) in depth, not intended to support structures, that does not exceed 50 cubic yards (38.3 m 3 ) on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course. 
 Exemption from the permit requirements of this chapter must not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.155 - Grading Permit Requirements. 
Section J104 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 Section J104. Grading Permit Requirements. 
 J104.1 Permits Required. Except as exempted in Section J103.2 of this code, no person may do any grading without first obtaining a grading permit from the Building Official. A separate permit must be obtained for each site and may cover both excavations and fills. 
 J104.2 Application. The provisions of Section 106.3.1 CBC Appendix, Chapter 1, are applicable to grading. Additionally, the application must state the estimated quantities of work involved. 
 J104.3 Grading Designation. Grading in excess of 5,000 cubic yards (3825 m 3 ) must be performed in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a civil engineer, and will be designated as engineered grading. Grading involving less than 5,000 cubic yards (3825 m 3 ) will be designated regular grading, unless the permittee chooses to have the grading performed as engineered grading, or the Building Official determines that special conditions or unusual hazards exist, in which case grading must conform to the requirements for engineered grading. 
 J104.3.1 All grading exceeding 1,000 cubic yards must be performed in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a civil engineer, and will be designated as engineered grading. Grading involving less than 1,000 cubic yards will be designated regular grading, unless the permittee, with the Building Official's approval, chooses to have the grading performed as engineered grading. 
 J104.4 Engineered Grading Requirements. Application for a grading permit must, at a minimum, be accompanied by, but not be limited to, two sets of plans and specifications, and supporting data consisting of a soils engineering report and engineering geology report. The plans and specifications must be prepared and signed by an individual licensed by the State to prepare such plans or specifications when required by the Building Official. 
 Specifications must contain information covering construction and material requirements. 
 Plans must be drawn to scale upon substantial mylar; must be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed; and show in detail that they will conform to the provisions of this code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans must give the location of the work, the name and address of the owner, and the person who prepared the plans. 
 The plans must include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
 1. General vicinity of the proposed site. 
 2. Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of terrain and area drainage. 
 3. Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to be achieved by the grading, and proposed drainage channels and related construction. 
 4. Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams, and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a part of, the proposed work together with a map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains. 
 5. Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed, and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners that are within 15 feet (4572 mm) of the property, or that may be affected by the proposed grading operations. 
 6. Recommendations included in the soils engineering report and the engineering geology report must be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. When approved by the Building Official, specific recommendations contained in the soils engineering report and the engineering geology report, which are applicable to grading, may be included by reference. 
 7. The dates of the soils engineering and engineering geology reports together with the names, addresses and phone numbers of the firms, or individuals, who prepared the reports. 
 J104.5 Soils Engineering Report. See CMC § 16.38 Geotechnical Studies. 
 J104.6 Engineering Geology Report. See CMC § 16.38 Geotechnical Studies. 
 J104.7 Liquefaction Study. The Building Official may require a geotechnical investigation in accordance with Sections 1802.4 when, during the course of an investigation, all of the following conditions are discovered, the report must address the potential for liquefaction: 
 1. Shallow ground water, 50 feet (15240 mm) or less. 
 2. Unconsolidated sandy alluvium. 
 3. Seismic design categories D and E. 
 J104.8 Regular Grading Requirements. Each application for a grading permit must, at a minimum, be accompanied by, but not be limited to, a plan in sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work. The plans must give the location of the work, the name of the owner, and the name of the person who prepared the plan. The plan must include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
 1. General vicinity of the proposed site. 
 2. Limiting dimensions and depth of cut and fill. 
 3. Location of any buildings or structures where work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures within 15 feet (4572 mm) of the proposed grading. 
 J104.9 Issuance. The provisions of Section 105.1 Appendix Chapter 1 are applicable to grading permits. The Building Official may require that grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur which incur weather-generated problems not considered at the time the permit was issued. The Building Official may require professional inspection and testing by the soils engineer. When the Building Official has cause to believe that geologic factors may be involved, the grading will be required to conform to engineered grading. 
 J104.10 Grading Bonds. No grading bond is required if less than 1000 cubic yards will be graded. For amounts over 1000 cubic yards, a grading bond in the amount of $3.00 for each cubic yard must be posted. 
 J104.11 Grading Plan Review Fees. Grading plan check fees must be in the amounts set by city council resolution. There is a surcharge set by city council resolution for every plan check after the first three. 
 J104.12 Grading Permit Fees. Grading permit fees are set by city council resolution. 
 J104.13 Soils Geology Report Review. Should a soils and geology report be required for issuing a grading permit, in addition to any other fees, the permittee must reimburse the city for the cost of all consultant reviews and analysis of such reports and an administrative cost as set by city council resolution. 
 J104.14 Geotechnical Studies. Geotechnical studies must conform to the requirements of Chapter 16.38 of the Camarillo Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.160 - Grading inspection. 
Section J105 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 Section J105. Grading Inspection. 
 J105.1 General. Grading operations for which a permit is required will be subject to inspection by the Building Official. Professional inspection of grading operations must be provided by the Civil Engineer, Soils Engineer and the Engineering Geologist retained to provide such services, in accordance with Section J105.5 for engineered grading. 
 J105.2 Civil Engineer. The Civil Engineer must provide professional inspection within such engineer's area of technical specialty, which will consist of observation and review as to the establishment of line, grade, and surface drainage of the development area. If revised plans are required during the course of the work, they must be prepared by the Civil Engineer. 
 J105.3 Soils Engineer. The Soils Engineer must provide professional inspection within such engineer's area of technical specialty, which will include observation during grading and testing for required compaction. The Soils Engineer must provide sufficient observation during the preparation of the natural ground and placement and compaction of the fill to verify that such work is being performed in accordance with the conditions of the approved plan and the appropriate requirements of this chapter. Revised recommendations relating to conditions differing from the approved soils engineering and engineering geology reports must be submitted to the permittee, the Building Official and the Civil Engineer. 
 J105.4 Engineering Geologist. The Engineering Geologist must provide professional inspection within such engineer's area of technical specialty, which will include professional inspection of the bedrock excavation to determine if the conditions encountered are in conformance with the approved report. Revised recommendations relation to the conditions differing from the approved engineering geology report must be submitted to the Soils Engineer. 
 J105.5 Permittee. The permittee is responsible for the work performed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in conformance with the provisions of this code and the permittee must engage consultants, if required, to provide professional inspections on a timely basis. The permittee will act as a coordinator between the consultants, the contractor, and the Building Official. In the event of changed conditions, the permittee is responsible for informing the Building Official of such changes and must provide revised plans for approval. 
 J105.6 Building Official. The Building Official will inspect the project at the various stages of work requiring approval to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants. 
 J105.7 Notice of Non-compliance. If, in the course of fulfilling their respective duties under this chapter, the Civil Engineer, the Soils Engineer, or the Engineering Geologist finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this chapter or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies must be reported immediately in writing to the permittee and the Building Official. 
 J105.8 Transfer of Responsibility. If the civil engineer, the soils engineer or the engineering geologist of record is changed during grading, the work must be stopped until the replacement has agreed in writing to accept their responsibility within the area of technical competence for approval upon completion of the work. It must be the duty of the permittee to notify the Building Official in writing of such change prior to the recommencement of such grading. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.165 - Cuts. 
Section J106 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 Section J106. Cuts. 
 J106.1u General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soils engineering or engineering geology report. Cuts must conform to the provisions of this section. In the absence of an approved soils engineering report, these provisions may be waived for minor cuts not intended to support structures. 
 J106.2v Slope. The slope of cut surfaces may be no steeper than is safe for the intended use, and may not be steeper than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50 percent slope), unless permitted by the Building Official based on the permittee furnishing a soils engineering or an engineering geology report, or both, stating that the site has been investigated and giving an opinion that a cut at a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard to public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.170 - Benching details. 
Section J107 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 Figure J107.3 Benching Details is deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.175 - Surface preparation. 
Section J107.2 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 J107.2 Preparation of Ground. Fill slopes may not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50 percent slope). The ground surface must be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, non-complying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill and, where slopes are steeper than one unit vertical in five units horizontal (20 percent slope) and the height is greater than five feet (1524 mm), by benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the soils engineer. The bench under the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than one unit vertical in five units horizontal (20 percent slope) must be at least ten feet (3048 mm) wide. The area beyond the toe of fill must be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain must be provided. When fill is to be placed over a cut, the bench under the toe of fill must be at least ten feet (3048 mm) wide, but the cut must be made before placing the fill and acceptance by the soils engineer, or engineering geologist, or both, as a suitable foundation for fill. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.180 - Fill material. 
Section J107.3 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 J107.3 Fill Material. Detrimental amounts of organic material are not permitted in fills. Except as permitted by the Building Official, no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than 12 inches (305 mm) may be buried or placed in fills. 
 EXCEPTION: The Building Official may permit placement of larger rock when the soils engineer properly devises a method of placement, and continuously inspects its placement and approves the fill stability. 
 The following conditions must also apply: 
 1. Prior to issuance of the grading permit, potential rock disposal areas must be delineated on the grading plan. 
 2. Rock sizes greater than 12 inches (305 mm) in maximum dimension must be ten feet (3048 mm) or more below grade, measured vertically. 
 3. Rocks must be placed so as to assure filling of all voids with well-graded soil. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.185 - Compaction. 
Section J107.4 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 J107.4 Compaction. All fill material must be compacted to 90 percent of maximum density as determined by ASTM D 1557, Modified Proctor, in lifts not exceeding 12 inches (305 mm) in depth. 
 [DSA-SS and OSHPD 1, 2 & 4] This section establishes minimum requirements only. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.190 - Slope. 
Section J107.5 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 J107.5 Slope. The slope of fill surfaces may be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Fill slopes may be no steeper than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50 percent slope). 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.195 - Setbacks—General. 
Section J108.1 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 J108.1 General. Cut and fill slopes must be set back from the property lines in accordance with this section. Setback dimensions are the horizontal distances measured perpendicular to the property line and must be as shown in Figure J108.1. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.200 - Top of cut slope. 
Section J108.2 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 J108.2 Top of Cut Slope. The top of cut slopes may not be made nearer to a site boundary line than one-fifth of the vertical height of cut with a minimum of 2 feet (610 mm) and a maximum of 10 feet (3048 mm). The setback may need to be increased for any required interceptor drains. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.205 - Toe of fill slopes. 
Section J108.3 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 J108.3 Toe of Fill Slope. The toe of a fill slope may not be made nearer to the site boundary line than one-half the height of the slope with a minimum of 2 feet (610 mm) and a maximum of 20 feet (6096 mm). Where a fill slope is to be located near the site boundary and the adjacent off-site property is developed, special precautions must be incorporated in the work as the Building Official deems necessary to protect the adjoining property from damage as a result of such grading. These precautions may include but are not limited to: 
 1. Additional setbacks. 
 2. Provision for retaining or slough walls. 
 3. Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope surface to minimize erosion. 
 4. Provisions for the control of surface waters. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.210 - Setbacks. 
Section J108.4 of the CBC Appendix is added to read as follows: 
 J108.4 Modification of Slope Location. The Building Official may approve alternate setbacks. The Building Official may require an investigation and recommendation by a qualified engineer or engineering geologist to demonstrate that the intent of this section has been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.215 - Figure—Drainage dimensions. 
Figure J108.1 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 Figure J108.1 Drainage Dimensions is replaced with the following Figure: 
  
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.220 - Drainage and terracing—General. 
Section J109.1 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 J109.1 General. Unless otherwise indicated on the approved grading plan, drainage facilities and terracing must conform to the provisions of this section for cut or fill slopes steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3 percent slope). 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.225 - Terrace. 
Section J109.2 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 J109.2 Terrace. Terraces at least six feet (1829 mm) in width must be established at not more than 30-foot (9144 mm) vertical intervals on all cut or fill slopes to control surface drainage and debris, except that where only one terrace is required, it must be at mid-height. For cut or fill slopes greater than 60 feet (18 288 mm) and up to 120 feet (36 576 mm) in vertical height, one terrace at approximately mid-height must be 12 feet (3658 mm) in width. Terrace widths and spacing for cut and fill slopes greater than 120 feet (36 576 mm) in height must be designed by the civil engineer and approved by the Building Official. Suitable access must be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance. 
 Swales or ditches on terraces must: (a) have a minimum gradient of five percent; (b) be paved with reinforced concrete not less than three inches (76 mm) in thickness, or an approved equal paving; (c) have a minimum depth at the deepest point of one foot (305 mm); and (d) have a minimum paved width of five feet (1524 mm). 
 A single run of a swale or ditch may not collect runoff from a tributary area exceeding 13,500 square feet (1254.2 m2) (projected) without discharging into a down-drain. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.230 - Interceptor drains. 
Section J109.3 of the CBC Appendix to amended to read as follows: 
 J109.3 Interceptor Drains. Paved interceptor drains must be installed along the top of all cut slopes where the tributary drainage area above slopes toward the cut and has a drainage path greater than 40 feet (12 192 mm) measured horizontally. Interceptor drains must be paved with a minimum of three inches (76 mm) of concrete or gunite and reinforced, and must have a minimum depth of 12 inches (305 mm) and a minimum paved width of 30 inches (762 mm) measured horizontally across the drain. The slope of drain must be approved by the Building Official.  
16.04.235 - Disposal. 
Section J109.4 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 J109.4 Disposal. All drainage facilities must be designed to carry waters to the nearest practicable drainage way approved by the Building Official or other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of ground in the area of discharge must be prevented by installation of non-erosive down-drains or other devices. Building pads must have a drainage gradient of two percent toward approved drainage facilities, unless waived by the Building Official. 
 EXCEPTION: The gradient from the building pad may be one percent if all of the following conditions exist throughout the permit area: 
 1. No proposed fills are greater than ten feet (3048 mm) in maximum depth. 
 2. No proposed finish cut or fill slope faces have a vertical height in excess of ten feet (3048 mm). 
 3. No existing slope faces steeper than one unit vertical in ten units horizontal (10 percent slope) have a vertical height in excess of one foot (3048 mm). 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.240 - Erosion control—General. 
Section J110.1 of the CBC Appendix is amended to read as follows: 
 J110.1 General. The faces of cut and fill slopes must be prepared and maintained to control erosion. This control may be permitted to consist of effective planting. 
 Exception: Erosion control measures need not be provided on cut slopes not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the materials. 
 Erosion control for the slopes must be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.245 - Completion of work. 
Section J113 is added to the CBC Appendix to read as follows: 
 Section J113. Completion of Work. 
 J113.1 Final Reports. Upon completion of the rough-grading work and at the final completion of work, the following reports, drawings, and supplements are required for engineered grading, or when professional inspection is performed for regular grading, as applicable. 
 1. An as-built grading plan prepared by the civil engineer retained to provide such services in accordance with Section J105.5 showing original ground-surface elevations, as graded-ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns, and the location and elevations of surface drainage facilities and of the outlets of subsurface drains. As-constructed locations, elevations, and details of subsurface drains must be shown as reported by the soils engineer. Civil engineers must state that to the best of their knowledge that the work within their area of responsibility was done in accordance with the final approved grading plan. 
 2. A report prepared by the soils engineer retained to provide such services in accordance with Section J105.5, including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests, other substantiating data, and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the approved soils engineering investigation report. Soils engineers must submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibilities is in accordance with the approved soils report and applicable provisions of this chapter. 
 3. A report prepared by the engineering geologist retained to provide such services in accordance with Section J105.5, including a final description of the geology of the site and any new information disclosed during grading and the effect of the same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. Engineering geologists must submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibility is in accordance with the approved engineering geologist report and applicable provisions of this chapter. 
 4. The grading contractor must submit in a form prescribed by the Building Official a Statement of Conformance to the as-built plan and the specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.250 - Notification of completion. 
Section J114 is added to the CBC Appendix to read as follows: 
 J114. Notification of Completion. The permittee must notify the Building Official when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval may not be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all erosion-control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan, and the required reports have been submitted. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.255 - California plumbing code administration provisions. 
The administrative provisions of the California Building Code contained in Chapter 1, Division II, of that Code and as modified in the Camarillo Municipal Code, are used for the administrative provisions governing the California Plumbing Code, including violation and penalty provisions, which are governed by Camarillo Municipal Code § 16.04.310. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.256 - Water conserving fixtures. 
Chapter 4 (Plumbing Fixtures and Fixture Fittings) of the California Plumbing Code (CPC) is amended, as follows: 
A.  Section 401.3.1 is added to the CPC, as follows: 
"401.3.1 Definitions. For the purposes of this code, the following terms are defined as follows: 
1.  Metered Faucet. A faucet that actuation dispenses water of a predetermined volume or for a predetermined period of time. The volume or cycle duration can be fixed or adjustable. 
2.  On demand recirculation system. Upon activation from a remote device, a pump circulates water through the hot water system until the water in the pipe reaches a desired temperature. Fixtures receive hot water eliminating the need to run water until it reaches a hot temperature. 
3.  Point of use hot water heater. A tankless water heater that serves an individual fixture. 
4.  Sensor operated self-closing faucet. A faucet designed to start operation automatically upon motion activation and which closes itself automatically as motion is stopped." 
B.  Section 407.2.1.2 of the CPC is amended to read as follows: 
"407.2.1.2 Residential Lavatory Faucets. [HCD 1] the maximum flow rate of residential lavatory faucets may not exceed 1.2 gallons (4.54 L) per minute at 60 psi. The minimum flow rate of residential lavatory faucets may not be less than 0.8 gallons (3.03 L) per minute at 20 psi. All residential lavatory faucets must be sensor operated self-closing." 
C.  Section 411.2.1 of the CPC is amended to read as follows: 
"411.2.1 Dual Flush Water Closets. Dual flush water closets must be installed in all R occupancies. The effective flush volume for dual flush water closets must be defined as the composite, average volume of two reduced flushes and one full flush. 
Exception: Single flush water closest, which use less than 1.28 GPF, may be installed in R occupancies as an alternate to dual flush water closets, with prior approval from the Building Official." 
D.  Section 412.1 of the CPC is amended to read as follows: 
"412.1 Application. Urinals must comply with ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1, ASME A112.19.19, or CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124. Wall-mounted urinals must have an average consumption not to exceed 0.125 gallons (0.47 L) per flush. Other urinals must have an average water consumption not to exceed 0.125 gallons (0.47 L) per flush." 
E.  Section 412.1.2 of the CPC is amended to read as follows: 
"Section 412.1.2 Floor-Mounted Urinals. Floor-mounted urinals must have an average consumption not to exceed 0.125 gallons (0.47 L) per flush." 
F.  Section 417.6 is added to the CPC, as follows: 
"Section 417.6 Metered Faucets. All lavatory faucets in non-residential restrooms must be sensor operated, self-closing metering faucets. Metered faucets must deliver a maximum of .25 gallons (0.95 L) of water per use."" 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 3, 3-14-2018)  
16.04.257 - Hot water recirculation systems. 
Chapter 5 (Water Heaters) of the CPC is amended to add Section 501.2, as follows: 
"501.2 Hot Water Recirculation Systems. All water heaters serving newly constructed single dwelling units must install an on-demand recirculation system. If hot water is provided at a non-residential lavatory, it must be provided by a point of use hot water heater." 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 3, 3-14-2018)  
16.04.260 - California mechanical code administration provisions. 
The administrative provisions of the California Building Code contained in Chapter 1, Division II, of that Code and as modified in the Camarillo Municipal Code, are used for the administrative provisions governing the California Mechanical Code, including violation and penalty provisions, which are governed by Camarillo Municipal Code § 16.04.310. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.265 - California electrical code administration provisions. 
The administrative provisions of the California Building Code contained in Chapter 1, Division II, of that Code and as modified in of the Camarillo Municipal Code, are used for the administrative provisions governing the California Electrical Code, including violation and penalty provisions, which are governed by Camarillo Municipal Code § 16.04.310. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.270 - California residential code administration provisions. 
The administrative provisions of the California Building Code contained in Chapter 1, Division II of that Code and as modified in of the Camarillo Municipal Code, are used for the administrative provisions governing the California Residential Code, including violation and penalty provisions, which are governed by Camarillo Municipal Code § 16.04.310. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.275 - Materials and construction methods for exterior wildfire exposure. 
Section R337.1.1 of the CRC is amended to read as follows: 
 R337.1.1 Scope. Requirements for materials and construction methods for exterior wildfire exposure are found in Chapter 7A of the California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.280 - Foundations application. 
Section R401.1 of the CRC is amended as follows: 
 R401.1. The provisions of this chapter control the design and construction of the foundation and foundation spaces for all buildings. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the design and construction of foundations in areas prone to flooding as established by Table R301.2 (1) must meet the provisions of Section R322. Wood foundations must be designed and installed in accordance with AF&PA PWF (American Forest & Paper Association permanent wood foundation). 
 Exception: The provisions of this chapter are permitted to be used for wood foundations only in the following situations: 
 1. In buildings that have no more than two floors and a roof. 
 2. When interior basement and foundation walls are constructed at intervals not exceeding 50 feet. 
 Wood foundations in Seismic Design Category D0, D1, D2, or E, are not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.283 - Minimum Size. 
Section R403.1.1 of the CRC is amended to read as follows: 
 R403.1.1 The minimum width, (W), and thickness for concrete footings must be in accordance with Table 403.1 and Figure R403.1(1) or R403.1.3, as applicable. The footing width must be based on the load-bearing value of the soil in accordance with Table R401.4.1. Footing projections, P, must be not less than 2 inches and may not exceed the thickness of the footing. Footing thickness and projection for fireplaces must be in accordance with Section R1001.2. The size of footings supporting piers and columns will be based on the tributary load and allowable soil pressure in accordance with Table R401.4.1. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.285 - Footings. 
Sections R403.1.2, R403.1.3, R403.1.4, R403.1.5, and R403.1.6.1 of the CRC are amended to read as follows: 
 R403.1.2 Exterior walls of buildings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E, must be supported by continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete footings. Other footing materials or systems must be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice. The braced wall panels at exterior walls of buildings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2 and E must be supported by continuous footings. All required interior braced wall panels in buildings must be supported by continuous footings. 
 The exception is deleted in its entirety. 
 R403.1.3 Footing and Stem wall reinforcing in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2 and E. Concrete footings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E, as established in Table R301.2(1), must have minimum reinforcement in accordance with this section and Figure R403.1.3. Reinforcement must be installed with support and cover in accordance with Section R403.1.3.5. 
 R403.1.3.1 Concrete stem walls with concrete footings. In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E, where a construction joint is created between a concrete footing and a concrete stem wall, a minimum of one No. 4 vertical bar must be installed at not more than four feet (4') on center. The vertical bar must have a standard hook and extend to the bottom of the footing and must support and cover as specified in Section R608.5.4.5. A minimum of one No. 4 horizontal bar must be installed within 12 inches of the top of the stem wall and one No. 4 horizontal bar must be located 3 to 4 inches from the bottom of the footing. 
 R403.1.3.2 Masonry stem walls with concrete footings. In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E, where a masonry stem wall is supported on a concrete footing, a minimum of one No. 4 vertical bar must be installed at not more than four feet (4') on center. The vertical bar must have a standard hook and extend to the bottom of the footing and must have support and cover as specified in Section R403.1.3.5.3 and extend a minimum of 14 inches into the stem wall. Standard hooks must comply with Section R608.5.4.5. A minimum of one No. 4 horizontal bar must be installed within 12 inches of the top of the wall and one No. 4 horizontal bar must located 3 to 4 inches from the bottom of the footing. Masonry stem walls must be solid grouted. 
 R403.1.3.3 Slabs-on-ground with turned-down footings. In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E, slabs on ground cast monolithically with turned-down footings must have a minimum of one No. 4 bar at the top and the bottom of the footing or one No. 5 bar or two No. 4 bars in the middle third of the footing depth. 
 Where the slab is cast monolithically with the footing, No. 3 or larger vertical dowels with standard hooks on each end must be installed at not more than 4 feet on center in accordance with Figure R403.1.3, Detail 2. Standard hooks must comply with Section R608.5.4.5. 
 R403.1.3.4 Interior bearing and braced wall footings in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E. In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E, interior footings supporting bearing walls or braced wall panels, and cast monolithically with a slab on grade, must extend to a depth of not less than 12 inches below grade. 
 R403.1.3.5 Reinforcement. Footing and stem wall reinforcement must comply with Sections R403.1.3.5.1 through R403.1.2.5.4. 
 R403.1.3.5.1 Steel reinforcement must comply with the requirements of ASTM A615, A706, or A996. ASTM A996 bars produced from rail steel must be Type R. The minimum yield strength must be 40,000 psi (Grade 40) (276 MPa). 
 R403.1.3.5.2 Location of reinforcement in wall. The center if the vertical reinforcement in stem walls must be located at the centerline of the wall. Horizontal and vertical reinforcement must be located in footings and stem walls to provide the minimum cover required by Section R403.1.3.5.3. 
 R403.1.3.5.3 Support and cover. Reinforcement must be secured in the proper location in the forms with the wire or other bar support system to prevent displacement during the concrete placement operation. Steel reinforcement in concrete cast against the earth must have a minimum cover of three inches. Minimum cover for reinforcement in concrete cast in removable forms that will be exposed to the earth or weather must be 1 ½ inches for No. 5 bars and smaller, and 2 inches for No. 6 bars and larger. For concrete cast in removable forms that will not be exposed to the earth or weather, and for concrete cast in stay-in-place forms, minimum cover must be ¾ inch. 
 R403.1.3.5.4 Lap splices. Vertical and horizontal reinforcement must be the longest lengths practical. Where splices are necessary in reinforcement, the length of the lap splice must be in accordance with Table R608.5.4(1) and Figure R608.5.4(1). The maximum gap between noncontact parallel bars at a lap splice may not exceed the smaller of one-fifth the required lap length and 6 inches [see Figure R608.5.4(1)]. 
 R403.1.3.6 is deleted in its entirety. 
 R403.1.4 Minimum depth. Exterior footings must be placed not less than 27 inches below the undisturbed ground surface unless specified by a current soils report. 
 R403.1.4.1 is deleted in its entirety. 
 R403.1.5 Slope. The top surface of footings must be level. The bottom surface of footings must be permitted to have a slope not exceeding one vertical unit in 10 units horizontal (10 percent slope). Footings must be stepped, where it is necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footing, or where the surface of the ground slopes more than one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope). 
 For structures located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E, stepped footings must be reinforced with four, ½-inch-diameter deformed reinforcing bars. Two bars must be placed at the top and bottom of the footings. 
 R403.1.6.1 Foundation anchorage in Seismic Design Categories C, D0, D1, D2, and E. In addition to the requirements of Section R403.1.6, the following requirements apply to wood light-frame structures in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E and wood light-framed townhouses in Seismic Design Category C. 
 1. Plate washers conforming to Section R602.11.1 must be provided for all anchor bolts over the full length or required braced wall lines except where approved anchor straps are used. Properly sized cut washers are permitted for anchor bolts in wall lines not containing braced wall panels. 
 2. Interior braced wall plates must have anchor bolts placed at not more than 6 feet on center and located within 12 inches of the ends of each plate section when supported on a continuous foundation, 
 3. Interior bearing wall sole plates must have anchor bolts spaced not more than 6 feet on center and located within 12 inches of the ends of each plate section when supported on a continuous foundation. 
 4. The maximum anchor bolt spacing must be 4 feet for buildings over two stories in height. 
 5. Stepped cripple walls must conform to Section R602.11.2.  
16.04.290 - Foundation Design. 
Section R403.1.8.2 is added and TABLE R403.1 of the CRC is amended to read as follows: 
 R403.1.8.2. When buildings are located on expansive soil having an expansion index greater than 50, gutters, downspouts, piping, and/or other non-erosive devices must be provided to collect and conduct rain water to pervious areas such as yards, open channels, or vegetated areas. Routing rooftop runoff via yard drains to the roadway or the storm water conveyance system is not permitted. 
Table 403.1 Foundations for stud bearing walls—Minimum requirements 1, 10, 11, 12 
Weighted expansion index 	Foundation for slab and raised floor systems 2, 5, 7 	Concrete slabs 	Pre-moistening of soils under footings, piers and slabs 5, 6 	Restrictions on piers under raised floors 
	No. of 
stories 	Stem thickness 8 	Footing width 9 	Footing thickness 	All 
perimeter 
footings 6 	Interior footings for slab and raised floors 6 	Reinforcement for continuous foundations 3, 8 	3-½? minimum thickness 
4? with E.I. over 51 		
					Depth below natural surface of ground and finish grade 		Reinforcement 4 	Total thickness of sand 		
		Inches 					
0-20 Very low non expansive 	1 	6 	12 	6 	12 	12 	1-#4 Top and bottom 	#4 @ 48? o/c. each way or #3 @ 36? o/c. each way 	2? 	Moistening of ground prior to placing concrete is recommended. 	Piers allowed for single floor loads only 
	2 	6 	15 	7 	18 	18 					
	3 	10 	18 	8 	24 	24 					
21-50 Low 	1 	6 	12 	6 	15 	12 	1-#4 Top and bottom 		4? 	3% over optimum moisture required to a depth of 18? below lowest adjacent grade. Testing required. 	Piers allowed for single floor loads only 
	2 	8 	15 	7 	18 	18 					
	3 	10 	18 	8 	24 	24 					
51-90 
Medium 	1 	6 	12 	8 	21 	12 	1-#4 Top and bottom 	#3 @ 24? o.c. each way 	4? 	3% over optimum moisture required to a depth of 18? below lowest adjacent grade. Testing required. 	Piers not allowed 
	2 	8 	15 	8 	21 	18 	# 3 bars @ 24? o.c. each way 12? into footing, 36? into slab 10 			
	3 	10 	18 	8 	24 	24 				
91-130 High 	1 	6 	12 	8 	27 	12 	2- # 4 Top and bottom 	# 3 @ 24? o.c. each way 	4? 	3% over optimum moisture required to a depth of 18? below lowest adjacent grade. Testing required. 	Piers not allowed 
	2 	8 	15 	8 	27 	18 					
	3 	10 	18 	8 	27 	24 	# 3 bars @ 24? o.c. each way 12? into footing, 36? into slab 10 			
Above 130 very high 	Special design by a licensed Architect or Engineer required 
 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.295 - Footnotes to table CRC R403.1. 
Table R403.1, Footnotes of the CRC is amended to read as follows: 
1.  Pre-moistening is required where specified in Table CRC R403.1 in order to achieve maximum and uniform expansion of the soil prior to construction and thus, limit structural distress caused by uneven expansion and shrinkage. Other systems, which do not include pre-moistening, may be approved by the Building Official, when such alternatives are shown to provide equivalent safeguards against the adverse effects of expansive soil. 
2.  Under-floor access crawl holes must be provided with curbs extending not less than six inches above adjacent grade to prevent surface water from entering the foundation area. 
3.  Reinforcement for continuous foundations must be placed not less than three inches above the bottom of the footing and not less than three inches below the top of the stem. 
4.  Slab reinforcement must be placed at mid-depth and continue to within two inches of the exterior face of the exterior footing walls. 
5.  Moisture content of soils must be maintained until foundations and piers are poured and a vapor barrier is installed. A test must be taken within 24 hours of each slab pour. 
6.  Crawl spaces under raised floors need not be pre-moistened except under interior footings. Interior footings which are not enclosed by a continuous perimeter foundation system or equivalent concrete or masonry moisture barrier must be designed and constructed, as specified for perimeter footings in Table CRC R403.1. 
7.  A grade beam not less than twelve-inches-by-twelve-inches in cross-sectional area, reinforced as specified for continuous foundations in Table CRC R403.1 must be provided at garage door openings. 
8.  Foundation stem walls which exceed a height of three times the stem thickness above lowest adjacent grade must be reinforced in accordance with Sections 18 and 19 in the CBC, or as required by engineering design, whichever is more restrictive. 
9.  Footing widths may be reduced upon submittal of calculations by a registered civil or structural engineer or licensed architect, but must be a minimum of 12 inches for one- and two-story structures and 15 inches for three-story structures. 
10.  Bent reinforcing bar between exterior footing and slab may be omitted when floor is designed as an independent, floating slab. 
11.  Fireplace footings must be reinforced with a horizontal grid located three inches above the bottom of the footing and consisting of not less than No. 4 bars at twelve inches on center each way. Vertical chimney reinforcing bars must be hooked under the grid. 
12.  Underground utility conduits must be installed prior to foundation inspection and must extend beyond the foundation. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.300 - Lateral support. 
Section R802.8 of the CRC is amended to read: 
 R802.8 Lateral Support. Roof-framing members and ceiling joists having a depth-to-thickness ratio exceeding 2 to 1 based on nominal dimensions must be provided with lateral support at points of bearing to prevent rotation. For roof rafters with ceiling joists attached per Table R602.3(1), the depth-thickness ratio for the total assembly will be determined using the combined thickness of the rafter, plus the attached ceiling joist.  
16.04.307 - Fee tables amended. 
Fees for building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, grading permits, and plan reviews are set by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.310 - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, or entity to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any land, building or structure, building service equipment, machine or equipment; or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this chapter or the codes adopted by reference pursuant to this chapter. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the codes adopted by reference pursuant to this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to remove, deface, alter, or obstruct from view a posted notice of the Building Official when such notice constitutes a stop work order or a warning of substandard or hazardous conditions or prohibits or restricts the occupancy or use of a building, structure, or building service equipment regulated by this chapter or the codes adopted by reference pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  Every violation of this code, or of any of the codes, adopted pursuant to this chapter, is a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Any person convicted of a misdemeanor, may be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both, such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.315 - Application of other codes. 
Section 102.3 of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 102.3 Application of Other Codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, must be done in accordance with the provisions of the California Building Code, California Existing Building Code, California Energy Code, California Electrical Code, California Mechanical Code, California Plumbing Code, California Residential Code, and the California Green Building Standards. Nothing in this code will be construed to cancel, modify, or set aside any provision of the Camarillo Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.320 - Fees. 
Section 103.5 of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out the department's responsibilities under this code are set by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.325 - Violation penalties under the IPMC. 
Section 106.4 of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 106.4 Violation Penalties. Section 16.04.310 of the CMC regulates the violation penalty provisions of the IPMC. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.330 - Unsafe structures and equipment. 
Section 108.1 of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 108.1 General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure may be condemned pursuant to the provisions of Section § 17920.3 of the California Health and Safety Code and this code. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.335 - Enclosures. 
Section 303.2 of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 303.2 Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas containing water more than 18 inches in depth must be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 60 inches in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers must be self-closing and self-latching. Where release mechanisms of the self-latching device are located less than 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the pool, the release mechanism must be located on the pool side of the gate at least three inches below the top of the gate and the barrier must have no opening greater than one-half inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism. Self-closing, self-latching gates must be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six inches from the gate post. No existing pool enclosure may be removed, replaced, or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. 
 The exception to section 302 is deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.340 - Exterior structure unsafe conditions. 
Section 304.1.1 of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 304.1.1 Unsafe Conditions. The following conditions are determined to be unsafe and must be repaired or replaced to comply with the California Building Codes or California Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings: 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.345 - Interior structure unsafe conditions. 
Section 305.1.1 of the IPMC is amended in part to read as follows: 
 305.1.1 Unsafe Conditions. The following conditions are determined to be unsafe and must be repaired, or replaced, to comply with the California Building Codes or California Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings: 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.350 - Component serviceability unsafe conditions. 
Section 306.1.1 of the IPMC is amended in part to read as follows: 
 306.1.1 Unsafe Conditions. The following conditions are determined to be unsafe and must be repaired, or replaced, to comply with the California Building Codes or the California Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings: 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.355 - Public toilet facilities. 
Section 502.5 of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 502.5 Public Toilet Facilities. Public toilet facilities must be maintained in a safe sanitary working condition in accordance with the California Plumbing Code. Except for periodic maintenance or cleaning, public access and use must be provided to the toilet facilities at all times during occupancy of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.360 - Water system. 
Section 505.1 of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower, drinking fountain, water closet, or other plumbing fixture must be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, and bathtubs and showers must be supplied with hot or tempered, and cold running water in accordance with the California Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.365 - Residential occupancies. 
Section 602.2 of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 602.2 Residential Occupancies. Dwellings must be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances may not be used, nor may portable unvented fuel-burning space heaters be used, as a means to provide required heating. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.370 - Heat supply. 
The "exceptions" in Section 602.3 of the IPMC are deleted in their entirety. 
 16.04.375 Occupiable work spaces. Section 602.4 of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces must be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F during the time the spaces are occupied. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.380 - Service. 
Section 604.2 of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment serves as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the California Electrical Code. Dwelling units must be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.385 - Electrical equipment—Water damage. 
Section 604.3.1.1 Electrical Equipment of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 604.3.1.1 Electrical Equipment. Electrical distribution equipment, motor circuits, power equipment, transformers, wire, cable, flexible cords, wiring devices, ground-fault circuit interrupters, surge protectors, molded case circuit breakers, low-voltage fuses, luminaries, ballasts, motors and electronic control, signaling, and communication equipment and that have been exposed to water must be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the California Building Code and California Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.390 - Electrical equipment - Fire damage. 
Section 604.3.2.1 Electrical Equipment of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 604.3.2.1 Electrical Equipment. Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures, including furnace, water-heater, security system, and power-distribution circuits that have been exposed to fire, must be replaced in accordance with the California Building Code and the California Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.395 - Locked doors. 
Section 702.3 of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 702.3 Locked Doors. All means of egress doors must be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where door hardware conforms to that permitted by the California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.396 - Fire protection systems. 
Sections 704.1 and 704.2.4 of the IPMC is amended to read as follows: 
 704.1 General. Systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate and alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof must be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the California Fire Code. 
 704.2.4 Smoke detection system. Smoke detectors listed in accordance with UL 268 and provided as part of the building's fire alarm system must be an acceptable alternative to single- and multiple-station smoke alarms and must comply with the following: 
 1. The fire alarm system must comply with all applicable requirements in Section 907 of the California Fire Code. 
 2. Activation of a smoke detector in a dwelling or sleeping unit must initiate alarm notification in the dwelling or sleeping unit in accordance with the Section 907.5.2 of the California Fire Code. 
 3. Activation of a smoke detector in a dwelling or sleeping unit must not activate alarm notification appliances outside the dwelling or sleeping unit provided that a supervisory signal is generated and monitored in accordance with Section 907.6.5 of the California Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
16.04.400 - Post-disaster safety assessment placards. 
Chapter 9 is added to the IPMC to read as follows: 
CHAPTER 9 
POST-DISASTER RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION 
 SECTION 901—POST-DISASTER SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS AND SECURITY 
 901.1 SCOPE. This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy after any natural or man-made disaster. It further authorizes the Building and Safety Department, as well as authorized representatives, to post appropriate placards at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. 
 901.2 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS. The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures, of all occupancies, regulated by the City following each natural or man-made disaster. 
 901.3 DEFINITIONS. 
 901.3.1 BUILDING OFFICIAL is defined in Section 16.04.020 of the Camarillo Municipal Code. 
 901.3.2 SAFETY ASSESSMENT is a visual examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining whether continued use or occupancy is appropriate following a natural or man-made disaster. 
 901.4 PLACARDS. The following official placards must be used to designate the condition of buildings or structures following a disaster. 
 901.4.1 (GREEN) INSPECTED - LAWFUL OCCUPANCY PERMITTED. Posted on any building or structure where no apparent hazard has been found. Placement of this placard does not mean that there is no damage to the building or structure. 
 901.4.2 (YELLOW) RESTRICTED OR LIMITED ENTRY. Posted on each damaged building or structure where damage has created a hazardous condition which justifies restricted occupancy. The Building Official who posts this placard will note in general terms the hazard created and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on occupancy. 
 901.4.3 (RED) UNSAFE - DO NOT ENTER OR OCCUPY. Posted on each damaged building or structure such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life or health. Buildings or structures posted with this placard may be entered only after authorization in writing by the building official. Safety assessment teams are authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard may not be used or considered as a demolition order. The official who posts this placard must make a note in general terms of the damage encountered. 
 901.4.4 SECURING OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES. Buildings or structures that have been determined by the Building Official to pose a threat to life safety or to be unsafe due to damage may be required by the Building Official to be secured from entry by fencing or other approved means until such time that the damage or threat to life is removed by repair, reconstruction or demolition. The fencing or security measures may not be removed without authorization from the building official. 
 901.4.5 REMOVAL OF PLACARDS. Once the placard has been attached to a building or structure, it may not be removed, altered, or covered until authorized by the Building Official. 
 901.5 VIOLATION. Any violation of § 16.04.400 of this code is a misdemeanor and will be subject to punishment according to the provisions of § 16.04.310. 
 SECTION 902—POST DISASTER ABATEMENT 
 902.1 INTENT. This chapter establishes abatement criteria for all buildings and structures damaged as a result of a disaster for which a local emergency has been declared. 
 902.2 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS. The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures regulated by the city. 
 902.3 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of the chapter, the following definitions apply: 
 902.3.1 EVENT means any occurrence which results in the declaration of a disaster, including but not limited to, fires, landslides, wind storms, earthquakes, and floods. 
 902.3.2 HISTORIC BUILDING OR STRUCTURE means any building or structure registered with a federal, state, county, or city government, or the register of points of interest. Historic buildings and structures also include those buildings and structures within a recognized historic district. 
 902.3.3 STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER (SHPO) is the person appointed by the Governor, pursuant to Section 101(b)(1) of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, to administer the State Historic Preservation Program. 
 Office of Historic Preservation 
Department of Parks and Recreation 
P.O. BOX 942896 
Sacramento, CA 94296-0001 
Phone: (916) 653-6624 
FAX: (916) 653-9824 
 902.4 ABATEMENT CRITERIA 
 902.4.1 NOTICE OF DETERMINATION. Except as provided in Section 902.4.2 below, the Building Official must serve a written Notice of Determination to each property owner as found on the latest available copy of the last equalized assessment roll. Such Notice of Determination must be delivered by hand-delivery, telephone, telegram, facsimile or other reasonable means, and must clearly indicate that the structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous and that, as such, it constitutes a public nuisance. The notice must set forth those factors which, in the opinion of the Building Official, make the structure an imminent hazard and dangerous, and must also include a directive from the Building Official of the specific action or actions to be taken by the property owner. The Notice must specify that within 48 hours from the time of issuance of the Notice of Determination, the owner or other party of record with an equitable or legal interest in the property must abate the nuisance in accordance with the directives written in the Notice of Determination by the Building Official. 
 902.4.2 NOTICE OF DETERMINATION EXCEPTION. No prior notice is required, when the building official, after considering all the facts, determines, in writing, that the structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous, and that it must be abated immediately and that time and circumstances do not permit the giving of prior notice to the owner. In those cases where time and circumstances do not permit the city to give the owner notice prior to abatement, the Building Official may cause the nuisance to be summarily abated. 
 902.4.3 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF DETERMINATION. A Notice of Determination delivered by the Building Official, that a building or structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous and therefore must be abated, may be appealed by the property owner or any other party of record with an equitable or legal interest in the property. Such appeal must be made to the Building Official within 48 hours of delivery of such Notice of Determination by the Building Official. Such appeal must be accompanied by a written Hazard Abatement Plan signed by a State of California licensed engineer or architect or by a written report by a State of California licensed engineer or architect stating why the engineer or architect feels the building or structure is not an imminent hazard or dangerous at this time. Such report must include a recommendation by the engineer or architect as to what should or should not be done at this time. If the Building Official accepts the proposed Hazard Abatement Plan in lieu of the Notice of Determination, the Hazard Abatement Plan must be implemented within 24 hours of acceptance by the Building Official. If the Building Official accepts an engineer's report and agrees there is no imminent hazard, the Building Official must rescind, in writing, the Notice of Determination. 
 Should the Building Official disagree with the Hazard Abatement Plan, or should the Building Official disagree with the engineer's or architect's report, a hearing must be conducted by the Board of Appeals, as soon as a quorum can be assembled. 
 902.4.4 BOARD OF APPEALS HEARING. At the hearing, the appellant has the right to call witnesses, to submit evidence, and to cross-examine the witnesses of the city. All witnesses must be sworn. 
 A record of the proceedings must be made by tape recording. Any relevant evidence may be submitted, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in the courts of this State. 
 At the close of the hearing, the Board of Appeals must act to uphold, overrule, or modify the determination and order of the Building Official. The determination and order of the Building Official will be upheld, unless the Board of Appeals finds, based upon the evidence in the record, that the Building Official erred in determining that the structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous. The decision of the Board of Appeals, with the reasons therefore, may be given orally on the record. If given orally, the decision must be memorialized in writing and served upon the applicant within 24 hours of the time the oral decision is rendered. 
 If the Board of Appeals upholds the decision of the Building Official, the property owners of record will be ordered to abate the public nuisance within the time set forth in the order. If the structure is determined not to be an imminent hazard and dangerous, the Building Official's determination and order will be vacated. The decision of the Board of Appeals will be final on the date it is rendered. 
 902.4.5 HAZARD ABATEMENT PLAN. If a Hazard Abatement Plan is approved by the Building Official, the owner or other interested party of record must execute such plan within 24 hours of obtaining approval of the plan from the Building Official. Within 24 hours of completion of the abatement work the owner or other interested party of record must provide the Building Official with a written certification that the public nuisance, as described in the Building Official's Notice of Determination, has been abated. 
 If the work performed pursuant to the Hazard Abatement Plan amounts to temporary abatement, the owner or other party of record, prior to proceeding with permanent repairs, must obtain required permits and file a damage assessment report with the Building Official. The damage assessment report must be reviewed and approved by the Building Official prior to proceeding with permanent repairs. 
 902.4.6 FAILURE TO PERFORM. In those instances where the property owner or other interested party of record either does not respond to the Building Official's Notice of Determination or approved Hazard Abatement Plan, responds untimely, or responds timely but fails to abate the public nuisance within the required time period, the imminent hazard and dangerous structure will be subject to immediate abatement by the Building Official. 
 902.4.7 PUBLIC NUISANCE. All structures or portions of such structures which, after inspection by the Building Official, are determined to be an imminent hazard and dangerous, either to the public, occupants of the subject structure, or to any adjacent structures, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and must be abated by the owner in accordance with the procedures specified in Sections 43.2.4.4 and 43.2.4.5. 
 902.4.8 SUSPENSION OF ABATEMENT OF WORK. Notwithstanding any code provisions to the contrary, the Building Official is authorized to suspend abatement work, and to allow the property owner or other party of legal interest to complete the abatement work. 
 902.4.9 CHANGE OF STATUS. When the conditions making a structure an imminent hazard and dangerous have been abated, the structure will no longer be considered an imminent hazard and dangerous. However, if the abatement work is temporary in nature, as determined by the Building Official, the structure will remain subject to the provisions of this section. 
 902.4.10 DEMOLITION PERMIT. If the owner of any building or structure has decided to demolish rather than repair, the owner, or the owner's representative, must obtain a demolition permit. 
 902.5 HAZARD ABATEMENT OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES. 
 902.5.1 NOTIFICATION OF IMMINENT HAZARD. Within ten days after the event, the Building Official must notify the State Historic Preservation Officer that one of the following actions will be taken regarding any historic building or structure determined by the Building Official to represent an imminent hazard to the health or safety of the public, or to pose an imminent threat to the public right of way: 
 902.5.1.1 BRACING OR SHORING. Whenever possible, as determined by the Building Official, the building or structure may be braced or shored in such a manner as to mitigate the hazard to public health or safety or the hazard to the public right-of-way. 
 902.5.1.2 CONDEMNATION. Whenever bracing or shoring is determined to be an unreasonable alternative, the Building Official may cause the building or structure to be condemned and immediately demolished. Such condemnation and demolition may be performed in the interest of public health or safety without a condemnation hearing as required by the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
 902.5.2 CONDEMNATION PROCEEDINGS. If, ten days after the event and less than 30 days after the event, an historic building or structure is determined by the Building Official to represent a hazard to the health or safety of the public or to pose a threat to the public right of way, the Building Official may initiate condemnation proceedings in accordance with the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. The Building Official may also notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), in accordance with the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, of its intent to hold a condemnation hearing. 
 902.5.3 REQUEST TO DEMOLISH. If the Building Official and the owner of any historic building or structure agree that such a building or structure should be demolished, the Building Official must submit a request to demolish to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in accordance with the National Historic Preservation Act of 1986, as amended. Such request must include all substantiating data. 
 SECTION 903 - DISASTER REPAIR AND RECONSTRUCTION 
 903.1 INTENT. This section establishes standards and regulations for the expeditious repair and reconstruction of structures damaged as a result of a disaster for which a local emergency has been declared. 
 903.2 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS. 
 903.2.1 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY. The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures regulated by the city following each disaster after a local emergency has been declared. 
 903.2.2 WAIVER FOR ENGINEERING EVALUATION. The requirements of this chapter may be waived by the Building Official subject to an Engineering Evaluation as defined in Section 903.3.3.4. 
 903.3 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply: 
 903.3.1 ARCHITECT is a person licensed by the State of California to practice architecture, as prescribed by the State of California Business and Professions Code. 
 903.3.2 CIVIL ENGINEER is a person registered by the State of California to practice Civil Engineering, as prescribed by the State of California Business and Professions Code. 
 903.3.3 CURRENT CODE means those codes adopted by the city pursuant to California Health and Safety Code § 18941.5. 
 903.3.4 ENGINEERING EVALUATION is an evaluation of a damaged building or structure, or suspected damaged building or structure, performed under the direction of a structural engineer, civil engineer, or architect retained by the owner of the building or structure. Engineering evaluations must, at a minimum, contain recommendations for repair and an appropriate opinion of the construction cost for those repairs. All engineering evaluations must include the engineer's or architect's stamp, wet-signature, and license expiration date. 
 903.3.5 ESSENTIAL SERVICE FACILITY means those buildings or structures designated by the city to house facilities necessary for emergency operations subsequent to a disaster. 
 903.3.6 REPLACEMENT VALUE is the dollar value, as determined by the building official, for replacing a damaged structure with a new structure of the same size, same type of construction, and same occupancy, and located on the same site. 
 903.3.7 STRUCTURAL ENGINEER is a person registered by the State of California to practice civil engineering and to use the title, Structural Engineer, as defined in Section 5537.1 of the State of California Business and Professions Code. 
 903.3.8 VALUE OF REPAIR is the dollar value, as determined by the Building Official, for making necessary repairs to the damaged structure. 
 903.4 REPAIR CRITERIA 
 903.4.1 GENERAL. Buildings and structures of all occupancies which have been damaged as the result of a disaster, except as otherwise noted, must be repaired in accordance with the following criteria: 
 903.4.2 UP TO TEN PERCENT REPAIR VALUE. When the estimated value of repair does not exceed ten percent of the replacement value of the structure, the damaged portion may be restored to the pre-disaster condition; except that when the damaged elements include suspended ceiling systems, the ceiling system must be repaired with all bracing required by current code. 
 903.4.3 UP TO FIFTY PERCENT REPAIR VALUE. When the estimated value of repair is greater than ten percent but less than fifty percent of the replacement value of the structure, the damaged elements must be repaired and brought into conformance with the structural requirements of the current code. 
 903.4.4 MORE THAN FIFTY PERCENT REPAIR VALUE. When the estimated value of repair is fifty percent or more of the replacement value of the structure, the entire structure must be brought into conformance with the fire and life safety and structural requirements of the current code. 
 903.4.5 CHIMNEY VALUE EXCLUSION. In Group R, Division 3, occupancies, the repair value of damaged chimneys may be excluded from the computation of percentage of replacement value. Damaged chimneys must be repaired in accordance with Section 903.5. 
 903.5 REPAIR CRITERIA FOR FIREPLACES AND CHIMNEYS. 
 903.5.1 GENERAL. All damaged chimneys must be repaired or reconstructed to comply with the requirements of Chapter 21 of the CBC. Damaged portions of chimneys must be removed in accordance with the following criteria. 
 903.5.2 DAMAGE ABOVE THE ROOF LINE. When the damaged portion of the chimney is located between the roof line and the top of the chimney, the damaged portion may be removed to the roof line provided the roof and ceiling anchorage are in sound condition. The reconstruction portion of the chimney must be braced to the roof structure using an approved method. 
 903.5.3 SINGLE-STORY STRUCTURE DAMAGE BELOW THE ROOF LINE. For a single-story structure in which the damaged portion of the chimney is below the roof line, or the damaged portion extends from above the roof line to below the roof line, the chimney must be removed to the top of the firebox. 
 903.5.4 MULTI-STORY STRUCTURE DAMAGE BELOW THE ROOF LINE. For a multi-story structure, the damaged portion of the chimney must be removed from the top to a floor line where anchorage is found. 
 903.5.5 FIREBOX DAMAGE. In any structure where the firebox has been damaged, the entire chimney and firebox must be removed to the foundation. If the foundation is in sound condition, the firebox and chimney may be reconstructed using the existing foundation. If the foundation has been damaged, the foundation must be removed and replaced. Such reconstruction and replacement must be in accordance with Chapter 21 of the CBC Code. 
 903.5.6 ENGINEERED ALTERNATE SOLUTIONS. Where existing conditions preclude the installation of all anchorage required by Chapter 21 of the CBC, alternate systems may be used in accordance with the alternate methods and materials provisions of the CBC when approved by the Building Official. 
 903.5.7 BRACING. Where the portion of the chimney extending above the roof line exceeds two times the least dimension of the chimney, that portion above the roof line must be braced to the roof structure using an approved method. 
 903.6 REPAIR CRITERIA FOR HISTORIC BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES. 
 903.6.1 ENGINEERING EVALUATION REQUIRED. Buildings or structures which are included on a national, state, or local register for historic places or which are qualifying structures within a recognized historic district, which have been damaged as a result of a disaster, must have an engineering evaluation performed. 
 903.6.2 MINIMUM REPAIR CRITERIA. The minimum criteria for repair are included in Section 903.4, Repair Criteria, with due consideration given to the historical rating and nature of the structures. Additional standards and criteria, as noted in Part 8, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, also apply. 
 903.7 REPAIR CRITERIA FOR UNREINFORCED MASONRY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES. 
 903.7.1 GENERAL. All damaged buildings determined to be bearing wall buildings constructed of unreinforced masonry must be repaired and strengthened to fully comply with the requirements of § 16.04.375. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 11-16-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
Chapter 16.08 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION 
 
16.08.005 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a process for individuals with disabilities seeking equal access to housing to request a reasonable accommodation in the application of the city's land use, zoning, and building standards, regulations, policies, and procedures and to establish relevant criteria to be used when considering such requests. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 2, 9-14-2011)  
16.08.010 - Applicability. 
Any individual with a disability, his or her representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities may seek relief from any land use, zoning or building standard, regulation, policy or procedure found in Title 16 or Title 19 of this code to ensure equal access to housing and to facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities by requesting a reasonable accommodation in the manner prescribed in Section 16.08.020. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 2, 9-14-2011)  
16.08.015 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
A.  "Applicant" means an individual who files an application for reasonable accommodation under this chapter. 
B.  "Department" means the Community Development Department. 
C.  "Director" means the Community Development Director or the director's designee. 
D.  "Fair housing laws" means the federal Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq.), the California Fair Housing and Employment Act (Government Code § 12900 et seq.), and Civil Code § 54, together with published judicial decisions interpreting such laws. 
E.  "Individual with a disability" means an individual with a qualifying disability under the fair housing laws. Generally, any person with any mental or physical impairment, disorder or condition, which substantially limits one or more major life activities, including physical, mental and social activities and working. "Disabled or individual with a disability" does not include impairments, disorders or conditions resulting from the current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance, sexual behavior disorders, compulsive gambling, kleptomania, or pyromania. 
F.  "Reasonable accommodation" means a modification or exception to the standards, regulations, policies and procedures contained in Title 16 or Title 19 of this code for the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities, that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide an individual with a disability equal opportunity for the use and enjoyment of housing of their choice, and that does not impose undue financial or administrative burdens on the city or require a fundamental or substantial alteration of the city's planning and zoning program. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 2, 9-14-2011)  
16.08.020 - Application process. 
A.  Application. Requests for a reasonable accommodation must be submitted on an application form provided by the department, or in the form of a letter addressed to the director, and must contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of the individual with a disability for whom the reasonable accommodation is being requested; 
3.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the property for which the reasonable accommodation request is being made; 
4.  The address and current use of the property for which the reasonable accommodation is being made; 
5.  If the applicant is someone other than the property owner, a letter of agency or authorization signed by the property owner consenting to the application being made; 
6.  The basis for the claim that the individual to be reasonably accommodated is disabled under the fair housing laws; 
7.  A description of the reasonable accommodation request and the land use, zoning or building standard, regulation, policy or procedure to be modified or waived; 
8.  A statement of the reason why the requested accommodation is necessary for the individual with a disability to use and enjoy the dwelling. 
B.  Other Discretionary Permits. If the project for which the request for a reasonable accommodation is made requires another discretionary permit or approval, then the applicant may file the request for reasonable accommodation together with the application for the other discretionary permit or approval. The processing procedures of the discretionary permit will govern the joint processing of both the reasonable accommodation and the discretionary permit. 
C.  If an individual needs assistance in making a request for a reasonable accommodation, the city will provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible. 
D.  A request for a reasonable accommodation may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual's obligations to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 2, 9-14-2011)  
16.08.025 - Review authority. 
A.  The director may approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application for a reasonable accommodation for an existing use or a proposed new use that only requires a ministerial permit or approval. 
B.  If the project for which the request for a reasonable accommodation is made requires a discretionary permit or approval, then the application for a reasonable accommodation will be heard at the same time as the other discretionary permit or approval. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 2, 9-14-2011)  
16.08.030 - Review procedure. 
A.  Director Review. The director will issue a written determination to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request for a reasonable accommodation within thirty days of acceptance of a complete application. The written determination must explain in detail the basis of the decision, including the director's findings required by Section 16.08.035. The director must mail written notice of the determination to the applicant and as part of such notice advise the applicant of the right to appeal the determination. 
B.  Review By Planning Commission or City Council. If the application for a reasonable accommodation is heard simultaneously with the application for another discretionary approval, the decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request for a reasonable accommodation will be made by the authority taking action on the other discretionary approval. The planning commission or city council must make their decision in accordance with Section 16.08.035. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 2, 9-14-2011)  
16.08.035 - Findings and decision. 
A.  Findings. The written decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request for a reasonable accommodation must be based on the following findings, all of which are required for approval: 
1.  The requested accommodation is requested by or on the behalf of one or more individuals with a disability protected under the fair housing laws. 
2.  The requested accommodation is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
3.  The requested accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city as "undue financial or administrative burden" is defined in the fair housing laws. 
4.  The requested accommodation will not result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city's zoning code, as "fundamental alteration" is defined in the fair housing laws. 
5.  The requested accommodation will not, under the specific facts of the case, result in a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
B.  Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for a reasonable accommodation, the director, planning commission, or city council may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required by subsection (A). 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 2, 9-14-2011)  
16.08.040 - Appeals. 
A.  Director Decision. Any person who is dissatisfied by the decision made by the director on an application for a reasonable accommodation may appeal the director's decision to the planning commission. The appeal must be filed within ten days of the mailing of the director's decision. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the director will set the matter for a hearing before the planning commission to occur not later than forty-five days from the date of filing. Notice of the appeal hearing will be given to the applicant by mail at least ten days prior to the hearing. The hearing on the appeal hearing will be conducted in accordance with the applicable procedures of Section 19.62.080 of this code. Any person who is dissatisfied by the decision of the planning commission may make a further appeal to the city council in accordance with applicable procedures of Section 19.62.090 of this code. The planning commission's decision will be final absent an appeal timely filed with the city council. 
B.  Planning Commission Decision. A decision of the planning commission on an application for a reasonable accommodation considered concurrently with another application for a discretionary approval is subject to the same appeal rights and procedures that apply to the other discretionary approval. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 2, 9-14-2011)  
16.08.045 - Expiration, revocation, termination. 
A.  Expiration. Any reasonable accommodation approved under this chapter will expire within twelve months from the effective date of approval or at such alternative time specified as a condition of approval unless: 
1.  A building permit has been issued and construction has commenced; 
2.  A certificate of occupancy has been issued; 
3.  The use is established; or 
4.  A time extension has been granted. 
B.  Revocation. Any reasonable accommodation approved under this chapter may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms of such reasonable accommodation are violated, or if any law or city ordinance is violated in connection with the reasonable accommodation. The revocation procedures in Section 19.62.170 of this code will be followed to revoke a reasonable accommodation. 
C.  Termination. If the individual with a disability who initially occupied the applicable dwelling ceases to reside at the premises, the reasonable accommodation will remain in effect only if the director determines that: (1) the modification is physically integrated into the residential structure and cannot easily be removed or altered to comply with this code, or (2) the accommodation is necessary to give another disabled individual an equal opportunity to enjoy the dwelling. The director may request that any successor-in-interest to the property provide documentation that subsequent occupants are persons with disabilities. Failure to provide such documentation within ten days of the date of a request by the director will result in the termination of a previously approved reasonable accommodation and the applicable premises must subsequently be made to conform to code. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 2, 9-14-2011)  
Chapter 16.16 - UNIFORM CODES PERMIT FEES 
 
16.16.010 - Permit fees established. 
The city council by resolution may establish fees for building permits, plumbing permits, wiring permits, and other permits relating to buildings and structures. 
(Ord. 249 § 1, 1973.)  
16.16.020 - Effective date of fee. 
Any fee established by ordinance prior to the effective date of any resolution adopted pursuant to the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be deemed to be repealed and shall be superseded by any fee established by such resolution. 
(Ord. 249 § 2, 1973.)  
Chapter 16.20 - CONSTRUCTION OF CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS 
 
16.20.010 - Driveways, sidewalks, curbs, gutters and public improvement. 
A.  No building or structure shall be constructed or erected, after January 14, 1970, nor shall any addition to or alteration of any existing building or structure hereafter be made where the reasonable value of such addition or alteration exceeds fifty percent of the reasonable replacement value of such existing structure, unless concurrently with such construction, erection, addition, or alteration, and unless concurrently with the development of any accessory yard, parking, storage, or other land areas utilized in conjunction with such construction, erection, addition or alteration, all driveways and driveway aprons, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, paving, drainage, water and sewer facilities, lights, trees, and other public improvements, as determined necessary by the public works director, in the public right-of-way abutting such lot or parcel of property or portion of such lot or parcel of property upon which the improvements referred to in this section are to be made, are made to conform with the plans and specifications on file in the office of the city engineer and approved by the city council for such type of construction in the zone concerned, if they do not already so conform; and unless concurrently with such construction, erection, addition, or alteration, and unless concurrently with the development of accessory yard, parking, storage, or other land areas utilized in conjunction with such construction, erection, addition, or alteration, all driveways and driveway aprons, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, paving, drainage, water and sewer facilities, lights, trees, and other public improvements, as determined necessary by the public works directors, in the public right-of-way abutting the lot or parcel of property or portion of the lot or parcel of property upon which the construction, erection, addition, or alteration is to be made, are installed in such public right-of-way as required by this chapter, and in accordance with the plans and specifications on file in the office of the city engineer and approved by the city council. 
B.  Guarantee security shall be required in the same manner as is required for subdivisions, as designated in Ordinance 156, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 157 § 1, 1970: Ord. 24 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 8102.)  
16.20.020 - Improvements prior to final inspection. 
In lieu of construction concurrently, as referred to in Section 16.20.010, construction of such driveways, driveway aprons, sidewalks, curbs, gutters and street paving may be made at any time prior to the final inspection by the building official for such construction, erection, addition or alteration; providing there is contained on any building permit issued for such construction, erection, addition or alteration a statement approved by the one receiving the permit that the installation of such required improvements shall be a condition precedent to final inspection by the building official. 
(Ord. 24 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 8102.1.)  
16.20.030 - Dedication. 
In the event improvements are required under the provisions of Section 16.20.010, and it is reasonably contemplated by the city engineer that the proposed improvement or use of the property will cause an increase in vehicular or pedestrian traffic so as to make necessary a widening of the existing right-of-way for street purposes in order that the public safety and welfare shall be protected, there shall be dedicated to the city that part of such property sufficient to bring such public street up to the necessary width and as the right-of-way is shown in the plans and drawings in the office of the city engineer. In the event that existing buildings or other structures are located within the right-of-way to be dedicated, the owner shall be compensated for the cost of removing and relocating such improvements on the remainder of the property, or in the alternative the city may permit such encroachments to remain. 
(Ord. 24 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 8102.2.)  
16.20.040 - Modification—Appeal. 
A.  When practical difficulties, unreasonable hardships or results inconsistent with the general purposes of Sections 16.20.010 through 16.20.030 occur by reason of the strict interpretation and application of any of the provisions of such sections, any owner, contractor or tenant affected thereby may file an application for relief from the provisions of Sections 16.20.010 through 16.20.030. Such application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, description of the property to which the application applies, a statement of the particular provisions for which relief is sought, and the reasons therefor. Such application shall be considered by the planning commission and it shall hear and consider all evidence and testimony that may be presented in support of or in opposition to such application. Upon finding that good cause has been shown and that the strict enforcement of Sections 16.20.010 through 16.20.030 of this code would not be consistent with the general purposes of the sections and that there are practical difficulties or unreasonable hardships which would result from the enforcement of the provisions, the planning commission, under such conditions as it deems necessary to assure that the spirit and purpose of Sections 16.20.010 through 16.20.030 will be observed, may grant in each case such relief from the provisions of such sections as in the determination of the commission will secure the maximum compliance with the provisions of the sections without injustice to the applicant. 
B.  Written notice of the decision of the planning commission shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
C.  Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal to the city council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal within ten days from the date of the written notification of the decision of the planning commission. The written notice of appeal must be accompanied by an administrative fee in an amount determined by city council resolution. The city council shall consider such appeal and hear and consider all evidence and testimony that may be presented in support of such petition or in opposition to the petition. If the city council finds that good cause has been shown and that to require strict compliance with the provisions of Sections 16.20.010 through 16.20.030 would be unjust or would effect results inconsistent with the general purposes of the sections or that there are practical difficulties and unreasonable hardships which would result from strict compliance with the sections, the council may, under such conditions as it deems necessary to assure that the spirit and purpose of Sections 16.20.010 through 16.20.030 will be observed, grant in each case such relief from the provisions of these sections as in the determination of the council will assure the maximum compliance with the provisions of such sections without injustice to the applicant. The decision of the city council shall be conclusive and written notice of the decision of the city council shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
(Ord. 950 § 11, 2002; Ord. 24 § 1 (part), 1965: prior code § 8102.3.)  
Chapter 16.24 - MINERAL EXCAVATIONS 
 
16.24.010 - Conditional use permit required. 
No person shall conduct, carry on, cause or permit to be carried on nor use any property for the purpose of quarrying, mining, or excavating for the purpose of selling or using at some other location earth, sand, gravel or clay or other mineral products without a conditional use permit therefor issued by the city council pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 174 § 1, 1970.)  
16.24.020 - Issuance. 
No conditional use permit for any of the uses specified in Section 16.24.010 shall be issued except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 174 § 2, 1970.)  
16.24.030 - Application—Contents. 
Before any conditional use permit is issued an application shall be filed with the planning department. The application shall contain the following: 
A.  Description of the property upon which the use or activity is to be conducted; 
B.  The name of the owner; 
C.  The name of the person who will be carrying on the activity; 
D.  The length of time for which such activity shall be carried on; 
E.  The quantity of material estimated to be removed; 
F.  The manner of excavation or removal; 
G.  Map showing the topography of the area on which the use is to be conducted; 
H.  The planning director may require additional information as may be necessary. 
(Ord. 174 § 3, 1970.)  
16.24.040 - Hearing by commission. 
After the application is filed the planning director shall set the matter for hearing before the planning commission and shall give notice of such hearing in the manner required for notice of zone exceptions. 
(Ord. 174 § 4, 1970.)  
16.24.050 - Recommendations. 
A.  The planning commission shall hear the matter and report its recommendations to the city council. The planning commission recommendation may be for granting the use as requested, for denying the use or for granting the use with such modification and conditions attached as may be necessary in the opinion of the commission to preserve the interests of the community and to further the purpose of the zoning ordinance, as codified in Title 19 of this code. 
B.  In determining the action to be taken relative to such application the planning commission shall consider: 
1.  The zoning of the area in which the property is located; 
2.  The proximity of the proposed use to any land used or zoned for residential purposes; 
3.  The effect of the proposed use upon surrounding territory; 
4.  The effect of the proposed use by reason of the change of topography upon the community at large and the adjacent territory including such effect as it may have upon drainage courses, runoff and the like; 
5.  The effect of the proposed use upon the city road system and traffic movement; 
6.  The effect of the proposed use upon the environment. 
(Ord. 174 § 5, 1970.)  
16.24.060 - Hearing by council. 
The planning commission after concluding its public hearing shall make a written report to the city council setting forth its findings and recommendations. The city council may adopt the recommendation of the planning commission with or without a hearing as it deems advisable, but the city council may not modify or disapprove the decision of the planning commission until after having held a public hearing thereon. Notice of such hearing shall be given in the same manner as the notice of hearing before the planning commission. The city council in reaching its decision shall consider those matters required to be considered by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 174 § 6, 1970.)  
Chapter 16.28 - LIMITATIONS ON ISSUANCE OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PERMITS 
 
16.28.010 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to any building permit for residential projects and uses, including, but not limited to, subdivisions for which final maps have been recorded, RPD and MHPD permits which have been granted, and single-family and multiple-family dwelling units for which no development permit is otherwise required. 
(Ord. 469 § 5, 1980.)  
16.28.020 - Monitoring of population growth by planning director. 
The city planning director shall monitor population growth within city boundaries, shall determine when the number of residents is within twenty percent of the population increase for the year permitted by the Air Quality Maintenance Plan (AQMP), and shall notify the city council of such determination. 
(Ord. 469 § 1, 1980.)  
16.28.030 - Consideration of building permit applications by city council. 
Following the notification provided in Section 16.28.020, any residential project consisting of ten or more dwelling units, for which a building permit application has been filed with the city, shall be referred to the city council for consideration whether the project may cause city population to exceed the AQMP allocation. The applicant shall be notified of the time and place of consideration, which consideration shall be scheduled within thirty days after a complete application for building permit is filed with the city. If the city council finds that the project may cause city population to exceed AQMP allocation, then only those building permits, if any, which the city council authorizes may be issued. 
(Ord. 469 § 2, 1980.)  
16.28.040 - Denial of building permit—Appeal procedure. 
Following the determination provided in Section 16.28.020, with respect to any residential project not covered by Section 16.28.030, no building permit shall be issued if the city director of planning and community development determines that its issuance could cause city population to exceed the AQMP allocation. Any denial of a permit pursuant to this section shall be in writing and may be appealed by the applicant to the city council by written appeal specifying the basis therefor and filed within fifteen days of the denial. Such an appeal must be accompanied by an administrative fee in an amount determined by city council resolution. The appellant shall be notified of the time and place for consideration of the appeal, which consideration shall be scheduled within thirty days after the appeal is filed. In acting on an appeal under this section, the city council shall determine whether the building permit should be issued or denied pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 950 § 12, 2002: Ord. 469 § 3, 1980.)  
16.28.050 - Status of denied building permit applications. 
If a building permit application is denied under the provisions of this chapter, the application shall be registered to show the time and date of filing with the city. If, after any permit has been denied, it is determined by the city planning director that there may be a population increase without exceeding the limitations set forth in Section 16.28.020 and that issuance of a permit is not in conflict with Sections 16.28.030 and 16.28.040, then building permits shall be issued accordingly, in the chronological order of their registration. An applicant for a building permit may withdraw the application at any time prior to issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. 469 § 4, 1980.)  
16.28.060 - Population increases determined by resolution of city council. 
For the purpose of this chapter, population increases shall be determined as set forth by resolution adopted by the city council which shall be made a part of this chapter. The resolution shall specify a range of densities for various types and sizes of units consisting of single-family detached, attached dwellings, apartments for families and adult only, mobile home and retirement projects. 
(Ord. 469 § 6, 1980.)  
Chapter 16.32 - MAINTENANCE DEPOSITS 
 
16.32.010 - Maintenance deposits established—Reimbursement of city expenses. 
The developer of any project requiring traffic control, landscape and/or irrigation improvements upon a public right-of-way shall deposit with the city, concurrently with submittal of the final map or issuance of a building permit, whichever occurs first, a maintenance deposit in an amount established by resolution of the city council for each such improvement. If the actual cost of maintenance described in Section 16.32.020 exceeds the amount of the deposit, the developer shall reimburse the city for any maintenance costs incurred in excess of the deposit. 
(Ord. 525 § 1 (part), 1982.)  
16.32.020 - Use of maintenance deposits. 
The maintenance deposits may be used at the discretion of the city to maintain traffic control, landscape and/or irrigation improvements to a public right-of-way or to correct deficiencies or conditions on such improvements after completion of construction and prior to acceptance of said improvements by the city. The city shall have the right, but not the duty, to perform said maintenance or to correct such deficiencies or conditions. 
(Ord. 525 § 1 (part), 1982.)  
16.32.030 - Return of unexpended maintenance deposits. 
Any unexpected amount of the maintenance deposits shall be returned to the developer at the time all guaranty security for the project is released. No guaranty security shall be released unless all amounts due the city pursuant to Section 16.32.010 have been paid. 
(Ord. 525 § 1 (part), 1982.)  
Chapter 16.34 - FLOOD DAMAGE PROTECTION  
Article I. - Findings, Purposes and Definitions. 
 
16.34.100 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which might result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which would adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Such flood losses could be caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in special flood hazard areas which increase flood heights and velocities, and when improvements are inadequately anchored, may cause damage in other areas from floatable objects. Developments that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage could also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.110 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
A.  To protect human life and health; 
B.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
G.  To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.120 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
A.  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
D.  Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.130 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter only, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application, unless specifically defined below. 
1.  "Appeal" means a request for a review of the director of engineering services' interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for variance. 
2.  "Area of shallow flooding" is designated as AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to the base flood depths ranging from one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. 
3.  "Base flood" means a flood having a one percent change of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
4.  "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
5.  "City" means the city of Camarillo. 
6.  "Development" means any manmade change to improved or un-improved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
7.  "Director" means the director of engineering services of the city or his designee. 
8.  "Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home sub-division" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the construction of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed before the effective date of this chapter. 
9.  "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the mobile homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, either final site grading or construction of concrete pads or the construction of streets). 
10.  "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
11.  "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map" means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway. 
12.  "Flood Hazard Boundary Map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
13.  "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
14.  "Flood Insurance Study" means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards. This includes the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the Flood Boundary Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
15.  "Flood plain" or "flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
16.  "Floodplain management" means the operation of any overall program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations and open space plans. 
17.  "Floodplain management regulations" means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. The term describes such state or local regulations which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
18.  "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
19.  "Flood-related erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood, or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
20.  "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. The floodway is delineated on the Flood Boundary Floodway Map. 
21.  "Floodway encroachment lines" means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps. 
22.  "Habitable floor" means any floor or lowest enclosed area, usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating or recreation, or a combination thereof. For flood insurance purposes "habitable floor" and "lowest floor" will share the same definition. 
23.  "Hazard mitigation plan" means a plan that incorporates a process, whereby the potential of future loss due to flooding can be minimized by planning and implementing alternatives to floodplain management community-wide. 
24.  "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
25.  "Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered district or districts preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c.  Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs. 
26.  "Levee" means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
27.  "Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
28.  "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including a basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage other than a basement area (see "basement") is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter. This definition allows attached garages to be built at grade. Below-grade garages are not allowed as they are considered to be basements. 
29.  "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
30.  "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent. 
31.  "Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the city's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
32.  "New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the date this chapter first became effective (August, 1986) and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
33.  "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at the minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed on or after the date this chapter first became effective in August, 1986. 
34.  "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light-duty truck; 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
35.  "Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one foot. 
36.  "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), streams, brooks, etc. 
37.  "Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area having special flood hazards and shown on the FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AH, AO, A-1 to A30, AE, A99, AH, E or M. 
38.  "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or in the case of manufactured homes, the placement of such home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
39.  "Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
40.  "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
41.  "Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
42.  "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
43.  "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the city's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
44.  "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. 780 § 1, 1993: Ord. 704 §§ 1—6, 1990; Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
Article II. - General Provisions 
 
16.34.200 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study for the city of Camarillo (FIS), Floodway Boundary and Flooding Maps 1 through 6 (FBFMs) and Flood Insurance Rate Maps 1 through 6 (FIRM) dated September 29, 1986, with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the director. The Flood Insurance Study, FIRMs and FBFM are on file in the office of the director. 
(Ord. 780 § 2, 1993: Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.210 - Compliance. 
No private structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.220 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and any other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflicts or overlaps, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.230 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the city; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.240 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. Nothing herein shall be construed to impose upon the city any duty or mandatory duty to prevent damage from flood in the areas subject to this chapter. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on the provisions of this chapter or any administrative decision made thereunder. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
Article III. - Administration 
 
16.34.300 - Establishment of flood area development permit. 
A flood area development permit (hereinafter "permit") shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 16.34.200. Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the director and may include, but not be limited to: plans, in duplicate, to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question including three hundred feet surrounding and adjacent to the area in question; existing and/or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Applications for permits shall be made at the same time and reviewed in conjunction with other applications for permits or approvals for the development. Specifically, the following information is required: 
A.  Proposed elevation in relation to "mean sea level as established by the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929" of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all structures; in Zone AO elevation of existing grade and proposed elevation of lowest habitable floor of all structures; 
B.  Proposed elevation in relation to "mean sea level as established by the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929" to which any structure will be floodproofed; 
C.  Certification by a registered professional engineer that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Section 16.34.400C3; 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and 
E.  Submittal of engineering data to satisfy the requirements established in Section 16.34.320A2 through A4. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.310 - Designation of the administrator of this chapter. 
The director of engineering services ("director") is appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.320 - Duties and responsibilities of the director. 
The duties and responsibilities of the director shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Permit Review. The director shall review all permit applications to determine if: 
1.  The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
2.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.  If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, the director shall ensure that the provisions of Section 16.34.400 are complied with by the party or parties requesting the development permit, and 
b.  If a subdivision proposal, including manufactured home parks or subdivision, are in a flood-prone area, the director shall ensure that the provisions of Section 16.34.440 are complied with by the party or parties requesting the development permits; 
3.  The proposed development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard (for purposes of this chapter, "adversely affected" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point), and until a regulatory floodway is designated, new construction will not increase the base flood elevation by more than one foot; 
4.  The flood discharge exiting the development after construction is more or less than the flood discharge at the location prior to development where downstream impacts are probable; 
5.  All necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972. 
B.  Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 16.34.200, the director shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize the best base flood data available from any source (federal, state or other), such as high water mark(s), floods of record, or private engineering reports, until such data has been provided by the Federal Insurance Administration, in order to administer Article IV of this chapter and provide the developer with an estimated base flood elevation. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption. 
C.  Information to be Obtained and Maintained. The director shall obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed for flood insurance policies: 
1.  The certification required in Sections 16.34.400C1 through C3, 16.34.430 and 16.34.440D. 
2.  Certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, flood-proofed elevation, or the elevation of the structure's lowest horizontal member is required at that point where the footings are set and slab constructed. Failure to submit elevation certification shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. As-built plans certifying the elevation (based on U.S.G.S., M.S.L.) of the lowest adjacent grade are also required. 
3.  If fill is used to elevate a structure above the base flood elevation, the permit holder may wish to apply for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), as set forth in Section 16.34.560. 
D.  Alteration of Watercourses. Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, it is the responsibility of the director to: 
1.  Notify adjacent communities, the Ventura County Flood Control District and the State Coordinating Agency prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and to send evidence of such notifications to the Federal Insurance Administration; 
2.  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within any altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
E.  Interpretation of Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Boundaries. The director shall provide interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 16.34.500B. 
(Ord. 780 § 3, 1993; Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.330 - Maintenance of flood protection measures. 
If flood protection measures (levees, dikes, dams or reservoirs) are privately owned, an operation or maintenance plan shall be required of the owner to be on file with the director. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.340 - Hazard mitigation plan. 
In reviewing development proposals, the planning commission shall consider the following in relation to the proposal; however, no findings are required so long as the information is presented in writing or orally to the body considering the proposal: 
A.  Whether the proposed development is in or affects a known floodplain; 
B.  Inform the public of the proposed development by the means required by state law or Titles 18 or 19 of this code for the other required approvals for the development; 
C.  If the proposal is in a floodplain, whether there are practicable alternatives or sites for the proposed development; 
D.  Impacts of the activity on the floodplain; 
E.  Plans to mitigate the impact of the activity. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
Article IV. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
 
16.34.400 - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
2.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 16.34.440A. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall use methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
3.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
4.  Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
1.  New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall have the bottom of the floor slab, lowest floor beam or basement floor elevated to a minimum of 1.0 foot above the base flood elevation. Nonresidential structures will meet the standards in subsection C3 of this section. Upon completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor, including the basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor or verified by the local building inspector that the elevation requirements have been met. Notification of compliance shall be recorded as set forth in Section 16.34.320C. 
2.  New construction and substantial improvement to any structure in a Zone AO shall have the bottom of the lowest floor beam or basement floor elevated above the highest grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). If there is no base flood depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the bottom of the lowest floor beam or basement floor shall be elevated to two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
Nonresidential structures will meet standards in subsection C3 of this section. Upon completion of the structure, compliance to the elevation requirement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor or verified by the local building inspector. Notification of compliance shall be recorded as set forth in Section 16.34.320C. 
3.  Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance with subsections C1 or C2 of this section or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed to the base flood elevation. Certification is required by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied and that the floodproofing methods are adequate to withstand the floor depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the base flood. Such certification shall be provided to the director as set forth in Section 16.34.320C1. Examples of floodproofing include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters; 
b.  Reinforcement of walls so that they are substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
c.  Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage through walls which have the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; 
d.  Addition of mass or weight or tiedowns to structure to resist flotation; 
e.  Armour protection of all fill materials from scour and/or erosion. 
4.  Manufactured homes shall meet the above standards and also the standards in Section 16.34.440. 
5.  All new construction or substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor shall be designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or have at least one square inch per square foot of flooded area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade. 
(Ord. 780 § 4, 1993; Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.410 - Standards for storage of materials and equipment. 
A.  In areas of special flood hazard the storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, is prohibited. 
B.  Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.420 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.430 - Standards for subdivisions. 
A.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
B.  All final subdivision plans shall provide the elevation of proposed structure(s), pads, and adjacent grade. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the official as set forth in Section 16.34.320C1. 
C.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
E.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage as set forth in Section 16.34.320C1. Certification of compliance shall be required by the developer. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.440 - Standards for manufactured homes and manufactured home parks and subdivisions. 
A.  1.  All new manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage, and shall be set on permanent foundation by anchoring the unit to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by one of the following methods: 
a.  By providing an anchoring system designed to withstand horizontal forces of fifteen pounds per square foot and uplift forces of nine pounds per square foot; or 
b.  By the anchoring of the unit's system, designed to be in compliance to the Department of Housing and Urban Development Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards; or 
c.  By bolting the frame or undercarriage to a reinforced, permanent foundation such as a retaining wall or storm wall used to set the unit; 
d.  By use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
2.  These requirements are in addition to applicable state and local requirements for resisting wind forces. 
3.  As set forth in Section 16.34.320C1, certification meeting the standards above is required of the installer or state agency responsible for regulating the placement, installation and anchoring of individual manufactured home units. 
B.  The following standards are required for: 
1.  Manufactured homes not placed in manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
2.  New manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  Expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; and 
4.  Repair, reconstruction or improvements to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions that equal or exceed fifty percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced: 
a.  Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler shall be provided, 
b.  All manufactured homes shall be placed on pads or lots elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood level. If elevated on pilings: 
i.  The lots shall be large enough to permit, 
ii.  The pilings shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart, and 
iii.  Reinforcement shall be provided for pilings more than six feet above ground level. 
C.  Despite subsection B of this section, no manufactured home shall be placed in a floodway. This provision does not apply to manufactured homes placed in an existing manufactured home park or existing manufactured home subdivision. 
D.  Certification of compliance is required of the developer responsible for the plan or state agency responsible for regulating manufactured home placement. 
E.  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the city's FIRM on sites: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest flood level of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement. 
F.  Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the city's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of Section 16.34.440E must be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
G.  Recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the city's FIRM must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" of Section 16.34.440E. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
H.  A plan for excavating residents of all manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas must be developed and filed with and approved by appropriate community emergency management authorities. 
(Ord. 704 §§ 7—11, 1990: Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.445 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, AO and AE on the city's Flood Insurance Map will either: 
A.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days; 
B.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
C.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 16.34.440(A). 
(Ord. 780 § 5, 1993.)  
16.34.450 - Floodways. 
Areas designated as floodways are located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 16.34.200. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Encroachments into the floodway shall be prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development which would increase flood elevations during the occurrence of the base flood discharge, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  If no floodway is identified, the permit holder shall provide an engineering study for the project area that establishes a setback where no encroachment of any new development will be allowed that would increase the water surface elevation of the base flood plus one foot; or establish a setback from the stream bank equal to five times the width of the stream at the top of the bank or twenty feet on each side from the top of the bank, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
Article V. - Variance and Exemption Procedures 
 
16.34.500 - Appeal board. 
A.  The planning commission of the city ("commission") shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. The commission (and council on appeal) shall hear the variance application at a noticed public hearing with notice made as required for variances pursuant to Title 19, Zoning, of this code. 
B.  The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the director of this chapter. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days following the director's action and shall specify the project and grounds for appeal. Such appeals must be accompanied by an administrative fee in an amount set by city council resolution. 
C.  Those aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission pursuant to this chapter may appeal such decision to the city council. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days of the commission's decision and shall specify the project and grounds for appeal. 
(Ord. 950 § 13, 2002: Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.510 - Considerations. 
In passing upon such applications, the commission (and council on appeal) shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards, etc., specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
A.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
B.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
C.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
D.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
E.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
F.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed uses that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
G.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
H.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
I.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
J.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
K.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.520 - Variances. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the items set forth in Section 16.34.510 have been fully considered and the conditions for a variance set forth in Section 16.34.530 are met. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the justification required for issuing the variance also increases. 
B.  The commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter, or to insure the health, safety and welfare of the area. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.530 - Conditions for variances. 
A.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
B.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
C.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.  A showing of good and sufficient cause. Economic considerations, aesthetics, or past practices are not good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nuisances, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.540 - Notice. 
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice signed by a city official that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, that such construction below the base flood level increases risk to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage. 
(Ord. 780 § 6, 1993: Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.550 - Records. 
The director shall maintain the records of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances in its annual or biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. 780 § 7, 1993: Ord. 647 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 616 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
16.34.560 - Map amendments. 
A.  The procedures for map corrections, letters of map amendments (LOMAs), conditional letters of map amendments and conditional letters of map revisions shall be those procedures set forth by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the Code of Federal Regulations; these regulations shall be kept on file in the department of engineering services. The city is preempted from enacting any procedures in this area. 
B.  The city shall require a fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council for processing any map amendment requests to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. 668 § 2, 1989.)  
Chapter 16.38 - GEOTECHNICAL STUDIES 
 
16.38.010 - Findings, intent and purpose. 
A.  A reconnaissance geohazards assessment study ("study") was commissioned by and prepared for the city to evaluate geologic, goetechnical and slope conditions in the city in order to assist the city's engineering and planning departments; a copy of this study is on file with the department of engineering. 
B.  The study has defined the presence of several instabilities and potential instabilities in the city in the form of landslides, mudflows, areas of laterally unsupported bedding, locally steep slopes, and areas of potential seismic instabilities. 
C.  The study has determined that the effects of water have played a key role in the slope instability. 
D.  The study has determined that in order to reduce and prevent future stability problems, with attendant structural damage to new development, it is imperative that consideration be given to drainage, geologic factors and foundation aspects of each new development. 
E.  The intent and purpose of this chapter is to protect against instabilities and potential instabilities in the city in the form of landslides, mudflows, areas of laterally unsupported bedding, locally steep slopes and areas of potential seismic instabilities. In order to safeguard the life, limb, property and public welfare against these dangers in areas of development, it is necessary to require geotechnical studies reports as part of the permitting process. 
(Ord. 653 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.38.020 - Geotechnical studies—Required. 
The following developments shall all be required to submit a geotechnical study prior to final map approval or issuance of building permits: 
A.  Final map approval under the Subdivision Map Act; 
B.  Vesting tentative maps under the Subdivision Map Act; 
C.  Building permits for any type of planned developments; 
D.  Building permits upon lots which have been previously subdivided; 
E.  Building permits for additions to existing developments where the addition will in any part be in a slope area or where the development will constitute at least a fifty percent addition to the existing development. 
(Ord. 653 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.38.030 - Waiver of studies. 
The city engineer, in consultation with the director of planning and community development, or their designees, may upon application, waive any of the required studies under the following conditions: 
A.  There exists a recently completed and satisfactory report which covers the same area; 
B.  The reports are included as part of an environmental impact report or negative declaration, if either is required or has been satisfactorily completed for the proposal; or 
C.  The property was located in the unincorporated area of the county on or after January 1, 2006, and was subsequently annexed to the city before January 1, 2007, for reasons unrelated to any development application by the property owner that had either been initiated in good faith or was pending with the county at the time of annexation. 
(Ord. 1014 § 1, 2007: Ord. 653 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.38.040 - Contents of geotechnical studies. 
A.  The contents of the geotechnical studies shall conform to the requirements and maps adopted by resolution of the city council. The requirements shall cover the performance of studies in general, as well as set forth requirements for studies in slope, nonslope and fault areas. 
1.  Slope and nonslope studies shall include at a minimum exploration, laboratory testing, seismicity, and analysis and report. 
2.  Fault studies shall include at a minimum analysis and report and subsurface exploration, as site conditions indicate. 
B.  These maps and requirements may be amended as need dictates upon the recommendation of the director of engineering services. 
(Ord. 653 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.38.050 - Definition of "slope area." 
For purposes of this chapter only, a "slope area" shall be that where the slopes are generally or locally inclined at about five horizontal to one vertical (5:1) or steeper (approximately twenty percent). 
(Ord. 653 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.38.060 - Review of studies. 
All geotechnical studies will be reviewed by a certified engineering geologist and/or a registered civil engineer licensed as a geotechnical engineer. The reports will then be reviewed from the city's perspective by the department of engineering services to see that appropriate measures are taken to mitigate any geohazards identified on the property. 
(Ord. 653 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.38.070 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and any other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflicts or overlaps, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 653 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.38.080 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. This chapter shall not create any liability on the part of the city, or any officer or employee thereof, for any damages from geotechnical hazards that result from reliance on the provisions of this chapter or any administrative decision made in relation thereto. 
(Ord. 653 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
Chapter 16.40 - USE OF EXPLOSIVES FOR GRADING 
 
16.40.010 - Finding, intent and purpose. 
A.  The use of explosives for grading or blasting is a potentially very dangerous activity. 
B.  Blasting should only be conducted in a manner that is safe to nearby residents. Potential noise and disruption to the surrounding area during site drilling and blasting should be mitigated as much as possible. 
C.  The intent and purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Camarillo. In order to do so, it is necessary to regulate blasting and require blasting permits. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.40.020 - Permit required. 
A.  No pre-blast drilling or blasting operation may take place without a permit issued by the department of engineering services. No permit shall be issued unless there is no economically feasible alternative to blasting. 
B.  The permit application shall be in the form of a report which, in addition to the requirements listed below, shall include a discussion of the following topics: general location of the blasting; justification for the blasting; ripping tests results; drilling operations; drilling noise attenuation; blasting operations; blasting objectives; vibration limits; noise limits; controlled blasting program; instrumentation; scaled distances; seismographic monitoring; notification; records; blasting complaints; blasting hours; and blasting duration. 
C.  The director of engineering services, or his designee, may impose any conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.40.030 - Licensed contractors required. 
All blasting operations must be conducted by a California state-licensed contractor. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.40.040 - Blasting to be conducted as series. 
Explosive operations must be conducted as a series rather than in one action in order to mitigate potential noise and disruption to the surrounding area. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.40.050 - Insurance coverage. 
Before conducting any explosive operations, appropriate insurance coverage by the contractor and the developer must be provided naming the city as an additional insured in an amount determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.40.060 - Blasting plan. 
The following information must be submitted to and approved by the director of engineering services, or his designee, before a permit will be issued: 
A.  Location of blasting area and charge placements; 
B.  Quantity of explosives to be used in each action; 
C.  Pre-blast drilling schedule (blasting may only occur Monday through Friday, except holidays, seven a.m. to four p.m.); 
D.  Schedule of dates and times when blasting will occur (blasting may only occur Monday through Friday, except holidays, seven a.m. to four p.m.); 
E.  Measures to be undertaken which will mitigate noise and earthshaking to surrounding properties during pre-blast drilling and blasting; 
F.  A list of areas requiring clearance of residents prior to blasting operations: 
G.  Any and all traffic control measures for periods prior to, during and immediately after blasting; 
H.  The communication system to be used at checkpoints; and 
I.  A copy of the notice which was delivered to the residents in accordance with Section 16.40.070. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.40.070 - Notice to residents. 
A.  Before a blasting permit will be issued, the developer must provide notice to all residents indicating the intent to conduct a series of blasting operations within a minimum of a one-quarter-mile radius of the premises and the date by which objections must be submitted to the department of engineering services. Said notice shall provide no less than seven days for residents to submit any objections to the department of engineering services. 
B.  A notice detailing the dates and times of all blasting activities must be provided to all residents within a minimum of one-quarter-mile radius of the blasting a minimum of twenty-four hours before the explosive actions. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.40.080 - Requirements. 
In addition to obtaining a blasting permit from the department of engineering services, the developer must also do each of the following: 
A.  Obtain an explosives permit from the Ventura County fire department; 
B.  Obtain approval from Caltrans prior to blasting on any site within one thousand feet of the Ventura Freeway; 
C.  Sign a statement agreeing to abide by all conditions and requirements in this chapter and Chapter 10.34 "Noise Regulations" of this code; 
D.  The contractor must provide a list of all employees who are permitted and licensed to receive and use explosives; 
E.  A geotechnical report outlining the probable after effects of the blasting and the likelihood of the presence of gas pockets and old oil wells must be submitted to the department of engineering services for review and approval; and 
F.  Coordinate with all owners of underground facilities, including but not limited to American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T), Southern California Edison, General Telephone, Southern California Gas, cable TV, water purveyor and sanitary sewer purveyor located within five hundred feet of the proposed blasting operation for determination of no conflict between the blasting operation and their underground facilities. Verification of this coordination must be submitted to the department of engineering services. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.40.090 - On-site observation. 
Notification of blasting must be submitted to the department of engineering services and the city manager at least twenty-four hours in advance of any blasting to allow on-site observation by the city. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.40.100 - Engineering services may order halt to blasting. 
Should any individual explosion result in damage to surrounding properties, the director of engineering services or his designee may order a halt to further blasting. The director of engineering services, or his designee, may also order a halt to blasting prior to commencement of said operation if new information comes to the attention of the director of engineering services, or his designee, after the blasting permit has been issued and said information causes the director of engineering services or his designee to determine that blasting would result in unavoidable harm to persons and/or property. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.40.110 - Appeal. 
A.  Provisions for Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the refusal of a permit may appeal the decision to the city council within thirty days after the date of such decision. The appeal shall be in the form of a written notice filed with the city clerk and signed by the applicant. The notice shall have attached a copy of the application as filed with the engineer, shall recite such other items as have been filed, and shall state clearly and concisely the grounds upon which the applicant relies in his appeal. 
B.  Fee. The appeal shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Time of Hearing. The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing and shall notify the applicant and the director of engineering services of the time of the hearing. 
D.  Notice. The city clerk shall provide notice in the following manner: 
1.  At least ten calendar days before the public hearing, notice shall be given stating the time, date and place of said hearing, the identity of the hearing body, and a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected and the street address, if any, of the property involved; 
2.  Said notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the city; and 
3.  The city shall give notice of the hearing by mail or delivery to: 
a.  The owner of the subject property or the owner's duly authorized agent; 
b.  The permit applicant; and 
c.  All persons, including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within a minimum of a one-quarter-mile radius of the property which is the subject of the proposed application. If notice is given by way of this last method, the notice must also be posted in at least three public places within the boundaries of the city, including one public place in the area directly affected by the proceeding. 
4.  Substantial compliance with the provisions of this section shall be sufficient and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. 
E.  Council Action. At the hearing, the applicant shall establish to the satisfaction of the council that he is entitled to issuance of a permit under this chapter. The director of engineering services, or his designee, may present the grounds for denial of the permit. The decision of the council is final. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
16.40.120 - Violation. 
Every person who performs any work regulated by this chapter, either without first obtaining a permit therefor from the director of engineering services or having a permit, fails to comply with any applicable provision of this chapter or with any condition of the permit, or performs work contrary to any of the general or special requirements or specifications of the permit is deemed in violation of this chapter and such violation shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (part), 1988.)  
Chapter 16.42 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
 
16.42.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general welfare by providing for the identification, protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of historic buildings and structures within the city that reflect special elements of the city's historical heritage for the following reasons: 
A.  To encourage public knowledge, understanding, and appreciation of the city's past; 
B.  To foster civic pride in the beauty and personality of the city and in the accomplishments of its past; 
C.  To safeguard the heritage of the city by protecting buildings and structures which reflect the city's history; 
D.  To protect and enhance property values within the city and to increase economic and financial benefits to the city and its inhabitants; 
E.  To identify as early as possible and resolve conflicts between the preservation of historical features and alternative land use; 
F.  To conserve building material resources through maintenance and restoration of existing historical buildings and structures; 
G.  To take whatever steps are reasonable and necessary to safeguard the property rights of the owners whose building or structure is declared to be a landmark; 
H.  To promote the use of landmarks for the education, enjoyment and welfare of the people of the city; and 
I.  To promote awareness of the economic benefits of historic preservation. 
(Ord. 670 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
16.42.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Alteration" means any change or modification of the exterior of a building or structure, or of an interior space designated as a landmark. Alteration shall include, but is not limited to, a changing or modification of structure, architectural details or visual characteristics and the placement or removal of any exterior objects or ornamentation affecting the exterior or interior visual qualities of the landmark. Alterations shall not include ordinary maintenance and repair. 
B.  "Committee" means the landmark committee of the city. 
C.  "Construction" means the act of interior or exterior modifications of or additions to a landmark or the erection of a new principal or accessory building or structure adjacent to a landmark. 
D.  "Demolition" means any act or process that destroys, in whole or in part, or permanently alters a landmark. 
E.  "Exterior architectural feature" means the architectural elements embodying style, design, general arrangement and components of all of the outer surfaces of an improvement, including, but not limited to, the kind, color and texture of the building materials, and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs, and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvements. 
F.  "Historic resource" means a general term that refers to buildings and structures of historical significance to the citizens of the city and which may be recommended for designation as landmarks pursuant to this chapter. 
G.  "Landmark" means those buildings and structures of significant, historical importance which have received the designation of landmark by resolution of the city council and whose demolition or destruction would constitute an irreplaceable loss to the quality and character of the city. 
H.  "Ordinary repair and maintenance" means any work, the purpose and effect of which is to prevent or correct any deterioration or decay of or damage to a building or structure, or any part thereof, and to restore the same, as nearly as may be practicable, to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay or damage, using the same materials or those materials available which are as close as possible to the original. 
I.  "Reconstruction" means the act or process of reassembling, reproducing, or replacing by new construction, the form, detail and appearance of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work, or by the replacement of missing earlier work, or by reuse of original materials. 
J.  "Rehabilitation" means the act or process of returning a building or structure to a state of utility through repair, remodeling or alteration that makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the building or structure that are significant to its historical value. 
K.  "Relocation" means any change of the location of a building or structure in its present setting or to another setting. 
L.  "Restoration" means the act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a building or structure and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing or earlier work. 
M.  "Work" means any alteration, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, relocation or demolition affecting a land-mark. 
N.  "Work permit" means a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, allowing work to be carried out on a landmark. 
(Ord. 670 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
16.42.030 - Establishment of landmark committee. 
The members of the planning commission shall act as the landmark committee. The committee shall meet as often as required by applications and permits filed. 
(Ord. 670 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
16.42.040 - Powers and duties. 
The committee shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  To oversee a continuing survey of the city so as to evaluate any historic resource and designate any landmarks in accordance with the criteria set forth in Section 16.40.060 
B.  To maintain a local register of landmarks; 
C.  To recommend removal of a designated landmark; 
D.  To review and comment upon the conduct of land use, housing and redevelopment, municipal improvement, and other types of planning and programs undertaken by any agency of the city, the county, or the state as they relate to the historic resources of the city; 
E.  To recommend to the city council the purchase of fee or less than fee interests in buildings or structures for purposes of historic preservation; 
F.  To investigate and report to the city council on the use of various federal, state, local or private funding sources and mechanisms available to promote historic resource preservation in the city; 
G.  To review applications for construction, reconstruction, alteration, relocation or demolition affecting proposed or designated landmarks and approve or deny permits for such actions pursuant to Section 16.40.070 of this chapter; 
H.  To cooperate with local, county, state and federal governments and private organizations in the pursuit of the objectives of historic preservation; 
I.  To keep minutes and records of all meetings and proceedings, including voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations and decisions; 
J.  To participate in, promote, and conduct public information, educational, and interpretive programs pertaining to landmarks; 
K.  To make any reasonable arrangements to preserve landmarks, including establishment of a private or public fund for preservation of landmarks or contractual agreements with property owners for the maintenance and preservation of facade easements or public access to the buildings or structures; 
L.  To ensure that designation of a building or structure as a landmark shall not infringe upon the rights of private owners to make any and all reasonable uses of such landmark which are not inconsistent with the purposes of this chapter; and 
M.  To meet at least annually to review the status of landmarks and prepare an annual report for the city council. 
(Ord. 670 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
16.42.050 - Notice of public hearings. 
Whenever this chapter calls for a public hearing, the abutting property owners of the subject property shall be given ten days' written notice of the public hearing by mail. Notice shall also be advertised once ten days prior to a hearing in a newspaper of general circulation. Such notice shall state the time, date and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected and the street address, if any, of the property involved. 
(Ord. 670 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
16.42.060 - Designation of landmarks. 
A.  Procedures. An application for landmark designation may be made by the property owner or with the written consent of the property owner, by filing such application with the department of planning and community development. The committee, planning commission, or city council may also initiate such application on its own motion, without the consent of the property owner. 
1.  The committee shall hold a noticed public hearing on the application within forty-five days of filing a complete application. Within ten days of the hearing, the committee shall provide a written recommendation to the city council as to whether the building or structure should be designated as a landmark. If the recommendation of the committee is to designate the building or structure as a landmark, the recommendation may include a determination of whether to mark it with a uniform and distinctive marker and shall include the reasons for designating the building or structure as a landmark. 
2.  Within thirty days after receiving the recommendation of the committee, the city council shall hold a noticed public hearing, and approve or deny the recommendation. 
3.  Each hearing may be continued for any reason by the city. 
4.  If an environmental impact report (EIR) or negative declaration is required, the time limits set forth in Public Resources Code Section 21151.5 shall apply. 
5.  The city council shall designate landmarks by resolution, which shall contain a statement as to why the historic resource should be designated as a landmark. Any such resolution shall include a legal description of the property involved, including lot and block number and the name of the property owner and shall be duly recorded by the city clerk in the county recorder's office. 
6.  The staff of the planning commission shall serve as the staff for the committee. 
B.  Criteria. A historic resource may be designated as a landmark if it meets one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  It is associated with persons or events significant in local, state, or national history; or 
2.  It reflects or exemplifies a particular period of national, state, or local history; or 
3.  It embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, style, period of architecture, or method of construction. 
C.  Temporary Stay On Permits Pending Designation. No construction, reconstruction, alteration, demolition, relocation, or other entitlement permits with regard to any proposed landmark shall be issued until the city council has made a final decision to either approve or deny requests for designation. 
D.  Removal of Designation. A landmark designation may be removed subject to the same procedures set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 670 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
16.42.070 - Permits for work affecting landmarks. 
A.  Permits Required. 
1.  Approval from the committee, or the city council on appeal, shall be required before the following actions affecting a landmark may be undertaken: 
a.  Construction and reconstruction; 
b.  Alteration, restoration and rehabilitation; 
c.  Relocation; 
d.  Ordinary repair and maintenance; 
e.  Demolition. 
2.  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to demolish, construct, alter, relocate, or otherwise perform work on any landmark without obtaining a work permit in the manner provided for in this chapter. 
B.  Permit Procedures. 
1.  General. 
a.  Except for a permit for ordinary repair and maintenance, the committee shall hold a public hearing and approve or disapprove the permit application. 
b.  The application shall include all required plans, materials, and documents from the applicant which are reasonably necessary for the proper review of the proposed action to be taken. 
c.  The committee's decision shall be in writing and shall state the findings of fact and reasons relied upon in reaching its decision. 
d.  If an EIR or a negative declaration is required, the time limits set forth in Public Resources Code Section 21151.5 shall apply. 
e.  The decision of the committee shall be final absent a failure to appeal within the time specified in this chapter. 
2.  The committee shall hold a public hearing within forty-five days of the completed application for a work permit for construction and reconstruction, alteration, restoration and rehabilitation, relocation, and demolition. This hearing may be continued from time to time if necessary. In cases of demolition, the committee may delay the hearing for up to six months for purposes of negotiation as provided for in subsection C3d of this section. 
3.  The director of planning and community development or his designee shall approve an application requesting a permit for ordinary repair and maintenance if such application demonstrates to the director's or his designee's satisfaction that the proposed activities will not involve a change in design, material, or external appearance of the landmark. A clear photograph of the building or structure to be repaired, a brief description of the intended work, and samples of replacement materials or paint for comparison with the existing building or structure must be furnished with the application. 
C.  Permit Criteria. 
1.  Alteration, Restoration, and Rehabilitation. The committee, or the city council upon appeal, shall issue an approval for any proposed actions affecting a landmark, except demolition and relocation if, and only if, it determines: 
a.  The proposed work will not detrimentally alter, destroy or adversely affect any exterior architectural feature or any other feature which led the historic resource to be designated as a landmark; and 
b.  In the case of construction of a new improvement upon a landmark or landmark site, the exterior of such improvements will not adversely affect and will be compatible with the external appearance of existing improvements on said landmark or landmark site. 
2.  Relocation of Landmarks. In considering whether to recommend approval or disapproval of an application for a permit to relocate a landmark, the committee shall be guided by the following considerations: 
a.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the setting contributes to the landmark; 
b.  Whether the landmark can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; and 
c.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the landmark. 
3.  Demolition of Landmarks. 
a.  Economic Hardship. Demolition of a landmark constitutes an irreplaceable loss to the quality and character of the city. Therefore, no permit shall be issued for demolition of a landmark unless the applicant shows clear and convincing evidence of unreasonable economic hardship: 
b.  Balancing Required. The committee shall be guided in its determination by balancing the historic value of the particular landmark against the merit of the proposed replacement project. 
c.  Approval of Permit. Should the applicant for demolition satisfy the committee that an unreasonable hardship will be suffered if a demolition permit is not approved, or, in failing to demonstrate unreasonable economic hardship, the applicant demonstrates unusual and compelling circumstances which dictate demolition of the landmark, the committee shall approve the application for a demolition permit. 
d.  Negotiations Prior to Demolition Application Decision. 
i.  Prior to the committee's decision on the demolition permit for a landmark, the planning department shall discuss the proposed demolition informally with the applicant, other city officials and local preservation organizations, to explore whether an alternative to demolition can be found before a formal consideration of the application by the committee. The planning department shall prepare a report for the committee analyzing alternatives to demolition, and request from other city departments or agencies information necessary for the preparation of this report. 
ii.  The negotiation period may take up to six months before the request for a demolition permit is brought to the committee. This time period may be further extended by mutual consent of the city and the applicant. 
iii.  If within this period any one of the following three events occur, the demolition application shall be considered to have been withdrawn by the applicant: 
(A)  The owner enters into a binding contract for the sale of the building or structure; 
(B)  Approved arrangements are made for the building or structure to be moved to an approved new location; or 
(C)  The city determines to condemn the property and take it by power of eminent domain for rehabilitation or reuse by the city, or other disposition with appropriate preservation restrictions in order to promote the historic preservation purposes of this chapter to maintain the building or structure and protect it from demolition. 
D.  Showing of Hardship. 
1.  When a claim of unreasonable economic hardship is made due to the effect of this chapter, the owner and/or applicant must prove to the committee, or city council on appeal, that a reasonable return cannot be realized upon the value of the building or structure. The public benefits obtained from retaining the historic resource must be analyzed and duly considered by the committee. 
2.  The committee may require that an applicant furnish information additional to what was submitted that is relevant to its determination of unreasonable economic hardship. The committee may also furnish additional information as the committee believes is relevant. The committee shall also state which form of financial proof it deems relevant and necessary to a particular case. 
3.  Evidence which may be considered in determining whether unreasonable economic hardship exists, includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  Bona fide efforts to rent or sell the building or structure have been unsuccessful; 
b.  Approval or conditional approval to do work permitted by this chapter will not enable the applicant to rent or sell the building or structure at a reasonable rate of return; 
c.  It is not economically or technically feasible to renovate or undertake an alternative development compatible with the permit criteria outlined in this chapter; 
d.  Personal or economic circumstances exist which preclude the applicant from performing work in compliance with the permit criteria outlined in this chapter; 
e.  Land use regulations and development standards, set forth in the city's zoning ordinance and the Uniform Building Code, preclude necessary renovations or a feasible use of the landmark. 
E.  Appeal Procedure—Director's Action. 
1.  An applicant may appeal the director's decision to the committee by filing a written appeal directed to the committee with the department of planning and community development within ten days from the date of action by the director. The notice of appeal shall indicate the grounds for the appeal. 
2.  The committee shall schedule a public hearing to be held no later than thirty days after the notice of appeal is filed and shall render its decision within thirty days of closing the public hearing. 
3.  In ruling upon the appeal, the committee shall consider the same factors as the director, the report of the city or the director, and any other matters presented at the hearing on the appeal. If the committee approves the application, it shall direct the director of planning and community development to issue a permit for the work covered. If the committee disapproves the application, it shall direct the director of planning and community development not to issue such permit. Such disapproval may indicate what changes in the plans and specifications would meet the conditions for protecting the distinctive historical character of the landmark. 
4.  The decision of the committee may be appealed as provided for in subsection F of this section. 
F.  Appeal Procedure—Committee's Action. 
1.  An applicant may appeal the committee's decision to the city council by filing a written appeal directed to the council with the city clerk within ten days from the date of action by the committee. The notice of appeal shall indicate the grounds for the appeal. 
2.  The city council shall schedule a public hearing to be held no later than thirty days after the notice of appeal is filed and shall render its decision within thirty days of closing the public hearing. 
3.  In ruling upon the appeal, the city council shall consider the same factors as the committee, the report of the city or the director, and any other matters presented at the hearing on the appeal. If the city council approves the application, it shall direct the director of planning and community development to issue a permit for the work covered. If the city council disapproves the application, it shall direct the director of planning and community development not to issue such permit. Such disapproval may indicate what changes in the plans and specifications would meet the conditions for protecting the distinctive historical character of the landmark. 
(Ord. 670 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
16.42.080 - Dangerous conditions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any demolition necessary to correct or eliminate the unsafe or dangerous condition of any designated or proposed landmark, or such condition as has been declared unsafe or dangerous by the department of building and safety and where such demolition is necessary to correct or eliminate such condition and has been ordered by the department of building and safety. 
(Ord. 670 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
16.42.090 - Duty to keep in good repair. 
The owner, occupant, or other person in actual charge of a landmark shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such landmark, all of the interior portions thereof when subject to control as specified in the designating resolution or permit, and all interior portions thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of any exterior feature. It shall be the duty of the building official and/or code enforcement officer to enforce this section. 
(Ord. 670 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
16.42.100 - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Methods of Enforcement. In addition to the regulations of this chapter, other chapters of this code and other provisions of law which govern the approval or disapproval of applications for permits or licenses covered by this chapter, the building officer shall have the authority to implement the enforcement thereof by any of the following means: 
1.  Serving notice requiring the removal of any violation of this chapter upon the owner, agent, occupant, or tenant of the improvement, building, structure, site or land; 
2.  Calling upon the city attorney to institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and the city attorney is authorized to institute any actions to that end; or 
3.  Calling upon the chief of police and authorized agents to assist in the enforcement of this chapter. 
B.  In addition to any of the foregoing remedies, the city attorney may maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain or enjoin or to cause the correction or removal of any violation of this chapter, or for an injunction in appropriate cases. 
C.  Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding six months or be so fined and imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. 670 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
Chapter 16.46 - POLICE FACILITIES FEE 
 
16.46.010 - Findings. 
A.  The city authorized a study addressing the need for a new police facility within the city. In November, 1986, the city was presented with a report by Steinmann, Grayson, Smylie on the need for new police facilities and staffing needs for the Camarillo police department through the year 2005 (the "report"). This report was updated by the Planning Collective Limited in September, 1989 (the "update"). 
B.  The report and the update indicate that there has been a steady increase for police service calls resulting in a demand for increased space and additional staff to ensure that the police functions can be carried out in a responsible manner. Based on the projected growth for the city through the year 2005, the police facility located on Palm Drive has been determined to be inadequate in size and structure and it has been determined that there will be a need to increase staff size. Therefore, the establishment of a new police facility and the imposition of a fee on new development to fund that portion of the new police facility and the imposition of a fee on new development to fund that portion of the new police facility attributable to new development is necessary in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the present and future citizens of Camarillo, and those who work and will work in the city. 
C.  The update recommends that the city acquire at least four acres and construct a facility of approximately twenty-two thousand eight hundred gross square feet, including an emergency operating center, with parking for approximately one hundred twenty-five to one hundred fifty vehicles within the Flynn Road Industrial area. 
D.  The city council has examined and generally concurs with the recommendations of the report, as modified by the update. Based upon the report, the update, and the options available for development of a new police facility in the near future, the city council has selected and purchased an alternate site near Flynn Road which consists of an existing building of approximately twenty-seven thousand seven hundred square feet with one hundred eighty parking spaces. The city council has retained an architectural firm to redesign the building to serve as a police facility, including an emergency operating center. 
E.  The city council has determined that in order to build the police facility in a timely manner, it is necessary to finance new development's share of the costs. As financing will result in an additional monetary expenditure which increases the cost of the police facility, the city council has determined that it is proper to include the financing costs of the portion attributable to new development in the fee. 
F.  Camarillo contracts with the Ventura County sheriff's department for police services. 
(Ord. 796 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 697 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
16.46.020 - Police facility fee. 
A.  There shall be a police facility fee imposed on all new industrial, commercial and residential development in the city in an amount to be determined by a resolution duly adopted by the city council. 
B.  The resolution setting forth the police facility fee shall take into account the portion of the new police facility attributable to new development, the distribution of police calls to the various types of land uses, and the total cost of the new police facility, including acquisition, redesign, construction and financing costs. 
C.  The police facility fee shall be used solely to pay for that portion of the costs attributable to new development for acquiring, redesigning, and constructing the new police facility in the city, including financing costs. 
D.  It is reasonable to impose a police facility fee on all new development in the city as all new development places an increased burden on police services and causes a need for increased staff and increased space and all new development benefits from adequate police service. 
E.  It is reasonable to include the amount of financing the new police facility in the police facility fee as it would be impossible to establish a new police facility prior to building out of the existing general plan without financing such facility and absent such financing, police service would become inadequate in the interim causing a detriment to the public health, safety and welfare of those who live and work in the city. 
(Ord. 796 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 697 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
16.46.030 - Payment of police facility fee. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the police facility fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
(Ord. 796 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 697 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
16.46.040 - Waiver. 
The city council may waive all or part of the police facility fee for low and moderate income housing upon the request of the developer. 
(Ord. 796 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 697 § 1 (part), 1989.)  
Chapter 16.50 - FIRE PROTECTION FACILITIES FEE 
 
16.50.010 - Purpose. 
New construction within the city will create a need for additional fire protection services and a corresponding need for additional or enlarged fire stations from which to provide those services. The Ventura County Fire Protection District which provides fire protection services to the city has primary responsibility for providing the additional fire protection services, but its tax revenues are insufficient to provide the corresponding additional or enlarged fire stations and it is questionable whether the fire district has authority to directly impose a fee on new construction for such purposes. The city does have authority to impose such a fee and it is in the interest of the city to ensure that the fire district has sufficient funds to pay for the needed new or enlarged fire stations. The purpose of this chapter is to impose on new construction within the city, and to transfer to the fire district, a fee in an amount sufficient to reimburse the fire district for that new construction's estimated pro rata share of the cost to the fire district of providing the additional or enlarged fire stations. 
(Ord. 771 § 1 (part), 1992.)  
16.50.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them below. 
"Building official" means the district supervisor of the department of building and safety in the city, or such person's designee. 
"Fire district" means the Ventura County Fire Protection District. 
"Fire station" means a building (including furnishings and fixtures), site, and appurtenant equipment (including vehicles) which are designed, developed and used to provide the full spectrum of fire protection services (excepting central administration services, air unit services, hand crew services, dispatch services, repair shop services, and central training services provided out of buildings located at the Ventura County Airport at Camarillo) to a given service area. 
"Floor space" means "floor area" as the latter term is defined in Section 407 of the 1991 Uniform Building Code, or the most recent amendment thereto. 
"New construction," when applied to the construction of residential buildings or the installation of mobilehomes, means construction or installation which increases the number of dwelling units on a given lot or parcel. "New construction," when applied to the construction of nonresidential buildings means construction which increases the total square footage of a structure on a given lot or parcel. 
A fire station or group of fire stations is "overextended" when, as determined by resolution of the city council, the estimated population of the station's or group's service area exceeds, or the projected population of the service area will at any time within the following eight years exceed, the maximum number of people which the station or group of stations can adequately serve. 
The "service area" for a given fire station or group of fire stations is that geographical area within the fire district, including both incorporated and unincorporated territory, within which the station or group of stations is located and to which the station or group of stations is the primary provider of fire protection services. The precise boundaries of a given service area shall be determined by resolution of the city council based upon information provided by the fire district. 
"Standard fire station" means a fire station designed to the fire district's specifications, containing five thousand seven hundred square feet of floor space, and having as appurtenant equipment one new fire engine and one reserve fire engine. 
(Ord. 771 § 1 (part), 1992.)  
16.50.030 - Fire protection facilities fee. 
Within the incorporated portion of any service area for which the existing fire station or group of fire stations is overextended, a fire protection facilities fee computed pursuant to this chapter shall be imposed upon the issuance of any building permit for new construction. Except as otherwise provided by Government Code Section 66007, the fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit or, in the case of a mobilehome, prior to the issuance of a mobilehome set-up permit. 
(Ord. 771 § 1 (part), 1992.)  
16.50.040 - Computation of fee for residential construction. 
A.  The amount of the fire protection facilities fee to be paid pursuant to Section 16.50.030 with respect to the construction of residential buildings or the installation of mobilehomes shall be the dollar amount equal to "X" in the following formula: 
X = ACD / B 
where: 
"A" equals the estimated cost of acquiring a standard fire station, excluding land acquisition costs, but including site preparation and landscaping costs; 
"B" equals the maximum number of people who can be served adequately by a standard fire station; 
"C" equals the estimated average number of people who will reside in each dwelling unit in the buildings or mobilehomes for which the permit is issued, multiplied by a number equal to the number of dwelling units which will be contained in such buildings or mobilehomes after construction, minus, in cases where the construction is the replacement or modification of existing buildings or mobilehomes, the number of dwelling units contained in such buildings or mobilehomes immediately prior to construction; and 
"D" equals the estimated portion, expressed as a decimal, of the standard fire station needed to provide service to residential buildings and mobilehomes, as opposed to nonresidential buildings. 
B.  The specific number values to be assigned to "A," "B" and "D" in the foregoing formula, and the estimated average number of people per dwelling unit for the purpose of computing the value "C" in the foregoing formula, shall be determined by resolution of the city council from time to time on the basis of evidence submitted to it. 
C.  With respect to residential buildings or mobilehomes constructed or installed within a subdivision for which the tentative map was approved subject to the condition that the subdivider donate fire protection facilities, a credit shall be given against the fee on account of such donated facilities which are accepted by the fire district. For the purposes of this section, unfinished facilities shall be deemed to have been "accepted" by the fire district if such facilities are to be completed pursuant to a secured improvement agreement made in accordance with Section 66462 of the Government Code. The amount of the credit shall be determined as follows: 
1.  The fair market value of the donated and accepted facilities, excluding the land therefor, as of the date on which the final or parcel map was recorded shall be determined by written agreement of the chief of the fire district and the subdivider or applicant or, if they should fail to agree, by an independent appraiser selected by the chief of the fire district and paid for by the subdivider or applicant. 
2.  The estimated number of people who will reside in the entire subdivision when it is fully developed will be determined by multiplying the number of dwelling units proposed for the subdivision by the estimated average number of people who will reside in each unit and then adding the products. The estimated average number of people who will reside in each dwelling unit shall be the same as that used to calculate the value of "C" in the foregoing formula. 
3.  A fair market value as determined pursuant to subsection C 1 of this section shall then be divided by the estimated number of people who will reside in the entire subdivision as determined pursuant to subsection C 2 of this section. 
4.  The estimated number of people who will reside in the unit to be constructed or installed shall be multiplied by the quotient determined pursuant to subsection C 3 of this section. A credit for that unit shall be the dollar amount equal to the product; provided, however, that the amount of the credit shall not exceed the amount of the fee. 
(Ord. 771 § 1 (part), 1992.)  
16.50.050 - Computation of fee for nonresidential construction. 
A.  The amount of the fire protection facilities fee to be paid pursuant to Section 16.50.030 with respect to the construction of a nonresidential building shall be the dollar amount equal to "Y" in the following formula: 
Y = AFG / E 
where: 
"A" equals the number value assigned to "A" for the purpose of Section 16.50.040; 
"E" equals the maximum square footage of nonresidential building floor space which can be served adequately by a standard fire station; 
"F" equals the number of square feet of floor space in the building for which the building permit is issued minus, in cases where the construction is the replacement or modification of an existing building, the number of square feet of floor space in such existing building immediately prior to such replacement or modification; and 
"G" equals the number one minus the number value assigned to "D" for the purposes of Section 16.50.040. 
B.  The specific number values to be assigned to "E" in the foregoing formula shall be determined by resolution of the city council from time to time on the basis of evidence submitted to it. 
C.  With respect to buildings constructed for use pursuant to a conditional use permit or other similar entitlement that was approved subject to the condition that the permittee donate fire protection facilities, a credit shall be given against the fee on account of such donated facilities which are accepted by the fire district. For the purposes of this section, unfinished facilities shall be deemed to have been "accepted" by the fire district if such facilities are to be completed pursuant to a secured improvement agreement made in accordance with Section 66462 of the Government Code. The amount of the credit shall be determined as follows: 
1.  The fair market value of the donated and accepted facilities, excluding the land therefor, as of the date on which the conditional use permit or other similar entitlement was approved shall be determined by written agreement of the chief of the fire district and the permittee or applicant or, if they should fail to agree, by an independent appraiser selected by the chief of the fire district and paid for by the permittee or applicant; 
2.  A fair market value as determined pursuant to subsection C 1 shall then be divided by the estimated number of square feet of floor space in all existing and proposed buildings that will be used pursuant to the conditional use permit or other similar entitlement; 
3.  The value of "F" in the foregoing formula computed with respect to the building for which the building permit is issued shall be multiplied by the quotient determined pursuant to subsection C 2 of this section. A credit for that building shall be the dollar amount equal to the product; provided, however, that the amount of the credit shall not exceed the amount of the fee. 
(Ord. 771 § 1 (part), 1992.)  
16.50.060 - Use of fire protection facilities fee. 
All fire protection facilities fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be forwarded to the fire district on a periodic basis but no later than ninety calendar days after collection. All fees so forwarded shall be deposited in a restricted account of the fire district within the county treasury and all moneys deposited in such account together with any interest earned thereon shall be used only for the purposes of acquiring or improving fire stations serving the service area, or portions thereof, from which the fees were collected, subject to the refund provisions of Section 16.50.070. 
(Ord. 771 § 1 (part), 1992.)  
16.50.070 - Refund of fee. 
Any fire protection facilities fee collected pursuant to this chapter, plus any interest accrued thereon, shall be refunded to the payor if the building permit to which it relates is canceled or expires prior to commencement of construction pursuant thereto and if the payor files a written application for the refund with the building official within one hundred eighty calendar days after such cancellation or expiration. In any case where the building official determines that a fee deposited in the county treasury should be refunded pursuant to this section, the building official shall so notify the fire district and request transmittal of the refund to the city, and the city shall make the refund to the person entitled thereto. Refunds pursuant to this section are in addition to any refunds that may be required by Government Code Section 66001. 
(Ord. 771 § 1 (part), 1992.)  
Chapter 16.54 - SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS 
 
16.54.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the California Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (which amended Civil Code section 714 and Government Code section 65850.5 of the Act) ) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3(Exh. A), 9-9-2015)  
16.54.020 - Definitions. 
"Association" means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
"Common interest development" means any of the following: 
1.  a community apartment project; 
2.  a condominium project; 
3.  a planned development; or 
4.  a stock cooperative. 
"Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: email; the internet; or facsimile. 
"Reasonable restrictions" on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits. 
"Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance" means: 
1.  For Water Heater Systems or Solar Swimming Pool Heating Systems: an amount exceeding 10% of the cost of the system, but in no case more than $1,000, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding 10 percent, as originally specified and proposed. 
2.  For Photovoltaic Systems: an amount not to exceed $1,000 over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding 10 percent as originally specified and proposed. 
"Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal. 
2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and all state and city health and safety standards. 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city. 
"Solar energy system" means either of the following: 
1.  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
2.  Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
"Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3(Exh. A), 9-9-2015)  
16.54.030 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. 
B.  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements will not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3(Exh. A), 9-9-2015)  
16.54.040 - Solar energy system requirements. 
A.  All solar energy systems must meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state, the city and the local fire department. 
B.  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications must be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
C.  Solar energy systems for producing electricity must meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3(Exh. A), 9-9-2015)  
16.54.050 - Permit application procedures. 
A.  The building and safety department will adopt and maintain standard plans and a checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
B.  The city's standard plans and checklist will substantially conform to state recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
C.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application will be made available on the publicly accessible city Website. 
D.  Applicants for small residential rooftop solar energy system permits may make electronic submittals of the required permit application and documents by email and the Internet. 
E.  An applicant's electronic signature will be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
F.  All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy system must comply, as applicable, with Government Code section 65850.55, Government Code section 66015, Government Code section 66016, and Health and Safety Code section 17951. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3(Exh. A), 9-9-2015)  
16.54.060 - Permit review and inspection requirements. 
A.  The building and safety department will adopt and maintain an administrative review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. 
B.  The building and safety department will issue a building permit or other ministerial permit the same day for over-the-counter applications or within 1—3 business days for electronic applications upon receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved city checklist and standard plan. 
C.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance will be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
D.  Review of the application will be limited to the building and safety department's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. 
E.  Any condition imposed on an application must be a feasible method to mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city will use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets does not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance as defined in this chapter and in Civil Code section 714. 
F.  The city may not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association. 
G.  Only one inspection may be required and performed by the building and safety department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. 
H.  The inspection will be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within one business day of a request. 
I.  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails the initial inspection, any subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
J.  The city, may not deny an application for a permit to install a solar energy system unless it makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. The findings must include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives of preventing the adverse impact. 
K.  Any decision of the building official pursuant to subsections (E) and (J) may be appealed to the planning commission. Appeals from any decision of the building official must be made in writing and filed with the department of building and safety within ten days from the date of the issuance of the building official's decision. The appeal must be made on the approved form available from the city and must include the date of appeal, the grounds for the appeal, and the appeal processing fee established by the city council. The appeal will be final with the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3(Exh. A), 9-9-2015)  
Chapter 16.55 - Electrical Vehicle Charging Stations 
 
16.55.010 - Definitions. 
The words, phrases and terms used in this chapter will have the meaning set forth in this section unless another meaning is clearly apparent from the context. 
"Building official" means the person or entity designated as such by the city council or that person or entity's designee, as set forth under Section 16.040.020.B, who is authorized to interpret and administer the provisions of this chapter. 
"Electronic submittal" has the meaning set forth in Government Code section 65850.7(i)(2), as it may be amended. 
"Electric vehicle charging station" or "charging station" has the meaning set forth in Government Code section 65850.7(i)(3), as it may be amended. 
"A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" has the meaning set forth in Government Code section 65850.7(i)(1), as it may be amended. 
"Specific, adverse impact" has the meaning set forth in Government Code section 65850.7(i)(4), as it may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1143, § 3, 9-27-2017)  
16.55.020 - Implementation of expedited permitting process. 
This chapter implements an expedited, streamlined permitting process for the installation of electric vehicle charging stations, and establishes a checklist of requirements before an applicant may be eligible for expedited review of eligible permit applications for electric vehicle charging stations. The city's checklist will be published on the city's website. 
(Ord. No. 1143, § 3, 9-27-2017)  
16.55.030 - Permit application procedure. 
A.  Prior to submitting an application, the applicant must verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety. Verification by the applicant includes, but is not limited to, review of the following for adequate safety: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking. 
B.  After submission, a permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the city's adopted checklist will be reviewed. If deemed complete, the permit application will be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the building official that the permit application and supporting documents meets the requirements of the city adopted checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the building official will approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the city. If the building official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she will issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. 
C.  The building official will allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by this chapter and associated supporting documents. In accepting such permit applications, the building official will also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1143, § 3, 9-27-2017)  
16.55.040 - Review. 
A.  If the building official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon public health or safety, as defined in this chapter, the city may require the applicant to apply for a use permit. 
B.  In the technical review of a charging station, the building official may not condition the approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of such a system by an association, as defined by Civil Code section 4080 (a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development). 
C.  Any conditions imposed on an application to install an electric vehicle charging station must be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety at the lowest cost possible. 
D.  The city may not deny an application for a use permit to install an electric vehicle charging station unless it makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. The findings will include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives of preventing the adverse impact. 
E.  Electric vehicle charging station equipment must meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
F.  Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices must meet the requirements of Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, and all other applicable provisions of the California Electrical Code. 
G.  Installation of electric vehicle charging stations must be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and must meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment will be considered a continuous load for the purposes of such calculations. 
H.  Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations must meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer's installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations may not adversely affect building elements. 
(Ord. No. 1143, § 3, 9-27-2017)  
16.55.050 - Appeals. 
A.  The decision of the building official may be appealed to the planning commission. 
B.  Any appeal pursuant to this section must be in writing and filed within 15 days of the building official's decision. The written appeal must also specify the basis for the appeal and must be accompanied by an administrative appeal fee in an amount determined by city council resolution. The appeal hearing will be scheduled at the earliest opportunity and in any event no later than 45 days after a complete appeal application is filed. The city will notify the appellant of the time and place for consideration of the appeal. In acting on an appeal under this section, the planning commission will determine whether the permit should be issued or denied pursuant to this chapter. The decision of the planning commission will be final. 
(Ord. No. 1143, § 3, 9-27-2017)  
Title 17 - SIGNS  
Chapter 17.04 - SIGN REGULATIONS (PRIVATE PROPERTY) 
 
17.04.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes and intent of these sign regulations include to: 
A.  Regulate signs located on private property within the city and on property owned by public agencies other than the city and over which the city has zoning and land use regulatory power. 
B.  Implement the city's community design and safety standards as set forth in the city's general plan, specific plans, special districts, design guidelines and municipal code. 
C.  Maintain and enhance the city's appearance by regulating the design, character, location, number, type, quality of materials, size, illumination and maintenance of signs. 
D.  Serve the city's interests in maintaining and enhancing its visual appeal for residents, tourists and other visitors by preventing the degradation of visual quality which can result from excessive and poorly designed, located or maintained signage. 
E.  Generally limit commercial signage to on-site locations in order to protect the aesthetic environment from the visual clutter associated with the unrestricted proliferation of signs, while providing channels of communication to the public. 
F.  Limit the size and number of signs to levels that reasonably allow for the identification of a residential, public or commercial location and the nature of any such commercial business. 
G.  Encourage signs that are appropriate to the zoning district in which they are located and consistent with the permitted uses of the subject property. 
H.  Establish sign sizes in relationship to the scale of the parcel and building on which the sign is to be placed or to which it pertains. 
I.  Minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property, including streets, roads and highways. 
J.  Protect the investments in property and lifestyle quality made by persons who choose to live, work or do business in the city. 
K.  Protect and improve pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety by balancing the need for signs that facilitate the safe and smooth flow of traffic (e.g., directional signs and on-site signs) without an excess of signage which may distract drivers or overload their capacity to quickly receive information. 
L.  Reduce hazardous situations, confusion and visual clutter caused by the proliferation, placement, illumination, animation and excessive height, area and bulk of signs which compete for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
M.  Regulate signs in a manner so as to not to physically interfere with or obstruct the vision of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
N.  Avoid unnecessary and time consuming approval requirements for certain minor or temporary signs that do not require review for compliance with the city's building and electrical codes, while limiting the size and number of such signs so as to minimize visual clutter. 
O.  Respect and protect the right of free speech by sign display, while reasonably regulating the structural, locational and other noncommunicative aspects of signs, generally for the public health, safety, welfare and specifically to serve the public interests in community aesthetics and traffic and pedestrian safety. 
P.  Enable the fair, consistent and efficient enforcement of the sign regulations of the city. 
Q.  Regulate signs in a constitutional manner, which is content neutral as to noncommercial signs and viewpoint neutral as to commercial signs. All administrative interpretations and discretion are to be exercised in light of this policy and consistent with the purposes and intent stated in this section. 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.)  
17.04.020 - Definitions. 
The words, phrases and terms used in this chapter will have the meaning set forth in this section unless another meaning is clearly apparent from the context. 
"Banner sign" means a temporary sign publicizing a unique happening, action, purpose or occasion and constructed of lightweight cloth, canvas, paper or similar material. 
"Business associates sign" means lettering on the building or windows of a building indicating the owners, operators or associates of the business or occupancy. 
"Changeable copy sign" means a sign that is characterized by changeable copy, letters, symbols, or numerals. 
"Commercial message" means any wording, logo or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a commercial or industrial business, product, good, service or other commercial or industrial activity. 
"Commercial sign" means any sign that is intended to attract attention to a commercial or industrial business, occupancy, product, good, service, or other commercial or industrial activity for a commercial or industrial purpose. 
"Construction sign" means a temporary sign denoting the architects, engineers, owners, lenders, contractors, future tenants and others associated with a construction project, but which contains no other advertising matter. 
"Department" means the department of community development of the city of Camarillo. 
"Direct lighting" means a light source used which is detached from the sign to illuminate the sign surface. 
"Director" means the director of the community development department or the director's designee. 
"Directory sign" means a sign illustrating the general site plan and listing the businesses or establishments within an office complex, shopping center or industrial complex showing the locations of various buildings, uses or occupancies on a single display surface. 
"Display surface" means that area of a sign or area structure utilized for displaying copy, messages or display. 
"Double-face sign" means a sign that has two display surfaces, backed against each other or against the same supporting structure in such a manner that each display surface is designed to be viewed from a different direction. 
"Election period" means the period commencing 90 days before any national, state, or local election in which city electors may vote up through the date of the election. 
"Erect" means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix to or upon any surface. 
"Face or wall of a building" means the outer surface of any main exterior wall or foundation of a building, including windows and store fronts. 
"Flashing sign" means any sign which, by method or manner of illumination, flashes, winks or blinks with varying light intensity, shows motion, or creates the illusion of motion, or revolves in a manner to create the illusion of being on or off. 
"Freestanding sign" means any sign supported by one or more upright poles or rock, block, or masonry base in or upon the ground, other than an outdoor advertising structure, and not attached to a building. 
"Fuel pricing sign" means a sign indicating, and limited to, the brand or trade name, method of sale, grade designation and price per gallon of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel offered for sale on the premises and such other information as may be required by law. 
"Future construction sign" means a sign indicating the future location of a building and the developer of such building. 
"Hand-held sign" means a sign that is held by or otherwise mounted on a person. For the purposes of this chapter, hand-held sign does not include a noncommercial sign. 
"Identification sign" means a sign that contains only the name, trademark or symbol, or address, of the building or occupant of the property. 
"Illegal sign" means: (a) any sign originally erected or installed without first complying with all structural, locational, design, building and electrical regulations in effect at the time of its construction or installation; (b) any commercial sign that is not maintained, or is not used to identify or advertise an ongoing business, occupancy, product, good or service available on the site of the sign for more than ninety days; (c) any unsafe sign; (d) any legal nonconforming sign that has not been removed following the expiration of any applicable amortization period provided in this code; and (e) any sign that is in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
"Incidental sign" means a sign indicating credit cards accepted, trade affiliations, no solicitation, no trespassing and similar property-related matters. 
"Industrial park" means a group of four or more industries, developed as an independent entity under a common plan and design with common off-street parking as an integral part thereof, the single units of which entity do not have direct access to a public street but with the entity as a whole having such direct access. 
"Inflatable sign" means a sign that is inflated by air or other gaseous matter. 
"Interior illumination" means the placement of lights on the interior of a sign panel designed to evenly distribute the source of light upon the translucent sign surface. 
"Legal nonconforming sign" means a sign that was originally erected or installed in compliance with all structural, locational, design, building and electrical regulations at the time of its erection or installation, but which no longer conforms to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Lighted sign" means a sign that is illuminated by any source, whether internal, external or indirect. 
"Marquee sign" means a sign affixed to a building that projects into a public or private right-of-way and which is typically used to identify movie or live performance or event attractions. 
"Master sign program" means a plan showing the location, dimensions, area, color, lighting and materials of all signs located on a single parcel or parcels, either under the same ownership or under the same planned development permit. 
"Menu board sign" means a wall or monument sign displaying a list of items available with prices at a drive-through business for the purpose of taking drive-through orders. 
"Mobile sign" means the use of a moving trailer, automobile, truck, or any other vehicle to display commercial or noncommercial messages primarily for advertising purposes unrelated to the principal use of such vehicle. 
"Monument sign" means a sign supported by a base constructed of concrete, block or rock material placed in or upon the ground that has no air space, columns or supports visible between the ground and the bottom of the sign. 
"Moving, rotating or animated sign" means a sign which rotates, moves, flashes, blinks, or directs attention to or advertises with human or animal figures or has animated movement by a sequence or series of flashing, flickering, rotating or blinking lights, excepting therefrom any sign as may show date, time, temperature or barometric information only. 
"Multitenant sign" means a sign listing the names of the various tenants, which do not have direct access or visibility to a public street, occupying a building or buildings on a parcel of land or multiple parcels of land approved under a common plan with common off-street parking and access. 
"Noncommercial message" means any wording, logo or other representation that does not directly or indirectly, name, advertise or calls attention to a commercial or industrial business, product, good, service or other commercial or industrial activity. 
"Noncommercial sign" means a sign that does not name, advertise or call attention of a commercial or industrial business, commodity, product, good, service or other commercial or industrial activity for a commercial or industrial purpose. 
"Office complex" means a group of four or more separate offices, developed as an independent functioning entity under a common plan and design with common off-street parking as an integral part of the plan and where the separate offices do not have direct access to a public street, but the complex as a whole has such direct access. 
"Off-site sign" means a commercial sign not located on the site of the business or entity indicated or advertised by the sign, or a commercial sign advertising a commodity, good, product, service or other commercial or industrial activity which originates on a site other than where the sign is maintained. Off-site sign includes outdoor advertising structures. 
"On-site sign" means any sign which directs attention to an occupancy, business, commodity, good, product, service or other activity conducted, sold or offered upon the site where the sign is maintained. For the purposes of this chapter, all signs with noncommercial messages are deemed to be on-site, regardless of location. 
"Outdoor advertising structure" means a sign erected for the purpose of advertising a product, event, person or subject not related to the premises on which the sign is located (i.e., a billboard). 
"Permanent sign" means any sign which is intended to be and is constructed as to be of lasting and enduring condition, remaining unchanged in character, condition (beyond normal wear and tear) and position and in a permanent manner affixed to the ground, wall or building. 
"Portable sign" means a freestanding sign that is not permanently affixed, anchored or secured to either the ground or a structure on the premises it is intended to occupy, but does not include hand-held signs. For the purposes of this chapter, a portable sign does not include a noncommercial sign. 
"Projecting sign" means a sign mounted on the wall or building face or structure and the display surface of which projects more than twelve inches from the face of the building. 
"Public convenience sign" means a sign that serves the public safety or convenience, such as a sign that indicates the entrance or exit to a property, identifies parking areas, or provides regulatory or service information of a noncommercial character. 
"Real estate sign" means any temporary sign that relates to the sale, lease or exchange of all or a portion of the premises upon which it is located. 
"Roof sign" means a sign erected upon or wholly supported by the roof of a structure. 
"Shopping center" means a group of four or more separate stores, developed as an independent functioning entity under a common plan and design with common off-street parking as an integral part of the design, and the single units of the entity do not have direct access to a public street, but the entity as a whole does have such direct access. 
"Sign" means any device, fixture, placard or structure, including its component parts, which draws attention to an object, product, place, activity, opinion, person, institution, organization, or place of business, or which identifies or promotes the interests of any person and which is to be viewed from any public street, road, highway, right-of-way or parking area. The following are not within the definition of "sign" for the regulatory purposes of this title: 
1.  Any public or legal notice required by a court or public agency; 
2.  Decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks or moving parts; 
3.  Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts including, but not limited to, religious or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a permanent building which is otherwise legal; 
4.  Signs on street legal vehicles, license plates, license plate frames, registration insignia, including noncommercial messages, messages relating to the business or service of which the vehicle is an instrument or tool (not including general advertising) and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of the vehicle; 
5.  Traffic, directional, emergency, warning or informational signs required or authorized by a government agency having jurisdiction; 
6.  Permanent memorial or historical signs, plaques or markers; 
7.  Public utility signs; and 
8.  Newsracks that are otherwise subject to regulation under this code. 
"Sign face" means that portion of a sign intended to be viewed from one direction at a time. 
"Temporary sign" means any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, wood or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. 
"Unsafe sign" means a sign posing an immediate peril or reasonably foreseeable threat of injury or damage to persons or property on account of the condition of the sign structure or its mounting mechanism. 
"Wall sign" means a sign applied to or mounted on or painted on the surface of a building and the display surface of which is parallel to or on the wall surface and which has no portion that projects more than twelve inches from the wall surface. 
"Window sign" means any sign placed in a window or attached to the interior side of a window surface or painted on the exterior or interior side of a window surface, or otherwise located within six inches of the window so as to be visible from the exterior of the building. This definition does not include window displays of merchandise offered for sale or incidental signs. A window sign painted on the exterior surface of a window must be sealed in a manner that preserves the sign and protects it from damage or defacement. 
"Zone" means the zone district designation, definition or classification designated in Title 19 of this code. 
The following definitions contained in Title 19 of this code (as they may be amended) apply to the provisions of this title: 
1.  Front yard (Section 19.04.825); 
2.  Parcel (Section 19.04.595); 
3.  Rear yard (Section 19.04.830); 
4.  Side yard (Section 19.04.835); 
5.  Street (Section 19.04.745). 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 1, 10-8-2014; Ord. No. 1122, § 3, 3-23-2016)  
17.04.030 - Applicability. 
This chapter regulates signs located on private property within all zoning districts of the city. This chapter also applies to signs within public rights-of-way, and to property owned by public agencies other than the city and over which the city has zoning and land use regulatory power. Except where otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, all signs located in such areas of the city must be erected and maintained in conformity with this chapter. 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.)  
17.04.040 - General provisions. 
A.  Sign Permit Required. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to place, erect, structurally or electrically alter, change commercial message copy (except for changeable copy signs), move, or display any temporary or permanent sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the department in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No additional sign permit is required for cleaning or other normal maintenance of a previously approved sign, unless a structural or electrical change is made. 
B.  Owner's Consent Required. The consent of the property owner or person in control or possession of the property is required before any sign may be erected on any private property within the city. 
C.  Noncommercial Signs. Noncommercial signs are allowed wherever commercial signage is permitted and are subject to the same standards and total maximum allowances per site or building of each sign type specified in this chapter. A permit is required for a permanent noncommercial sign only when a permanent commercial sign has not been previously approved. For purposes of this chapter, all noncommercial messages are deemed to be on-site, regardless of location. 
D.  Substitution of Noncommercial Messages. Subject to the consent of the property owner or person in control or possession of the property, a noncommercial message of any type may be substituted for all or part of the commercial or noncommercial message on any sign allowed under this chapter. No special or additional approval is required to substitute a noncommercial message for any other message on a permitted sign, provided the sign structure is already approved or exempt from the sign permit requirement and no structural or electrical change is made. When a noncommercial message is substituted for any other message; however, the sign is still subject to the same design, locational and structural regulations (e.g., color, materials, size, height, illumination, maintenance, duration of display etc.) as well as all building and electrical code requirements, as would apply, if the sign were used to display a commercial message. In the event of any perceived or actual conflict between the general provisions of this subsection and any other specific provisions in this chapter, the provisions of this subsection will prevail. 
E.  Substitution of Commercial Messages. The substitution of one commercial message for another commercial message is not automatically allowed nor is the free substitution of a commercial message in a place where only a noncommercial message is allowed. In addition, no off-site commercial messages may be substituted for on-site commercial messages. 
F.  Legal Nature of Sign Rights and Duties. All rights, duties and responsibilities related to permanent signs attach to the land on which the sign is erected or displayed and run with the land or personal property. The city may demand compliance with this chapter and with the terms of any sign permit from the permit holder, the owner of the sign, the property owner or person in control or possession of the property, or the person erecting the sign. 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.)  
17.04.050 - Signs not requiring a sign permit. 
The following signs do not require a sign permit under Section 17.04.060 of this chapter, nor will the area of such signs be included in the maximum area of signs permitted; provided, however, that each such sign must comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter. The intent of this section is to avoid unnecessary or time consuming review procedures where certain permitted signs are minor or temporary or the erection of such sign does not require review for compliance with the city's building or electrical codes. 
A.  Campaign signs; 
B.  Construction signs; 
C.  Hand-held noncommercial signs; 
D.  Incidental signs; provided, that the maximum sign area for all such signs does not exceed six square feet per use or occupancy on a parcel; 
E.  Real estate signs; 
F.  Temporary freestanding noncommercial signs permitted by Section 17.04.090(J) of this chapter; 
G.  Window signs. 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.)  
17.04.060 - Administration. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of a sign permit is to help ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, in particular, the provisions regulating the design, illumination, location, materials, number, size and type of sign. 
B.  Sign Permit Application Process. 
1.  Where specifically required by this chapter, an application for a sign permit must be made in writing on the form provided by the department and accompanied by any required materials, plans and exhibits and the required fee established by city council resolution. 
2.  The director shall initially determine whether the application contains all the information and items required by the provisions of this chapter and may be deemed complete. 
3.  All notices required by this chapter are deemed given upon the date, any such notice is either deposited in the United States mail or the date upon which personal service of such notice is provided. 
4.  No sign permit application will be accepted, if: 
a.  The applicant has installed a sign in violation of the provisions of this chapter and, at the time of submission of the application, each illegal sign has not been legalized, removed or included in the application. 
b.  There is any other existing code violation located on the site of the proposed sign(s) (other than an illegal sign that is not owned or controlled by the applicant and is located at a different business location on the site from that for which the approval is sought) that has not been cured at the time of the application. 
c.  The sign permit application is substantially the same as an application previously denied, unless: (i) twelve months have elapsed since the date of the last application, or (ii) new evidence or proof of changed conditions is furnished in the new application. 
d.  The applicant has not submitted for processing or obtained any applicable use permit. 
C.  Standard Sign Permit Review Process. 
1.  After receiving a complete sign permit application, the director shall cause the application to be reviewed and render a written decision to approve or deny the application within ten business days. 
2.  Determinations on sign permit applications are to be guided by the standards and criteria set forth in this chapter. An application shall be approved whenever the proposed sign conforms to all design, size, height and other standards for signs subject to a permit requirement; as such requirements are set forth in this chapter. 
3.  The director may refer certain sign permit applications to the planning commission for review. Such determination should be made within ten days of a complete application and acted upon by the planning commission within sixty days or concurrent with any related and required project approval that is presented to the planning commission. The planning commission's approval may be conditional so as to ensure compliance with the purposes and provisions of this chapter. 
4.  An application may be granted either in whole or in part when more than one sign or location is proposed by an applicant. When an application is denied in whole or in part, the determination of the director or planning commission must be in writing and must specify the grounds for such denial. 
D.  Sign Permit Review: Master Sign Programs, Modifications and Variances. 
1.  Master Sign Programs. The director has the authority to authorize master sign programs with specific design standards to enable reasonable flexibility for unique circumstances and special design themes. 
2.  Modifications. The director may grant slight modifications in or approve signs deviating from the provisions of this chapter or any limitations imposed upon the use or general design of the sign and may authorize modifications from the permitted sign area, height or setback requirements not to exceed ten percent. Before granting any such minor modification, the director must make the applicable variance findings as set forth in Chapter 19.66 of this code. 
3.  Variances. The planning commission may grant variances from the provisions of this chapter for the erection and maintenance of signs when difficulties, unnecessary hardship or results inconsistent with the general purpose of this chapter would otherwise occur and would deprive the owner of rights enjoyed by others. The application and review process for a sign variance will follow the applicable procedures set forth in Chapter 19.66 of this code. 
E.  Time Limit. Signs authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter must be erected within one year of the issuance of the permit; otherwise, the approval will be null and void. 
F.  Revocation of a Sign Permit. Subject to Section 17.04.150 of this chapter, the director may revoke any permit approval upon refusal of the permit holder to comply with the provisions of this chapter after written notice of noncompliance was issued and at least fifteen days opportunity to cure. 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.)  
17.04.070 - General location, height and area standards. 
A.  Location Standards. 
1.  Except as specifically provided in this chapter, no sign may be located upon or project over a public right-of-way. 
2.  Except as specifically provided in this chapter, no sign may extend above the eave line or parapet or the lowest point on the sloping roof of the building on which it is located. 
3.  Signs must be designed and located so as not to interfere with the unobstructed clear view of the public right-of-way and nearby traffic regulatory signs or any pedestrian, bicyclist or motor vehicle driver. 
4.  All signs authorized under this chapter must be placed on the side of the property facing on a public or private right-of-way. 
B.  Sign Height. Sign height will be measured using the greatest vertical measurement from grade level along the base of the sign structure to the highest point of the sign. 
C.  Sign Area. The surface area of any sign face will be computed from the smallest rectangles, circles or triangles which will enclose all words, letters, figures, symbols, designs and pictures, together with all framing, background material, colored or illuminated areas, and attention-attracting devices forming an integral part of the overall display, but excluding all support structures, except that: 
1.  Superficial ornamentation or symbol-type appendages of a nonmessage-bearing character which do not exceed five percent of the surface area will be exempted from computation. 
2.  Wall signs painted on or affixed directly to a building wall, facade or roof, and having no discernible boundary, will have the areas between letters, words intended to be read together, and any device intended to draw attention to the sign message included in any computation of surface area. 
3.  Signs placed in such a manner, or bearing a text, as to require dependence upon each other in order to convey meaning will be considered one sign and the intervening areas between signs included in any computation of surface area. 
4.  Spherical, cylindrical or other three-dimensional signs not having conventional sign faces will be computed from the smallest three-dimensional geometrical shape or shapes which will best approximate the actual surface area of such faces up to an eight-sided shape. 
5.  Logos and graphics will be included as part of the calculation of sign area. 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.)  
17.04.080 - Design, material, construction and maintenance standards. 
Each permanent sign that requires a permit must comply with the following standards: 
A.  Materials and Colors. All permanent signs must be constructed of durable materials that are compatible in appearance to the building supporting or identified by the sign. Sign colors and materials should be selected to be compatible with the existing building designs and should contribute to legibility and design integrity. 
B.  Relationship to Buildings. Each permanent sign located upon a site with more than one main building, such as a commercial, office or industrial complex must be designed to incorporate the materials common or similar to all buildings. 
C.  Relationship to Other Signs. Where there is more than one sign on a site or building, all permanent signs must have designs that similarly treat or incorporate the following design elements: 
1.  Type of construction materials; 
2.  Sign/letter color and style of copy; 
3.  Method used for supporting sign (i.e., wall or ground base); 
4.  Sign cabinet or other configuration of sign area; 
5.  Illumination; and 
6.  Location. 
D.  Sign Illumination. Illumination from or upon any sign must be shaded, shielded, directed or reduced so as to minimize light spillage onto the public right-of-way or adjacent properties, and in no event may illumination be permitted to cause such excessive glare as to constitute a potential hazard to traffic safety. Externally illuminated signs must be lighted by screened or hidden light sources. 
E.  Construction. Every sign, and all parts, portions and materials thereof, must be manufactured, assembled and erected in compliance with all applicable state, federal and city regulations, including the city's building code and electrical code. Under no circumstances may a permanent sign have an exposed back. 
F.  Maintenance. Every sign and all parts, portions and materials must be maintained in good repair. The display surface of all signs must be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from rust, cracking, peeling, corrosion or other states of disrepair. This maintenance obligation includes the replacement of malfunctioning or burned out lamps, replacement of broken faces, repainting of rust, chipped or peeling structures or faces within fifteen days following written notification by the city. When there is a change or discontinuance of a business or occupancy such that a sign no longer represents a place of business or occupancy, the sign must be removed or the name of the prior business or occupant either removed, or the sign face covered in a manner that blends with the building or supporting structure. 
G.  Restoration of Building or Property Upon Sign Removal. Within thirty days of the removal of a sign from a building wall or from the grounds of the premises if a freestanding sign, the wall of the building or the grounds of the premises must be repaired and restored to remove any visible damage or blemish left by the removal of the sign. 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.)  
17.04.090 - Signs permitted in all zones. 
The following signs are permitted in all zones subject to the applicable regulations: 
A.  Construction Signs. 
1.  Number. Any parcel with construction activity under a valid building permit is permitted one construction sign. A house improvement project shall be permitted one sign. 
2.  Area. A construction sign may not exceed thirty-two square feet in area. Signs for home improvement projects may not exceed six square feet in area. 
3.  Height. A freestanding construction sign may not exceed eight feet in height. 
4.  Location. Construction signs must be parallel to a public right-of-way, but may not encroach into the right-of-way. 
5.  Time Limit. A construction sign may not be erected until after the issuance of the applicable building permit. The sign must be removed before a certificate of occupancy is issued. A sign for a home improvement project shall be removed upon completion of the home improvement. 
6.  Lighting. Construction signs may not be illuminated. 
B.  Flags. 
1.  Number. Flag poles may be erected on any parcel with a limit of three flags per flag pole, which may include a flag of the United States, California, the city, or a corporate or philanthropic or charitable use. 
2.  Area. The size of any flag must be compatible with the size and design of the flag pole. All flags must be contained within the property boundaries where they are displayed. 
3.  Height. An applicant must obtain a building permit for all poles that are six feet or higher, and the height of the flag pole may not exceed that height permitted for structures in the zone in which it is intended to be erected. 
4.  Lighting. Flags may be illuminated. 
C.  Future Construction Signs. 
1.  Number. Any parcel approved for future construction is permitted one future construction sign. 
2.  Area. A future construction sign may not exceed thirty-two square feet in area. 
3.  Height. A future construction sign may not exceed eight feet in height. 
4.  Location. Future construction signs must be erected parallel to a public right-of-way but may not encroach into the right-of-way. 
5.  Time Limit. A future construction sign may be erected following approval of a planned development permit, conditional use permit or similar entitlement. In the event, construction does not start within one year following the date of the applicable approval, the sign must be removed unless an extension of time is approved by the director. The sign must be removed, if a construction sign is erected and must be removed in any event before a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
6.  Lighting. Future construction signs may not be illuminated. 
D.  Public Convenience Signs. Public convenience signs may be authorized and approved by the director when the director finds such signs are necessary. No sign may exceed five square feet in area. 
E.  Real Estate Signs. 
1.  Number and Area. 
a.  In agricultural, residential, and open space zones, one wall-mounted or freestanding real estate sign is permitted for a parcel on each street frontage; provided the sign does not exceed six square feet in area for each sign face. Mobilehome parks may have a real estate sign that does not exceed sixteen square feet in area for each face. 
b.  In the commercial and industrial zones, one wall-mounted or freestanding real estate sign is permitted for a parcel on each street frontage; provided the sign does not exceed twenty-four square feet in area for each sign face. 
2.  Height. Freestanding real estate signs may not exceed the following heights: 
a.  In the agricultural, residential, and open space zones, signs may not exceed six feet (eight feet for mobilehome parks). 
b.  In the commercial and industrial zones, signs may not exceed eight feet. 
3.  Location. Freestanding real estate signs may be placed in front yard set back areas, provided such signs are located at least ten feet away from any adjacent street. 
4.  Time Limit. All real estate signs must be removed within fifteen days after the applicable property has been rented, leased or sold. 
5.  Lighting. Real estate signs may not be illuminated. 
F.  Reserved. 
G.  Reserved. 
H.  Reserved. 
I.  Temporary Agricultural Stand Signs. Temporary agricultural stands are permitted thirty square feet of wall sign area on the building frontage on a public street. No sign may be illuminated. 
J.  Temporary Freestanding Noncommercial Signs. 
1.  General Regulations. 
(a)  Number. In residential zones only, each parcel is permitted two temporary freestanding noncommercial signs at all times. Such signs are in addition to all other signage allowed in this chapter. 
(b)  Area. A temporary freestanding noncommercial sign may not exceed six square feet in area. 
(c)  Height. A temporary freestanding noncommercial sign may not exceed four feet in height. 
(d)  Location. Temporary freestanding noncommercial signs may be placed in the front yard, rear or side yard of any property; provided, that the signs do not encroach into any public right-of-way. 
(e)  Lighting. Temporary freestanding noncommercial signs may not be illuminated. 
2.  Election Period Regulations. During any election period, the following additional opportunities for temporary noncommercial signs are permitted, subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Number. Each parcel in all zones is permitted eight temporary freestanding noncommercial signs. Such signs are in addition to all other signage allowed in this chapter. 
(b)  Area. In agricultural, commercial, and industrial zones, no temporary freestanding noncommercial sign may exceed 32 square feet in area per face. The sign may be double-faced if it is placed perpendicular to the right-of-way. In residential areas, no temporary freestanding noncommercial sign may exceed six square feet in total area per face and may be double-faced. 
(c)  Height. In residential zones, a temporary freestanding noncommercial sign may not exceed four feet in height from the adjacent ground level in front or side-yard areas or three feet in height from the top of any rear-yard wall or fence if posted on top of a rear-yard wall or fence. In agricultural, commercial, and industrial zones, the bottom of the sign may not exceed four feet in height, and the top of the sign may not exceed 10 feet in height. 
(d)  Location. Temporary freestanding noncommercial signs may be placed in the front, rear or side yard of any property; provided, that the signs do not encroach into any public right-of-way. 
(e)  Lighting. Temporary freestanding noncommercial signs may not be illuminated. 
(f)  Removal. All of the additional temporary freestanding noncommercial signs permitted during an election period must be removed within seven days following the end of the election period. 
K.  Window Signs. One temporary window sign, not to exceed six square feet in area or twenty-five percent of the window area of any single window, whichever is greater, is permitted on each building frontage in all zones (except in commercial zones where window signs are permitted subject to Section 17.04.110(M) of this code). 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 2, 10-8-2014; Ord. No. 1122, § 3, 3-23-2016; Ord. No. 1128, § 3, 9-28-2016)  
17.04.100 - Signs permitted in residential zones. 
In addition to any other applicable signage allowed under this chapter, the following signage is permitted in residential zones: 
A.  Multifamily Housing. Apartment, condominium and townhouse projects are permitted one identification sign, which may be a monument sign or a wall sign, not exceeding twenty square feet in area per face, eight feet in height, if a monument sign, and may be shadow lighted. 
B.  Mobilehome Parks. Each mobilehome park is permitted one lighted or unlighted identification sign. The sign area may not exceed thirty square feet, if single-faced or twenty square feet, if double-faced, and the sign height may not exceed six feet. 
C.  Public Facilities. In all residential zones, churches, schools, hospitals, public facilities, conditional and special uses are permitted: 
1.  One lighted or unlighted double-faced monument or single-faced wall identification sign, not to exceed forty square feet in area, with the size and location to be determined by the planning commission. A monument sign may not exceed eight feet in height, and a freestanding sign may not exceed twelve feet in height. 
2.  One temporary banner sign, not to exceed thirty-six square feet in area. A banner sign may be erected up to four times a year for a period not to exceed thirty days. The banner sign must be removed within five days of the conclusion of any event or activity which it advertises. 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.)  
17.04.110 - Signs permitted in commercial zones. 
In addition to any other applicable signage allowed under this chapter, the following signage is permitted in commercial zones. 
A. An individual use on a separate parcel of land which is not a part of a planned development area, where the project does not share similar landscape features, common accessways, reciprocal parking or similar architectural features. 
Sign Type 	Number 	Maximum Size 	Other Regulations 
1. Freestanding or Monument Sign 	One. A parcel with a single use may be permitted two, separate monument identification signs with a minimum separation between the signs of 300 ft. 	Up to three-fourths of the sign area authorized for a wall sign, up to a maximum of 150 square feet in area. Only one side of a freestanding or monument sign will be measured when computing sign area. Maximum height of 25 feet for a freestanding sign and 8 feet high for a monument sign. 	• Sign area for separate frontage may not be combined. 
• Changeable copy area is permitted and will be measured as part of the total sign area. 
 
B. Shopping centers as defined in section 17.04.020 
Sign Type 	Number 	Maximum Size 	Other Regulations 
1. Shopping Center Identification Sign 	Two monument or freestanding signs. In the event the shopping center fronts upon two dedicated public streets; the center may be permitted one additional identification sign. 	Freestanding: The identification sign may not exceed 100 square feet in area whether single-faced or double-faced. The sign area allowed for a major tenant may not exceed 20 square feet per face, with such area counting toward the total permitted sign area. 
Freestanding: Maximum height of 25 feet, except that shopping centers located within 150 feet of the U.S. Highway 101/Ventura Freeway and containing more than 225,000 square feet may be permitted a height of up to 35 feet. 
Monument: Maximum of 8-feet high by 14-feet wide. The sign area allowed for a major tenant may not exceed 3.5 square feet per face, with such area counting toward the total permitted sign area. 	• Identification signs must be located on separate street frontages, except shopping centers that contain at least 20 gross acres; may be allowed two identification signs on one street frontage. 
• Shopping centers that contain at least 55,000 square feet of building area may include the identification of up to four major tenants on each sign. 
• Shopping centers that contain at least 225,000 square feet of building area and located within 150 feet of the Ventura Freeway, may include the identification of up to five major tenants on each sign. A minimum separation distance of 500 feet must be provided between identification signs on the same street frontage within a shopping center. 
• Where more than one sign is authorized, the listing of the major tenants may differ on the two signs. 
• Signs may be interior lighted or unlighted. 
• The design of shopping center identification signs must be compatible with the architecture and materials of the approved shopping center design in which it is located. Panels for signs must be aluminum and textured, and painted a uniform solid color with channel letters. 
2. Shopping Center Multi- Tenant Monument Sign For Centers Containing at Least 20 Gross Acres with 10 or More Uses 	Two monument signs at the primary shopping center entrance and one monument sign at each secondary entrance. 	Primary entrance: Maximum of 8-feet high by 14-feet wide. 
Secondary entrance: Maximum of 6-feet high by 14-feet wide. 	• Primary entrance: Up to six tenant names are permitted on each sign face, not to exceed 3.5 square feet per tenant, with such area counting toward the total permitted sign area. 
• Secondary entrances: Up to four tenant names are permitted on each sign face, not to exceed 3.5 square feet per tenant, with such area counting toward the total permitted sign area. 
• Except for the primary entrance, monument signs located on the same street frontage must be at least 500 feet apart. 
• The design of the monument signs must be compatible with the architecture and materials of the approved shopping center design in which it is located. Panels for signs must be aluminum and textured, and painted a uniform solid color with channel letters. 
3. Signs for Pedestrian Traffic 	One per business 	6 square feet 	• Must be placed perpendicular to the street or parking lot. 
 
C. Office Complex or Shopping Center 
Sign Type 	Number 	Maximum Size 	Other Regulations 
1. Directory Sign 	One wall-mounted or freestanding sign 	16 square feet per face 	• The directory sign is in addition to all other applicable signage allowed under this chapter. 
• The directory sign may be interior illuminated or exterior illuminated. 
 
D. Hotels and Motels 
Sign Type 	Number 	Maximum Size 	Other Regulations 
1. Marquee Signwith Changeable Copy 	One single or double-faced sign 	40 square feet 	• The changeable copy sign is in addition to the signage otherwise allowed for individual businesses under this chapter. 
• The sign copy may not be changed more often than once every four consecutive hours. 
 
E. Assembly uses of 100 or more persons for meetings or entertainment and where such meetings or entertainment occurs on a regular basis 
Sign Type 	Number 	Maximum Size 	Other Regulations 
1. Changeable Copy Sign 	One 	25 square feet if single-faced or 15 square feet if double-faced 	• The copy for the sign is limited to coming and current entertainment or events only, and may not include rates or prices of attractions or events. 
 
F. Multi-screen Theaters 
Sign Type 	Number 	Maximum Size 	Other Regulations 
1. Marquee Sign with Changeable Copy 	One 	75 square feet 	• The marquee sign is in addition to all other applicable signage allowed under this chapter. 
• The sign must be placed on a wall at the ticket booth with the specific location and height as approved by the Director of Community Development. The copy for the sign is limited to the titles, times, prices, and ratings of current attractions. 
2. Poster 	One for each screen in the theater for current or future films 	As approved by the Director of Community Development 	• Sign must be in a cabinet along the front wall of the building at a location as approved by the Director of Community Development. 
• The movie poster cabinet must be an integral part of the building design and in proportion to the front entrance. 
 
G. Gasoline Service Stations 
Sign Type 	Number 	Maximum Size 	Other Regulations 
1. Monument Sign 	One 	36 square feet per face, 8-feet-high 	• Gasoline service stations located within 1,000 feet of a freeway interchange centerline, or within 500 feet of a freeway centerline where access is provided are entitled to one freestanding sign in lieu of a monument sign that may not exceed 25 feet in height and 50 square feet in area on each face. 
2. Wall Sign 	One 	25 square feet 	
3. Fuel Price Sign 	One double-faced sign, which may be part of a monument sign or a freestanding sign. 	20 square feet per face 	
4. Service Sign 	Four single-faced signs 	4 square feet per sign 	• Must be unlighted and mounted on canopy supports or poles on service islands to indicate self-service or full- service islands. 
5. Vehicle Services Sign 	One double-faced sign 	36 square feet, 6-feet high 	• Limited to identifying vehicle services provided by the service station. 
 
H. Commercial Drive-Thru Restaurant 
Sign Type 	Number 	Maximum Size 	Other Regulations 
1. Menu Board Sign 	Two 	30 square feet, 8-feet high 	• Menu board signs are in addition to any other applicable signage allowed under this chapter. 
• The location of all menu board signs will be determined by the Director of Community Development. 
 
I. Additional Signs Permitted for Each Business in a Commercial Zone 
Sign Type 	Number 	Maximum Size 	Other Regulations 
1. Wall Sign 	One. 
A business in a building facing on more than one street or public parking lot is allowed a wall sign on each street or parking lot frontage, provided the area may not be accumulated on one frontage of the building and may not exceed the allowed area on any one dimension of the building. 	Two square feet in area for each lineal foot of building frontage or one square foot for each lineal foot of parcel frontage to a maximum of 200 square feet. 	• Businesses maintained exclusively on the second floor of a two-story building are entitled to 50 percent of the sign area authorized for the business frontage. This does not take away from the sign area permitted for the first floor. 
• Buildings containing more than two stories are limited to two square feet in area for each lineal foot of building frontage, or one square foot for each lineal foot of parcel frontage to a maximum of 200 square feet. However, such buildings may also have one wall identification sign for the entire building or a tenant in the building that may be placed above the first floor of the building; provided, that the sign area for this wall identification sign does not exceed one square foot in area for each lineal foot of building frontage. 
2. Temporary Banner 	One 	36 square feet 	• A temporary banner sign must be placed on the building frontage facing a public street or parking lot. 
• Temporary banner signs are permitted up to four times a year for a period not to exceed 30 days at a time with a minimum of 30 days between each period in which a banner is displayed. 
3. Business Associates Sign 	One 	3 square feet 	• Sign must be on the building or windows and is limited to indicating the owners, operators, or associates of the business. 
• Lettering must be enclosed within a single area. 
4. Window Sign 	Each window sign must be at least 8½-inches-by-11-inches and no more than 25 percent of the total window area on each frontage of a business may be utilized for the display of window signs. 
5. Sidewalk Display Sign (such as an A-frame sign or sandwich board) 	One 	6 square feet per side 	• The business must have frontage within 40 feet of the curb line of a publicly-maintained street or be within 40 feet of the publicly-accessible driveway or parking areas if part of a shopping center with four or more uses and under a planned development area where it shares similar landscape features, common access ways, reciprocal parking, or similar architectural features. 
• Sign must be placed within 5 feet of the primary entrance of the individual business on private property, or within the first 18 inches of any public property that is directly in front of the individual business. A minimum passage way width of 48 inches must be maintained along the sidewalk in front of such sidewalk display sign. 
• No sidewalk display sign may be placed outside a business during non-business hours. 
 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 3, 10-8-2014; Ord. No. 1138, § 3, 1-25-2017)  
17.04.120 - Signs permitted in industrial zones. 
In addition to any other applicable signage allowed under this chapter, the following signage is permitted in industrial zones: 
A.  Monument and Wall Identification Signs. 
1.  Number. Each separate business is permitted one identification sign, which may be a wall sign or a monument sign, if there is a single user on a separate parcel. 
2.  Area. The following regulations in determining maximum sign area are applied: 
a.  In general, the total sign area for any one business frontage may not exceed one and one-half square feet of area per lineal foot of frontage of that dimension of the building facing on a street or parking lot up to a maximum of sixty feet of frontage (i.e., ninety feet of sign area). 
b.  For businesses that contain a frontage upon a street or parking lot along one dimension in excess of sixty feet, the sign area may be increased one square foot for every two feet of building frontage in excess of sixty feet of frontage up to one hundred feet of frontage and one square foot of sign area for each four feet of frontage in excess of one hundred feet. 
c.  A business in a building facing on more than one street or public parking lot is allowed the authorized sign area on each street or parking lot upon which it fronts; provided the area may not be accumulated on one lineal dimension of the building and may not exceed the allowed area on any one dimension of the building. 
d.  Businesses maintained exclusively on the second floor of a two-story building are entitled to fifty percent of the sign area authorized for the business frontage. This does not reduce the sign area permitted for the first floor. 
e.  Buildings containing more than two stories are limited to the sign area authorized for the first floor area in accordance with subsection (A)(2)(a) of this section. However, such buildings may also have one wall identification sign for the entire building or a tenant in the building that may be placed above the first floor of the building; provided, that the sign area for this wall identification sign does not exceed the area authorized by subsection (A)(2)(d) of this section. 
3.  Location. Identification signs must be placed on the building frontage that is located adjacent to the street or parking lot from which its maximum allowable size is determined. 
4.  Height. Monument identification signs may not exceed eight feet in height and wall identification signs may not exceed twenty feet in height. 
B.  Public Convenience Signs. The director may approve public convenience signs to be placed on the building in numbers and locations as approved by the director. No public convenience sign may exceed twenty-five square feet in area. 
C.  Directory Signs. Business directory signs may be placed in an industrial complex on a display surface, either wall-mounted or freestanding, containing a sign face of no more than sixteen square feet per face in area. A business directory sign may be interior or exterior illuminated. The general design, location and number of directory signs will be determined by the director. 
D.  Multitenant Industrial Project Signs. In a multitenant industrial project, in addition to the sign area authorized for all industrial uses under this section, a multitenant sign may be utilized subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Each use is allowed one space in the sign identifying the use. 
2.  Area. The multitenant sign may be single-faced or double-faced with a maximum area of thirty-two square feet per face, including four square feet in area per use. 
3.  Location. The multitenant sign may be placed in the setback area or on the building face. 
4.  Height. If freestanding, the multitenant sign may not exceed six feet in height. 
5.  Lighting. The sign may have interior illumination or indirect lighting or shadow lighting. 
6.  The number of multitenant signs, sign placement and design will be determined by the director. 
E.  Airport Industrial Park Identification Signs. 
1.  One identification monument sign may be placed at each entrance to the Camarillo airport industrial park, with a height not to exceed eight feet, and a total sign area of not more than one hundred square feet, or fifty square feet per face, if a two-faced sign. 
2.  Another monument identification sign may also be placed where the airport property abuts a public right-of-way and where no public access is provided. This sign may also not exceed fifty square feet per face and eight feet in height. The sign must include the name of the airport and may include a changeable copy panel not greater than forty square feet in area. 
3.  A marquee sign with changeable copy is also permitted; provided, that the sign copy is not changed more often than once every four consecutive hours. Advertising on the marquee sign is limited to coming events, activities or other uses scheduled at the Camarillo airport. 
4.  Directory signs are permitted; provided, that no sign may exceed thirty-two square feet in area per face. 
F.  Banner Signs. In addition to all other applicable signage allowed under this chapter, temporary banner signs are permitted as follows: 
1.  Number. A maximum of one temporary banner sign is permitted. 
2.  Area. A temporary banner sign may not exceed thirty-six square feet in area. 
3.  Location. A temporary banner sign must be placed on the building frontage facing a public street or parking lot. 
4.  Time Limits. Temporary banner signs are permitted up to four times a year for a period not to exceed thirty days at a time with a minimum of thirty days between each period in which a banner is displayed. 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.) 
(Ord. No. 1097, § 3, 10-8-2014)  
17.04.130 - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are prohibited in all zones: 
A.  Banner signs, bunting, streamers, pennants and flags, except banner signs as permitted under Sections 17.04.100(C), 17.04.110(E) and 17.04.120(F) of this chapter, and flags as permitted under Section 17.04.090(C) of this chapter; 
B.  Devices projecting or otherwise reproducing the image of a sign or message on any surface or object; 
C.  Flashing signs; 
D.  Hand-held commercial signs; 
E.  Inflatable signs; 
F.  Mobile signs; 
G.  Moving, rotating or animated signs; 
H.  Off-site signs; 
I.  Outdoor advertising structures; 
J.  Portable commercial signs; 
K.  Projecting signs; 
L.  Roof signs; 
M.  Signs located in such a manner to constitute a potential traffic hazard or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign or signal device, or designed to resemble or conflict with any authorized traffic control sign; 
N.  Signs emitting audible sounds, odors or particulate matter. 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.) 
(Ord. No. 1097, § 3, 10-8-2014)  
17.04.140 - Removal of signs. 
A.  Unsafe Signs. Any unsafe sign may be removed by the city without prior notice. Alternatively, the director may issue a notice of violation and give the permit holder, property owner or person in possession and control of the property fifteen days to cure the violation. In the case of an unsafe sign removed by the city, the costs of such removal and storage shall be borne by the permit holder, property owner, or person in possession and control of the property, as applicable, and may be collected by the city in the same manner as it collects any other debt or obligation. No unsafe sign that has been removed and stored by the city may be released until the costs of removal and storage have been paid. If an unsafe sign remains unclaimed for a period of thirty days after notice of removal is sent to the permit holder, property owner, or person in possession and control of the property, it will be deemed to be unclaimed personal property and may be disposed of in accordance with the law. 
B.  Illegal Signs. Any illegal sign must be removed or brought into conformity by the permit holder, property owner, or person in possession and control of the property following written notice from the director. Such notice must specify the nature of the violation, order the cessation thereof and require either the removal of the sign or the execution of remedial work in the time and in the manner specified by the notice. The time for removal or repair may not be less than fifteen days from the date of mailing the notice. The director's order may be appealed to the planning commission in the manner provided in Section 17.04.150 of this chapter. 
C.  Legal Nonconforming Signs—Special Circumstances. In accordance with California Business and Profession Code Section 5499, no legal nonconforming sign will be required to be removed on the sole basis of its height or size, if special topographic circumstances would result in a material impairment of visibility of the sign or the owner's or user's ability to adequately and effectively continue to communicate to the public through the use of the sign. The owner or user may maintain the sign at the premises and at a location necessary for continued public visibility at the height or size at which the sign was previously lawfully erected pursuant to all applicable codes, regulations and permits. Any such sign will be deemed to be in conformance with this chapter. 
D.  Abatement of Signs. Whenever the permit holder, property owner, or person in possession or control of the property fails to comply with an order of the director requiring compliance with this chapter, the city may abate any such sign in the manner set forth in Chapter 9.17 of this code. 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.)  
17.04.150 - Appeals. 
A.  General Procedure. Any person seeking to appeal a decision of the director or planning commission granting or denying an application for issuance of a sign permit, revoking a permit or ordering the remediation or removal of a sign, may appeal such action, first to the planning commission, if pertaining to a decision of the director, and if dissatisfied with the decision of the planning commission, then to the city council in the manner provided by this section. 
B.  Effective Date of Decision. Decisions of the director or planning commission under this chapter will be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the director's or planning commission's decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed as provided in this section. 
C.  Form of Appeal. An appeal must: 
1.  Be in writing on a form provided by the department of community development; 
2.  Identify the director's or planning commission's action to which the appeal relates; 
3.  Be filed with the department prior to the decision to which the appeal relates becomes final; and 
4.  Be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by the city council. 
D.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal will stay the decision of the director or planning commission to which the appeal relates pending final action by the planning commission or city council on the matter. 
E.  Hearing. The department shall expeditiously schedule a hearing before the planning commission or city council, as applicable, not later than thirty days after the notice of appeal is received by the city and give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant; provided, however, the hearing may be held after such thirty-day period upon the request or concurrence of the appellant. Action on the appeal shall be taken at the time of the hearing by the planning commission or city council, as applicable, unless the appellant requests a continuance. 
F.  Judicial Review. Any person dissatisfied with the final action taken by the city council may seek prompt judicial review of such decision pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. 979 § 3 (part), 2005.)  
Title 18 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 18.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
18.02.010 - Citation and authority. 
This title is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act, Section 66410, et seq. of the Government Code, and may be cited as the sub-division ordinance of the city of Camarillo. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.02.020 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this title to regulate and control design and improvement of subdivisions within the city and to implement and supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act concerning the design, improvement and survey data of subdivisions, the form and content of all maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act and the procedure to be followed in securing the official approval of the city council, planning commission, director of engineering services/city engineer, director of planning and community development and planning department regarding such maps. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this title are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, to promote orderly growth and development, to provide for housing needs of the region, to promote open space, conservation, protection and proper use of land, and to ensure provision for adequate traffic circulation, utilities and services. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.02.030 - Conformity to general plan, specific plan and zoning ordinances. 
A subdivision shall be consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, as the plans existed on the date the application for approval of the tentative map or parcel map is deemed complete, and shall comply with the zoning ordinance of the city in effect on that date except as provided in Government Code Section 66474.2. 
(Ord. 678 § 1, 1989: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.02.040 - Application. 
The regulations set forth in this title shall apply to all subdivisions or parts thereof within the city and to the preparation of subdivision maps thereof and to other maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act. Each such subdivision and each part thereof lying within the city shall be made and each such map shall be prepared and presented for approval as hereafter provided for and required. Any subdivision which has developable land upon which there is a slope of fifteen percent or greater shall also comply with the requirements of Chapter 18.100 of this title. 
(Ord. 652 § 3, 1988: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.02.050 - Modification of requirements. 
Where exceptional or special circumstances apply to a proposed subdivision, the city council, or, with respect to parcel maps, the planning commission may authorize modification of the requirements of this title, following a finding that any such modifications are reasonably necessary or expedient and comply with the Subdivision Map Act as well as with the objectives of the zoning ordinance and general plan. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to, limited size, unusual shape or topography of the subject property, or the nature of the proposed use which renders full compliance with the requirements of this title impractical. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
18.04.010 - Generally. 
For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall be defined as set forth in this chapter unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined in this chapter but are defined in the Subdivision Map Act, such definitions are incorporated in this title and shall be deemed to apply as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.04.020 - Advisory agency. 
A.  The planning commission shall be the advisory agency, charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed divisions of real property and the imposing of requirements or conditions thereon, for tentative maps and parcel maps and shall have authority to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove tentative parcel maps other than lot line adjustments. 
B.  The director of planning and community development shall be the advisory agency for lot line adjustments and shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove tentative parcel maps for lot line adjustments. 
(Ord. 678 § 2, 1989: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.04.030 - Block. 
"Block" means the area of land within a subdivision, which area is entirely bounded by streets, highways or ways, except alleys or the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.04.035 - City engineer. 
"City engineer" means the director of engineering services or his designee. 
(Ord. 810 § 2, 1994.)  
18.04.040 - Condominium project. 
"Condominium project" means a development consisting of condominiums. A condominium consists of an undivided interest in common in a portion of real property coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan in sufficient detail to locate all boundaries thereof. The area within these boundaries may be filled with air, earth, or water, or any combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to land except by easements for access and, if necessary, support. The description of the unit may refer to (1) boundaries described in the recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan, (2) physical boundaries, either in existence, or to be constructed, such as walls, floors, and ceilings of a structure or any portion thereof, (3) an entire structure containing one or more units, or (4) any combination thereof. The portion or portions of the real property held in undivided interest may be all of the real property, except for the separate interests, or may include a particular three-dimensional portion thereof, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan. The area within these boundaries may be filled with air, earth, or water, or any combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to land except by easements for access and, if necessary, support. An individual condominium within a condominium project may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of the real property. 
(Ord. 810 § 3, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.04.050 - Design. 
"Design" means: 
A.  Street alignments, grades and widths; 
B.  Drainage, domestic water and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades thereof; 
C.  Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way; 
D.  Fire roads and fire breaks; 
E.  Lot size and configuration; 
F.  Traffic access; 
G.  Grading; 
H.  Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; and 
I.  Such other specified physical requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary or convenient to ensure consistency with, or implementation of the general plan or any applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. 678 § 3, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.04.060 - General plan. 
"General plan" means the general plan of the city and any amendment thereto. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.04.070 - Improvement. 
A.  "Improvement" means and refers to any street work, utilities and such other specific improvements required to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways and easements as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof. "Improvement" also refers to any other specific improvements or type of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the local agency or by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to ensure consistency with, or implementation of the general plan or any applicable specific plan. 
B.  "Improvements" shall be constructed in accordance with the adopted city of Camarillo standard specifications, details and policies and, when applicable, with standards as adopted by local utility companies and approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 678 § 4, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.04.080 - Lot. 
"Lot" means: 
A.  A parcel or portion of land separate from other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision or record of survey map, or by metes and bounds, for purpose of sale, lease, or separate use as approved by the appropriate advisory agency and recorded; 
B.  Each side line of a lot in any proposed subdivision shall be as close as is practicable to perpendicular to the centerline of the street at the point at which the lot side line terminates. All lots in a proposed subdivision shall conform to the minimum lot area and width requirements of the zone in which the proposed subdivision is located. No lot shall be less than forty feet in its shortest dimension, except that the staff of a flag lot shall be at least twenty feet wide at all points. All residential, commercial and industrial lots shall have approved access to streets. Where lots are irregular in dimension due to a location on a cul-de-sac or curve or due to other unusual circumstances, the minimum lot dimension for such lots in a particular proposed subdivision may be reduced. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.04.090 - Lot line adjustment. 
"Lot line adjustment" means a minor shift or rotation of an existing lot line or other adjustments where four or fewer existing adjoining parcels are affected by the lot line adjustment and a greater number of parcels than originally existed in not created. 
(Ord. 952 § 1, 2002: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.04.100 - Map Act. 
"Map Act" means the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.04.110 - Remainder. 
"Remainder" means that portion of an existing parcel which is not included as part of the subdivided land and is not considered as part of the subdivision. 
(Ord. 810 § 4, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.04.120 - Subdivision improvement standards. 
"Subdivision improvement standards" means standard details, standard specifications and other standards approved by the city engineer that shall govern the improvements to be constructed pursuant to this title and the Map Act. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.04.130 - Subdivider. 
"Subdivider" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or associate who propose to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for himself, or for others; except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not "subdividers." 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.04.140 - Subdivision. 
A.  "Subdivision" means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. "Subdivision" includes a condominium project, a community apartment project, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as the same is defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code. 
Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity or public utility shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number of parcels. 
B.  This title shall be inapplicable to the following: 
1.  Short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty days' notice in writing) of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, unless a showing is made in individual cases, under substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates the application of such regulations to short-term leases in such individual cases; those activities set forth in Government Code Section 66412 which include but are not limited to: 
a.  The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks, 
b.  Mineral, oil or gas leases, 
c.  A lot line adjustment between two or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created, provided the lot line adjustment is approved by the city engineer, 
d.  Boundary line or exchange agreements to which the State Lands Commission or local agency holding a trust grant of tide and submerged lands is a party, 
e.  Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
2.  Those activities set forth in Government Code Section 66428(a) which include: 
a.  Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, as defined by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, which are created by short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty days' notice in writing), 
b.  Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to that public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map; 
3.  The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion thereof, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under other city ordinances regulating design and improvement; 
4.  The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel; or 
5.  Subdivisions of four parcels or less for construction of removable commercial buildings having a floor area of less than one hundred square feet. 
(Ord. 810 § 5, 1994: Ord. 678 § 5, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.04.145 - Vesting tentative map. 
"Vesting tentative map" means a tentative map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it and need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the property, and shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "vesting tentative map" at the time it is filed in accordance with this title and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.12. 
(Ord. 678 § 6, 1989: Ord. 645 § 1, 1988: Ord. 603 § 1, 1986: Ord. 603 § 1, 1985.)  
18.04.150 - Zoning ordinance. 
"Zoning ordinance" means Title 19 of the city of Camarillo Municipal Code, or any ordinance enacted under zoning law. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.06 - RESPONSIBILITIES 
Sections: 
 
18.06.010 - City council. 
The city council shall act as the appeal board for hearing appeals from actions of the planning commission with regard to tentative parcel maps. The city council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove tentative and final maps, shall accept or reject dedication of such real property interest and improvements thereon as may be required, and shall approve any improvement agreements which may be required therefor and any fees which may be imposed thereon. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.06.020 - Director of engineering services/ city engineer. 
The director of engineering services is the city engineer for the city and the city engineer shall be responsible for: 
A.  Establishing design and construction details, standards and specifications; 
B.  Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the provisions of this title and the Map Act and for reporting the findings together with any recommendations for approval or conditional approval of the tentative map to the director of planning and community development for subdivisions of five or more parcels and parcel maps; 
C.  The processing and certification of final maps, reversion to acreage maps and amended maps; the processing and approval of subdivision improvement plans; 
D.  The inspection and approval of subdivision improvements; 
E.  The acceptance or rejection of dedications and improvements for subdivisions of four or less parcels; 
F.  Final approval of parcel maps; 
G.  The compliance of private improvements (improvements not to be maintained by the city); 
H.  The processing and approval of certificates of compliance and conditional certificates of compliance. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.06.030 - Planning and community development department (PCDD). 
The planning and community development department shall be responsible for: 
A.  The processing of preliminary and tentative maps, parcel maps and for the collection of all required filing deposits and fees; 
B.  Investigating proposed subdivisions for conformity to the general plan, specific plans and zoning ordinance of the city and reporting its findings together with recommendations for approval of conditional approval through the planning commission to the city council (for tentative maps) and to the planning commission (for parcel maps); 
C.  Examining and certifying that final maps are in substantial conformance to the approved tentative map. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.06.040 - Planning and community development director. 
The planning and community development director shall be responsible for the management of the planning and community development department in carrying out the responsibilities imposed by this chapter. The planning and community development director shall also be the advisory agency and shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove tentative parcel maps relating to lot line adjustments. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.06.050 - Planning commission. 
The planning commission shall act as the advisory agency with regard to tentative maps and tentative parcel maps. The planning commission shall review tentative maps for general layout and aesthetics and shall make its recommendations for approval, conditional approval, or disapproval to the city council. The planning commission shall have authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove tentative parcel maps. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.08 - MAPS REQUIRED 
Sections: 
 
18.08.010 - General. 
The necessity for tentative, final and parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.08.020 - Tract maps. 
A tentative and final map shall be required for all subdivisions creating five or more parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Section 18.04.040 of this title, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units, except where: 
A.  The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body; or 
B.  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or 
C.  The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or 
D.  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.08.030 - Parcel maps. 
A tentative and final parcel map shall be required for all subdivisions to which this title applies which create four or less parcels, lot line adjustments as provided in Section 18.20.160, and those subdivisions described in subsections (A), (B), (C) and (D) of Section 18.08.020, except that the planning and community development director may waive the parcel map requirement as provided in Section 18.20.030. 
(Ord. 810 § 6, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.08.035 - Remainder. 
A.  A remainder may not be created which fails to meet all minimum requirements for a legal lot. 
B.  When a subdivision is of a portion of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, the subdivider may designate as a remainder that portion which is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing. As an alternative to designating a remainder, the subdivider may omit entirely that portion of any unit of improved or unimproved land which is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing. If the subdivider elects to designate a remainder, the following requirements shall apply: 
1.  The designated remainder shall not be counted as a parcel for the purpose of determining whether a parcel map or final map is required. 
2.  For a designated remainder parcel described in this subdivision, the fulfillment of construction requirements for improvements, including the payment of fees associated with any deferred improvements, shall not be required until a permit or other grant of approval for development of the remainder parcel is issued by the city or, where provided by ordinance, until the construction of the improvements, including the payment of fees associated with any deferred improvements, is required pursuant to an agreement between the subdivider and the city or other local agency. In the absence of that agreement, the city may require fulfillment of the construction requirements, including the payment of fees associated with any deferred improvements, within a reasonable time following approval of the final map and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a remainder parcel upon a finding by the city that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of: 
a.  The public health and safety; or 
b.  The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. 
C.  As an alternative to designating a remainder, if the subdivider elects to omit all or a portion of any unit of improved or unimproved land which is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing, the omitted portion shall not be counted as a parcel for purposes of determining whether a parcel or final map is required, and the fulfillment of construction requirements for offsite improvements, including the payment of fees associated with any deferred improvements, shall not be required until a permit or other grant of approval for development is issued on the omitted parcel, except where allowed pursuant to subsection (B)(2) of this section. 
D.  The provisions of subsections (B) and (C) of this section, providing for deferral of the payment of fees associated with any deferred improvements, shall not apply if the designated remainder or omitted parcel is included within the boundaries of a benefit assessment district or community facilities district. 
E.  A designated remainder or any omitted parcel may subsequently be sold without any further requirement of the filing of a parcel map or final map, but the city may require a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. 810 § 7, 1994.)  
18.08.040 - Fees and deposits. 
All persons submitting maps as required by this title shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by city council resolutions establishing fees and deposits. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.10 - TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPS 
Sections: 
 
18.10.010 - General. 
The form and contents, submittal and approval of tentative subdivision maps shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.020 - Form and contents. 
The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the planning and community development department and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor. The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one sheet and contain not less than the following: 
A.  A title which shall contain the subdivision number, subdivision name and type of subdivision; 
B.  Name and address of legal owner, subdivider and person preparing the map (including registration number); 
C.  Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision; 
D.  Date, north arrow, scale and contour interval; 
E.  Existing and proposed land use; 
F.  A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivision, creeks, railroads and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community; 
G.  Existing topography of the proposed site and at least one hundred feet beyond its boundary, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Existing contours at two-foot intervals if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and at not less than five-foot intervals for existing ground slopes equal to or greater than ten percent. Contour intervals shall not be spread more than one hundred fifty feet apart. Existing contours shall be represented by dashed lines or by screened lines, 
2.  Type, circumference and dripline of existing trees. Any trees proposed to be removed shall be so indicated, 
3.  The approximate location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Buildings to be removed shall be so marked, 
4.  The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflow and the location, width and direction of flow of each watercourse, 
5.  The location, pavement and right-of-way width, grade and name of existing streets or highways, 
6.  The widths, location and identify of all existing easements with ownership identified, 
7.  The location, size and ownership identified of existing sanitary sewers, wells, water mains and storm drains. The approximate slope of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The location of existing overhead utility lines on peripheral streets, 
8.  The approximate location of the 60, 65 and 70 CNEL (Community Noise Equivalent Level) contours, if any; 
H.  Proposed improvements to be shown shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  The location, grade, centerline radius and arc length of curves, pavement and right-of-way width and name of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown, 
2.  The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs, 
3.  The location, width and purpose of all easements, including solar easements, 
4.  The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four degrees, 
5.  The approximately lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and of each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to scale and the number of each lot, 
6.  Proposed contours at two-foot intervals shall be shown if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and not at less than five-foot intervals for existing ground slopes greater than or equal to ten percent. A separate grading plan may be submitted, 
7.  Proposed recreation sites, trails and parks for private or public use, 
8.  Proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated to public open space, 
9.  The location and size of sanitary sewers, water mains, storm drains and drainage facilities, including slopes and graded areas necessary to direct surface flows to underground system. Proposed slopes and approximate elevations of sanitary sewers and drainage facilities shall be indicated, 
10.  A description of the proposed method of sewage disposal. Whenever the method of sewage disposal proposed is other than by a municipal or community sanitation system, a soil analysis and percolation data report shall be submitted to the city and the Ventura County health officer by the subdivider; 
I.  The name or names or any geologist or soils engineer whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map; 
J.  The source and date of existing contours; 
K.  All lettering size shall be one-eighth inch minimum if hand lettered and one-tenth inch minimum if computer drawn ("CAD"); 
L.  If the subdivider plans to develop the site as shown on the tentative map in units, then he shall show the proposed units and their proposed sequence of construction on the tentative map; 
M.  The planning and community development department or the city engineer may waive any of the foregoing tentative map requirements whenever it finds that the type of subdivision is such as not to necessitate compliance with these requirements, or that other circumstances justify such waiver. The planning and community development department or city engineer may require other such drawings, data or other information as deemed necessary; 
N.  A map showing all properties within three hundred feet of the property to be divided, a list of all owners of property within three hundred feet of the property certified as being from the latest equalized assessment roll and two complete lists with mailing addresses on labels of such owners; 
O.  Show any known archaeological sites. 
(Ord. 810 § 8, 1994; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.030 - Accompanying data and reports. 
The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data or reports, except that subsections (A) and (C) shall not apply to condominium conversions: 
A.  Soils Report. A preliminary soils report prepared by a civil engineer registered in this state and based upon the requirements of Chapter 16.38 of this code, shall be submitted for every subdivision for which a final map is required by this title. 
1.  The city engineer may waive the preliminary soils report if he/she determines that due to the knowledge available on the soils qualities of the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary. 
2.  The city engineer shall review the preliminary soils report and may require additional information or reject the report if it is found to be incomplete, inaccurate, or unsatisfactory. 
3.  If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each potentially affected lot within the subdivision may be required. 
4.  If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of rocks or liquids containing deleterious chemicals, which, if not corrected, could cause construction materials such as concrete, steel, and ductile or cast iron to corrode or deteriorate, a soils investigation of each potentially affected lot in the subdivision may be required. 
5.  The civil engineer who prepares the soils report shall recommend corrective actions which are likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where the soils problems exist. 
6.  The planning commission or city council may approve a subdivision where soils problems exist if it determines that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed and if the approved corrective actions be imposed as a condition of approval. 
B.  Title Report. A preliminary title report, showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative map. 
C.  Geotechnical Studies. A geotechnical study shall be required in accordance with Chapter 16.38 of this code. 
D.  Environmental Impact Information. The subdivider shall provide such additional data and information and deposit and pay such fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
E.  Other Reports. Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the planning and community development department or department of engineering services. 
(Ord. 810 § 9, 1994; Ord. 678 § 7, 1989; Ord. 652 § 4, 1988: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.040 - Filing tentative map. 
A.  The tentative map shall be considered filed only when such map conforms to Section 18.10.020 and when all accompanying data or reports, as required by Section 18.10.030, have been submitted and accepted by the planning and community development department and when the initial study of the environmental impact has been completed and the appropriate environmental document prepared and approved in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
B.  The subdivider shall file with the planning and community development department the number of tentative maps the direction may deem necessary. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.050 - Planning and community development department review. 
The planning and community development department shall forward copies of the tentative map to the affected public agencies, as determined by the planning and community development director in accordance with Government Code Sections 66454 through 66455.7, who may, in turn, forward to the planning and community development department their findings and recommendations thereon. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.060 - School district notification. 
Within ten days of the filing of a tentative map, the planning and community development department shall send a notice of the filing of the tentative map to the governing board of any elementary, high school or unified school district within the boundaries of which the subdivision is proposed to be located. Such notice shall also contain information about the location of the proposed subdivision, the number of units, density and any other information which would be relevant to the affected school district. Such governing board may review the notice and may send a written report thereon to the agency required by law to approve such tentative map. The report shall indicate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the affected school district and shall make such recommendations as the governing board of the district deems appropriate. In the event the school district fails to respond within a twenty-day period from receipt of notice of the tentative map such failure shall be deemed approval of the proposed subdivision by the school district. The city council shall consider the report from the school district in approving or conditionally approving the tentative map. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.070 - Development advisory conference. 
Upon completion of review by the planning and community development department and prior to the date the tentative map is scheduled for planning commission action, the planning and community development department shall hold a development advisory conference. Advance written notice of the development advisory conference shall be given to the subdivider or his agent and to all affected agencies. The results of the development advisory conference shall be reported to the planning commission. A copy of the staff report shall be served to the subdivider at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.080 - Notice of public hearings. 
A.  Upon receipt of a complete application and completion of the development advisory conference, the community development department will set the matter for public hearing before the planning commission in accordance with Sections 19.84.010 to 19.94.030 of this code. 
B.  Mailed notice must also be sent to all local agencies expected to provide water, sewage, schools or other essential facilities whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected. 
C.  In the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative project, notice will be given as required by Government Code section 66451.3. 
D.  In the event that the proposed change has been requested by a person other than the property owner as such property owner is shown on the last equalized assessment roll, the city will also give mailed notice to the owner of the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
(Ord. 678 § 8, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(A), 5-25-2018)  
18.10.090 - Planning commission review. 
The planning commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval or denial of the tentative map and shall report its decision to the city council and the subdivider within fifty days after the tentative map has been considered filed in accordance with Section 18.10.040. 
(Ord. 810 § 10, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.100 - City council action. 
A.  The city council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map within thirty days of receiving the planning commission's report after conducting a public hearing noticed in accordance with Section 18.10.080. 
B.  In approving or conditionally approving the tentative subdivision map, the city council shall find that the proposed subdivision, together with its provisions for its design and improvements, is consistent with applicable general or specific plans adopted by the city. 
C.  The city council may modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the planning commission report, except conditions required by city ordinance, or add additional requirements as a condition of its approval. 
D.  If no action is taken by the city council within the time limit as specified, the tentative map as filed shall be deemed to be approved, insofar as it complies with other applicable provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act, this title and other city ordinances, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to certify or state his or her approval. 
(Ord. 678 § 9, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.110 - Denial. 
The tentative subdivision map may be denied by the city council for failure to comply with city ordinances, resolutions or standards, or the state Subdivision Map Act. The city council shall deny approval of the tentative map if it makes any of the following findings: 
A.  The proposed map fails to meet or perform any of the requirements or conditions imposed by the Subdivision Map Act or this title; 
B.  That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
C.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
D.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development; 
E.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of the development; 
F.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
G.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
H.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the governing body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is granted to a legislative body to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision; 
I.  Williamson Land Act. 
1.  The land is subject to a contract entered into pursuant to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 (Government Code Section 51200 et seq.) and that the resulting parcels following a subdivision of that land would be too small to sustain their agricultural use. For purposes of this section, land shall be presumed to be in parcels too small to sustain their agricultural use if the land is: 
a.  Less than ten acres in size in the case of prime agricultural land; or 
b.  Less than forty acres in size in the case of land which is not prime agricultural land. 
For purpose of this section, agricultural land shall be presumed to be in parcels large enough to sustain their agricultural use if the land is: 
a.  At least ten acres in size in the case of prime agricultural land; or 
b.  At least forty acres in size in the case of land which is not prime agricultural land. 
2.  A subdivision with parcels smaller than those specified in this section may be approved if either of the following findings are made: 
a.  The parcels can nevertheless sustain an agricultural use permitted under the contract, or are subject to a written agreement for joint management pursuant to Government Code Section 51230.1, provided that the parcels which are jointly managed total at least ten acres in size in the case of prime agricultural land or forty acres in size in the case of land which is not prime agricultural land. 
b.  One of the parcels contains a residence and is subject to Section 428 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; the residence has existed on the property for at least five years; the landowner has owned the parcels for at least ten years; and the remaining parcels shown on the map are at least ten acres in size if the land is prime agricultural land, or at least forty acres in size if the land is not prime agricultural land. In such case, no other homesite parcels may be created on any remaining parcels under contract for at least ten years following the creation of a homesite parcel pursuant to this section. 
3.  This subsection shall not apply to land which is subject to a contract when any of the following has occurred: 
a.  A local agency formation commission has approved the annexation of the land to the city and the city will not succeed to the contract as provided in Government Code Sections 51243 and 51243.5; 
b.  Written notice of nonrenewal of the contract has been served prior to March 7, 1985, as provided in Government Code Section 51245; 
c.  Written notice of nonrenewal of the contract has been served on or after March 7, 1985, as provided in Government Code Section 51245, and, as a result of that notice, there are no more than three years remaining in the term of the contract; 
d.  The board or council has granted tentative approval for cancellation of the contract as provided in Section 51282. 
4.  This section shall not be construed as limiting the power of the city to establish minimum parcel sizes larger than those specified in subsection I(1) of this section, on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. 810 § 11, 1994; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.120 - Dedication of streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way or easements. 
As a condition of approval of a final map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of land within the subdivision that is needed for streets and alleys, including access and the abutters' rights, drainage, public greenways, scenic easements, bicycle paths if the subdivision contains two hundred or more parcels, public utility easements, and other public easements. In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys, including access rights and the abutters' rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements. The improvements and dedication shall be in accordance with the provisions of this title. All water, sanitary and storm drain easements shall be a minimum of twenty feet in width unless modified by the city council. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.130 - Dedication of land for transit facilities. 
A.  As a condition of approval of a final map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of land within the subdivision for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items which directly benefit the residents of a subdivision if: 
1.  The subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for two hundred dwelling units or more if developed to maximum density shown on the adopted general plan, or contains one hundred acres or more; and 
2.  The city council finds that transit services are or will within a reasonable time period be made available to such subdivision. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision or airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.135 - Cable access. 
As a condition of approval of a final map, the subdivider shall provide access to all cable operators within the city. 
(Ord. 678 § 10, 1989.)  
18.10.140 - Extension of time for planning commission or city council action. 
The time limits set forth in this chapter for acting on the tentative map may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the planning commission or the city council. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.150 - Expiration of tentative subdivision maps. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision map shall expire twenty-four months from the date of the adoption of the resolution of the city council approving or conditionally approving the map. However, if the subdivider is subject to a requirement of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars or more to construct, improve, or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, excluding improvements of public rights-of-way which abut the boundary of the property to be subdivided and which are reasonably related to the development of that property, each filing of a final map authorized by Government Code Section 66456.1 shall extend the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by thirty-six months from the date of its expiration, as provided in this section, or the date of the previously filed final map whichever is later. The extensions shall not extend the tentative map more than ten years from its approval or conditional approval. A tentative map on property subject to a development agreement authorized by Government Code Section 65864, et seq. may be extended, for the period of time provided for in the agreement, but not beyond the duration for the agreement. 
B.  The period of time specified in subsection (A) of this section, including any extension granted pursuant to Section 18.10.160, shall not include any period of time in which a development moratorium is in existence in accordance with Government Code Section 66452.6. 
C.  The period of time specified in subsection (A) of this section, including any extension granted pursuant to Section 18.10.160, shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval, or conditional approval, of a tentative map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the city council. After service of the initial petition or complaint upon the city, the subdivider may in writing, to the director of planning and community development, request a stay of the time period of the tentative map. Within forty days after receiving such request, the city council shall either stay the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay. The request for the stay shall be acted upon after a hearing has been held following notice to the subdivider. 
D.  Expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within such tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map. However, if a map which is ready for recordation is submitted to the city engineer prior to the expiration date, the city may process, approve and record the map after the expiration date. Delivery to the city engineer shall be deemed a timely filing for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. 810 § 12, 1994: Ord. 678 § 11, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.160 - Extensions of tentative subdivision maps. 
A.  The subdivider may request an extension of the approved or conditionally approved tentative subdivision map, not exceeding a total of three years, by written application to the planning and community development department. The application shall be filed prior to the expiration of the map as determined by Section 18.10.150 and shall state the reasons for requesting the extension. The period of extension specified in this section is in addition to the period of time provided for in Section 18.10.150 (A). Upon a timely request for extension, the map shall automatically be extended for sixty days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the city council, whichever occurs first. 
B.  The director of planning and community development shall review the request and submit the application for the extension, together with a report, to the city council for approval, conditional approval or denial. The resolution adopted by the city council approving or conditionally approving an extension shall specify the new expiration date of the tentative subdivision map. The hearing shall be noticed in the same manner as the original approval hearing. 
C.  No more than three extensions shall be approved for a tentative map and the period of each extension shall not exceed twelve months. The extension of time shall commence with the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map. The approved new expiration date shall not extend more than three years beyond the original expiration date of the tentative subdivision map. 
D.  As a condition of the extension of a tentative subdivision map, the city council may recommend new conditions or revise existing conditions on the approved tentative map as recommended by the planning and community development or as it may find necessary, provided the developer agrees to these conditions or revisions. 
E.  The fee for processing an extension shall be as provided by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 810 § 13, 1994; Ord. 678 § 12, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.10.170 - Amendments to approved tentative map. 
A.  Minor changes in the tentative map may be approved by the planning and community development director upon application by the subdivider on its own initiative, provided: 
1.  No lots, units or building sites are added; 
2.  Such changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval; 
3.  There are no resulting violations of this code. 
B.  Any revision shall be approved by the director of planning and community development. The amendment shall be indicated on the approved map and certified by the director of planning and community development. 
C.  Amendments of the tentative map other than minor shall be presented to the planning commission and city council for approval. Processing shall be in accordance with Sections 18.10.050 and 18.10.080. 
D.  Any approved amendment or modification shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.12 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
18.12.000 - Development rights. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confirm a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards of the city in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both. 
2.  The condition or denial is required in order to comply with the state or federal law. 
C.  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned upon the subdivider or his or her designee obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding Section 18.10.180A, confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map as approved. The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time period set forth in Section 18.10.180A. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for the development which depart from the ordinances, policies and standards described in Section 18.10.180A and B, and these approvals may be made to the extent that such departures are authorized under applicable law. 
E.  The rights conferred by this section shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map. If the final map is approved, the rights conferred by this section shall be subject to the periods of time set forth in Section 18.10.050B and C. 
F.  Consistent with Subsection A above, an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall not limit the city from imposing reasonable conditions on subsequent required approvals or permits necessary for the development and authorized by the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
(Ord. 678 § 13, 1989: Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 1986: Ord. 602 § 2 (part), 1985.)  
18.12.010 - Citation and authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 678 § 14, 1989: Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 1986: Ord. 602 § 2 (part), 1985.)  
18.12.020 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the vesting tentative map statute as described in Section 18.12.010 and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and Title 18 of the Camarillo Municipal Code. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 1986: Ord. 602 § 2 (part), 1985.)  
18.12.030 - Findings. 
The city council finds, determines and declares that: 
A.  The state has determined the necessity for local agencies to permit vesting tentative maps. 
B.  The amendment to the Subdivision Map Act, permitting vested tentative rights, permits local agencies to adopt guidelines and regulations for the processing of vesting tentative maps. 
C.  The adoption of provisions for vesting tentative maps will not significantly affect the quality of the environment within the city, nor be contrary to the goals and objectives of the city's zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance or general plan. 
D.  The vesting tentative map regulations set forth in this chapter will provide the necessary guarantees to insure that all projects are adequately served by streets, utilities and improvements as set forth in Title 18 of the Camarillo Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 1986: Ord. 602 § 2 (part), 1985.)  
18.12.040 - Applicability of chapter. 
A.  This chapter shall apply to residential, commercial and industrial developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by Title 18, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map, a vesting tentative map may be filed instead of a tentative map in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the vesting tentative map statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction or work preparatory to construction. 
C.  Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of Title 18 shall apply to vesting tentative maps. 
(Ord. 645 § 2, 1988; Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 1986: Ord. 602 § 2 (part), 1985.)  
18.12.050 - Fees. 
All persons submitting a vesting tentative map shall pay all fees in accordance with Section 18.08.040. In addition, the city council may set an additional fee by resolution to reimburse the city on a pro-rata basis for the costs associated with establishing and adopting the procedures for vesting tentative maps which fee shall be paid upon presentation of the application for a vesting tentative map. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 1986: Ord. 602 § 2 (part), 1985.)  
18.12.060 - Application for vesting tentative map. 
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports as specified in Sections 18.10.010, 18.10.020, 18.10.030 and 18.10.040 of this title, and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this title except as hereinafter provided: 
A.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map." 
B.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, the subdivider shall also supply the following information: 
1.  Plans for all public works improvements to be constructed as a condition of the subdivision, prepared by a registered civil engineer in accordance with city standards and approved by the director of engineering services; 
2.  Plans for all site development, including, but not limited to, grading, drainage facilities and miscellaneous structures, prepared by a registered civil engineer in accordance with city standards and approved by the director of engineering services; 
3.  Geological studies in such form as acceptable to the director of engineering services, which shall include detailed soils reports, seismic analysis, bank stabilization, and other factors pertinent to the particular site location; 
4.  Specific information on the uses to which the proposed buildings will be put; 
5.  The height, size and location of all buildings; 
6.  Architectural plans satisfactory for review by the department of building and safety, including necessary structural calculations, energy calculations, and information necessary for building permit plan checks. 
7.  Landscape plans, including planting and irrigation details and drawings and specifications as prepared by a licensed landscape architect or contractor satisfactory for planning department and community services review and approval; 
8.  Planned development permit application in accordance with Sections 19.16.260 (RPD zone), 19.22.190 (PO zone), 19.24.170 (CN zone), 19.26.200 (CPD zone), 19.27.190 (SC zone), Section 19.28.310 (LM zone), 19.30.240 (M-1 zone), and 19.32.240 (M-2 zone); 
9.  Development allotment application and support materials in accordance with Section 20.01.080 for residential subdivisions; 
10.  Traffic report and analysis, in a form approved by the director of engineering services; 
11.  All materials required to support the planned development application; and 
12.  Acoustical report, prepared by a licensed engineer in a form acceptable to the department of building and safety following the guidelines of the noise element of the general plan. 
(Ord. 645 § 3, 1988; Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 1986: Ord. 602 § 2 (part), 1985.)  
18.12.070 - Other project approvals. 
All other approvals or permits for the project, except for development allotments and grading and building permits, must be obtained prior to or concurrently with the approval of the vesting tentative map. A vesting tentative map may be approved with a condition that certain city approvals or permits be approved or issued after approval of the vesting tentative map and any such condition shall not limit the city from imposing reasonable conditions on required approvals or permits necessary for the project and authorized by the ordinances, policies and standards of the city in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 1986: Ord. 602 § 2 (part), 1985.)  
18.12.080 - Extension of vesting tentative map. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period established by this title for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval for tentative maps, and shall be subject to the same extensions as established in Section 18.10.160 for the extension of tentative maps. 
A.  The rights conferred by a vesting tentative map shall last for one year following the recordation of the final map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. 
B.  The initial time period set forth in subsection A shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit if such processing exceeds thirty days from the date a complete application is filed. 
C.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of the permit or any extensions of that permit. 
D.  The subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection A expires. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 1986: Ord. 602 § 2 (part), 1985.)  
18.12.090 - Modifications to an approved vesting tentative map. 
Modifications to an approved vesting tentative map shall be processed in accordance with Section 18.10.170. 
(Ord. 603 § 2 (part), 1986: Ord. 602 § 2 (part), 1985.)  
Chapter 18.15 - FINAL SUBDIVISION MAPS 
Sections: 
 
18.15.005 - Final subdivision maps—General. 
The form and contents, submittal, approval and filing of subdivision maps shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and the state Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.15.010 - Survey required. 
A.  An accurate and complete field survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor authorized to practice land surveying in the state of California. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the final map shall not exceed 1/10,000 for field closures and 1/20,000 for calculated closures. 
B.  At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards described in Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one exterior boundary line shall be monumented prior to recording the final map. Other monuments shall be set as required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.15.020 - Form—Final map. 
A.  The form of the final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and as provided herein and shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor authorized to practice land surveying in the state of California and shall be based upon a survey. 
B.  The final map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgements may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. 
C.  The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty-six inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be not less than one inch equals one hundred feet, or as may be necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. When four or more sheets including the title sheet are used, a key map will be included drawn to a scale approved by the city engineer. 
D.  All printing or lettering on the map shall be one-eighth inch minimum height if hand drawn and one-tenth inch minimum height if computer drawn ("CAD") and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible on prints and other reproductions made from the original drawings. 
E.  The final form of the final map shall be as approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 810 §§ 14, 15, 1994; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.15.030 - Contents. 
The contents of the final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and this title: 
A.  Boundary. The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a heavy unbroken black line that is at least three times the width of any other line. 
B.  Title. Each sheet shall have a title showing the subdivision number and name and the location of the property being subdivided with reference to maps which have been previously recorded, or by reference to the plat of a United States Survey. The following words shall appear in the title: "In the City of Camarillo." 
C.  Statements and Certificates. The following statements and certificates shall appear only once on the title sheets: 
1.  Owner's Statement. A statement, signed and acknowledged by all parties having record title interest in the land subdivided, excepting those parties having rights-of-way, easements or other interest which cannot ripen into a fee, or exceptions provided by the Subdivision Map Act and consenting to the preparation and recordation of the map and offering for dedication to the public certain specific parcels of land; 
2.  Engineer's Statement. A statement by the engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and final map shall appear on the map. 
a.  The statement shall give the date of the survey, state that the survey and final map were made by or under the direction of the engineer or surveyor, and that the survey is true and complete as shown. 
b.  The statement shall also state that all the monuments are of the character and occupy the positions indicated or that they will be set in such positions on or before a specified later date. The statement shall also state that the monuments are, or will be, sufficient to enable the survey to be retraced. 
c.  The statement shall be signed, dated, and shall indicate the engineer's registration or license number with expiration date; 
3.  City Engineer's Statement. A statement by the city engineer stating that the map has been examined and that it is in accord with the tentative map and any approved alteration thereof, complies with the State Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this title. The statement shall be signed, dated, and shall indicate the city engineer's registration or license number with expiration date. Additionally, if the city engineer has been registered as a civil engineer prior to January 1, 1982, the city engineer shall certify that the map is technically correct; if the city engineer has been registered after January 1, 1982, he/she may only certify that the map is technically correct if he/she is authorized to practice land surveying pursuant to Section 8700 of the Business and Professional Code; 
4.  City Council's Statement. A statement for execution by the mayor stating the date and number of the resolution adopted by the city council approving the final map and stating that the city council accepted, accepted subject to improvement or rejected on behalf of the public, any real property offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication; 
5.  County Recorder's Certificate. A certificate to be executed by the county recorder stating that the map has been accepted for filing; that the map has been examined and that it complies with the provisions of state laws and local ordinances governing the filing of final maps. The certificate shall show who requested the filing of the map, the time and date the map was filed and the book and page where the map was filed; 
6.  County Tax Collector's Statement. A statement to be executed by the county tax collector stating that all statements, certificates and security required under the provisions of Sections 66492 and 66493 of the State Subdivision Map Act have been filed and deposited with the county tax collector's office; 
7.  Residential Development Control System Statement. A statement by the city engineer stating that no grading permit, building permit or other city entitlement will be issued unless and until a development allotment under Title 20 of this code is awarded; and 
8.  Public Dedication Certificate. A certificate complying with Section 18.45.055 when there is property dedicated to the city in fee for public purpose, public improvements or public facilities. 
D.  Scale, North Point and Basis of Bearings. There must appear on each map sheet the scale (a graphic scale at least three inches in length), the date, the north point and the basis of bearings based on the California Coordinate System, Zone 5, and the equation of the bearing to geodetic north. The basis of bearings shall be approved by the city engineer. 
E.  Linear, Angular and Radial Data. Sufficient linear, angular and radial data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines, street centerlines, the boundary lines of the subdivision and of the boundary lines on every lot and parcel which is a part thereof. Length, radius, total central angle and radial bearings of all curves shall be shown. A radius need not be shown for segments of a curve if the radius is shown for the total curve. Ditto marks shall not be used in the dimensions and data shown on the map. 
F.  Monuments. The location and description of all existing and proposed monuments shall be shown. Standard city monuments shall be set at (or from offsets as approved by the city engineer) the following locations: 
1.  The intersection of street centerlines; 
2.  Beginning and end of curves in centerlines; 
3.  At other locations as may be required by the city engineer. 
G.  Lot Numbers. Lot numbers shall begin with the number 1 in each subdivision and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications except where contiguous lands, under the same ownership, are being subdivided in successive units, in which event lot numbers may begin with the next consecutive number following the last number in the preceding unit. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet of the final map, unless approved by the city engineer. 
H.  Adjoining Properties. Properties adjoining the subdivision shall be identified by tract or parcel map number or name together with lot or parcel number of same, including the recording reference for said subdivision, or if no such subdivision is adjoining, then by the name of the current owner and reference to the recorded deed for such owner of the adjoining properties. 
I.  City Boundaries. City boundaries which cross or join the subdivision shall be clearly designated. No lot shall be divided by the boundary of the city or special district. 
J.  Street Names. The names of all streets, alleys or highways within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown. 
K.  Easements. 
1.  Easements for roads or streets, paths, stormwater drainage, water systems, sanitary sewers or other public use as may be required, shall be dedicated to the public for acceptance by the city or other public agency, and the use shall be specified on the map. If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys, water systems or storm drainage easements are not accepted by the city council, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the city council may, by resolution at any later date, accept and open the streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements for public use, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
2.  All easements of record shall be shown on the map, together with the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify the conveyance, e.g., recorder's serial number and data, or book and page of official records. 
3.  Easements not disclosed by the records in the office of the county recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing, shall be specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements for which the easement was created. 
4.  The sidelines of all easements of record shall be shown by dashed lines on the final map with the widths, lengths and bearings of record. The width and location of all easements shall be per Section 18.10.080 and as approved by the city engineer. 
L.  Orientation. Each sheet of the final map and lettering thereon shall be so oriented that the north point shall be directed toward the top of the sheet or toward the left of the sheet. For the purpose of orientation, the left edge of the sheet is the binding edge and measures eighteen inches from top to bottom. All notes, legends, title blocks and dimensions of generally east-west lines shall be oriented on the map sheet to be read from the south. All dimensions of generally north-south lines shall be read from the east. 
M.  Additional Information. The final map shall also contain the following information: 
1.  The net acreage of all lots or parcels of one acre or more to not less than the nearest one-hundredth of an acre; 
2.  References to maps previously recorded relative to the property; 
3.  Monuments, shown and identified sufficiently to readily retrace the survey. 
N.  Standard Practices. All surveys and all drafting in connection with the preparation of tentative maps, final maps and improvement plans to be submitted pursuant to this chapter shall be done in accordance with the standard practices and principles of land surveying and of drafting. 
O.  If the map includes a "designated remainder" parcel, and the gross area of the "designated remainder" parcel or similar parcel is five acres or more, that remainder parcel need not be shown on the map and its location need not be indicated as a matter of survey, but only by deed reference to the existing boundaries of the remainder parcel. A parcel designated as "not a part" shall be deemed to be a "designated remainder" for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. 810 § 16, 1994: Ord. 678 § 15, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.15.040 - Preliminary submittal. 
The subdivider shall submit five sets of prints of the final map to the city engineer for checking. When required, the preliminary prints shall be accompanied by two copies of the following data, plans, reports and documents in a form as approved by the city engineer: 
A.  Improvement Plans. Improvement plans as required by Chapter 18.65 of this title. 
B.  Soils and Geotechnical Report. A soils and geotechnical report, when required, prepared in accordance with Chapter 16 of this code. 
C.  Title Report. A title report showing the legal owners at the time of submittal of the final map. 
D.  Improvement Bond Estimate. The improvement bond estimate shall include all improvements required by this chapter as provided by the developer, except for those utility facilities installed by a utility company under the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. 
E.  Deeds for Easements or Rights-of-Way. Deeds for easements or rights-of-way required for road, utility, slope construction or drainage purposes which have not been dedicated on the final map. Written evidence acceptable to the city in the form of rights of entry or permanent easements across private property outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of the facility. 
F.  Joint Use of Right-of-Way Agreement. Agreements. acceptable to the city, executed by all owners of all utility and other easements within the proposed rights-of-way consenting to the dedication of the road or consenting to the joint use of the right-of-way, as may be required by the city for public use and convenience of the road shall be required. When required by conditions of approval, these owners shall join in the dedication and subordinate their rights to the right of the public in the road. 
G.  Traverse Closures. Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots, easements, street centerlines and monument lines. The error of field closures in the traverse around the subdivision and around the interior lots or blocks shall not exceed one part in twenty thousand. 
H.  Hydrology and Hydraulic Calculations. Complete hydrology and hydraulic calculations of all storm drains. 
I.  Organization Documents. The submittal of the final map or parcel map shall include the proposed Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions, and all other organizational documents for the subdivision in a form as prescribed by Section 1355 of the Civil Code of the state. All documents shall be subject to review and approval by the planning director and city attorney when required by conditions of tentative map approval. 
J.  Offsite Easements. Written evidence of rights of entry or permanent easements on or across private property not within the proposed subdivision as may be necessary to allow performance of the work necessary to improve the subdivision. to allow for the maintenance of the subdivision improvements once completed, to allow for permanent access to the proposed subdivision, and to allow for and to grant necessary slope rights shall be submitted with the final map. 
K.  Utility Statement. A statement from each operator of proposed subdivision utility systems stating that the public utility easements shown on the final map are satisfactory for use by that utility for service to the proposed subdivision and that arrangements have been made to convey such easements to the utilities that are to use them shall be submitted with the final map. 
L.  Health Officer's Approval. The approval of the county health officer for the method of sewage and waste disposal planned for the proposed subdivision shall be submitted with the final map. Where septic tanks are proposed as the method of sewage disposal, the approval of the county health officer must be based upon a satisfactory report on percolation tests made to him and on a satisfactory field investigation made by him. The field investigation must be at the expense of the subdivider requesting the approval and to be satisfactory, it must show that ground slopes and soil conditions will allow septic tanks to function satisfactorily after ultimate development has occurred. The percolation tests shall be made at the expense of the subdivider requesting the approval and under the direction of a registered civil engineer who shall attest to the correctness of the results. The percolation tests shall be as specified by the county health officer and shall determine the location of the ground-water level and the character and condition and the rate of percolation of the ground underlying the subdivision. The percolation test shall be considered satisfactory only if the results of the percolation tests are such as to pose no threat to the health of the inhabitants of the area in which the subdivision is located. 
M.  Water Quality Certificate. The certification of the county health officer that the purveyor of water to the proposed subdivision is in possession of a temporary or permanent water supply permit issued under the authority of the state Department of Public Health shall be submitted with the final map. 
N.  Sewer Services. A statement from the entity which will provide sewage service for the proposed subdivision shall be submitted with the final map stating that the portion of the improvement plans containing the design and specifications for subdivision sewers is satisfactory to it, and that a satisfactory agreement has been entered into between the entity and the subdivider providing for connection of the subdivision sewage lines to the system of the entity. 
O.  Fire Chief's Certificate. The certification of the fire chief that adequate fire protection facilities have been planned for the proposed subdivision and for use by the fire department shall be submitted with the final map. 
P.  Stormwater Acceptance Easements. Written evidence of such deed, easements or rights not within the proposed subdivision as may be necessary to provide for the acceptance of storm-waters generated by the proposed subdivision shall be submitted with the final map. 
Q.  Railroad Crossings. Evidence of a satisfactory arrangement provided for all required railroad crossings shall be submitted with the final map. 
R.  Water Supply Certificate. A certificate showing that there is domestic water supply available from the city. If another water purveyor is to serve the proposed subdivision that the facilities of the facilities of the water purveyor, including the installation to be made in the proposed subdivision, meet the requirements set forth in the "Minimum Standards for Water Systems" shall be submitted with the final map. If the water purveyor is a mutual water company, a statement that the shares of stock applicable to this subdivision are appurtenant to the land shall also be submitted with the final map. 
S.  Dedication of Easements for Public Use. All title, rights and easements specified in subsections U through X, inclusive, of this section shall be offered for dedication to the city or other appropriate public agency at the time the final map is filed for approval. 
T.  Street Rights-of-way. Except as provided below, all rights-of-way for public streets, pedestrian walks, paths and alleys shown on the final map and all rights of access to and from lots of the proposed subdivision abutting on controlled access roads shall be offered in fee, free and clear of any prior easements of rights-of-way for dedication to the city. The rights of access to and from lots abutting on controlled access roads shall be such that owners of such lots shall have no rights whatsoever in such roads except in the general right of travel which belongs to the whole public. The city engineer may approve an offer of dedication wherein certain easements remain prior, in whole or part, to the rights-of-way being offered to the city. However, such approval shall be given only when unusual circumstances warrant and the easements which remain prior do not substantially interfere with proper governmental use of the rights-of-way being offered to the city. 
U.  Park Sites. All park sites to be dedicated in accordance with Chapter 18.30 of this title, as the same may be amended from time to time, shall be offered for conveyance to the appropriate public agency. 
V.  Flood Control Channels. All rights-of-way for drainage projects required for proper drainage of the proposed subdivision and for flood control channels or laterals thereto which may be construed within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision and which are shown upon a comprehensive flood control plan approved by the Ventura County flood control district shall be offered for dedication. All rights-of-way offered pursuant to the subsection shall be a fee simple title free of all liens, encumbrances, assessments, easements and leases except for public utility easements and shall be shown as Parcel "X" on the final map. 
W.  Private Street Easements. Easements allowing all governmental agencies providing for the public safety, health and welfare access on all private streets or lanes serving as access for more than two dwelling units shall be offered for dedication to the city. 
X.  Other Easements. All other easements for public use required as a condition for approval of the tentative map for the proposed subdivision shall be offered for dedication to the city or other appropriate agency. 
Y.  Any additional data, reports or information as required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 810 §§ 17—19, 1994; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.15.050 - Approval by city engineer. 
A.  Upon completing the preliminary check, the city engineer shall note the required corrections on the preliminary prints, reports and data and return one set to the subdivider's engineer for revision. 
B.  The subdivider's engineer shall submit two sets of the revised map, reports and data to the city engineer. After checking the revisions, one set shall be returned to the subdivider's engineer marked "approved as submitted," "approved when corrected as noted" or "revise and resubmit." 
C.  Upon receipt of an approved print, the subdivider shall submit the original tracing of the revised map, prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title and corrected to its final form, and signed by all parties required by the Map Act and this title to execute the appropriate certificates or statements on the map, to the city engineer. 
D.  The city engineer shall sign the appropriate certificates and statements. The city engineer shall complete and file the map with the city council within twenty days from the date on which the final map is submitted by the subdivider for approval. A final map is not deemed submitted to the city engineer until the city through its employees or agents determines that the map is technically correct and all conditions imposed by the tentative tract map approval, the State Subdivision Map Act and this title have been satisfied. 
(Ord. 810 § 20, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.15.060 - Approval by city council. 
A.  The final map shall be placed on the city council agenda for its approval. The city council shall consider the final map for approval at the meeting at which the city council receives the map or the next regular meeting after it receives the map. 
B.  The city council shall approve the final map if it has previously approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision, and if it finds that the final map is in substantial compliance with the previously approved tentative map, and if it conforms to all applicable requirements of this title and the state Subdivision Map Act. 
C.  If the final map is unacceptable, the council shall make their recommended corrections, instruct the subdivider to revise the final map and defer approval until the final map has been resubmitted. 
D.  The city council shall deny approval of the final map only for failure to meet or perform requirements or conditions which were applicable to the subdivision at the time of approval of the tentative map. Where the council denies approval of the final map, such disapproval shall be accompanied by a finding identifying the requirements or conditions which have not been met or performed. The city council may waive the requirements of this section upon a finding that the failure of the map to meet the conditions set forth in the tentative map is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which does not materially affect the validity of the map. 
(Ord. 810 § 21, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.15.070 - Filing with the county recorder. 
Upon approval of the final map by the city council and receipt of the improvement security by the city engineer, the mayor and city clerk shall execute the appropriate certificates and statements and the city clerk or authorized agent shall transmit the map to the county recorder. 
(Ord. 810 § 22, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.15.080 - Submittal by units or phases. 
Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map; provided, however, that the subdivider, at the time the tentative map is filed, informs the director of planning and community development of the subdivider's intention to file multiple final maps on the tentative map or if after filing the tentative map, the city council and the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple final maps. In providing such notice the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple maps. However, the city council shall approve the sequence of map approvals, if such phasing is provided. The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any remaining part of the tentative map. Each final map which constitutes a part, or unit, of the approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision number. The subdivision improvement agreement to be executed by the subdivider shall provide for the construction of such improvements as may be required to constitute a logical and orderly development of the whole subdivision by units. The right of the subdivider to file multiple final maps shall not limit the authority of the city to impose reasonable conditions relating to the filing of multiple final maps. 
(Ord. 810 § 23, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.20 - TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
18.20.010 - General. 
The form and contents, submittal and approval of tentative parcel maps shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. The tentative parcel map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.020 - Fees and deposits. 
All persons submitting a tentative parcel map as required by this title, shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by city council resolution establishing fees and/or deposits. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.030 - Waiver of parcel map requirements. 
A.  This section is adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 66428 of the California Government Code and this code. 
B.  The director of planning and community development may waive the parcel map for the following upon making a finding that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection and other requirements of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act: 
1.  A division of land creating four or fewer parcels; or 
2.  A division where, before division, the land contains less than five acres, and each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body; or 
3.  A division in which each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or 
4.  A division in which the land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or 
5.  A division in which each parcel created has a gross area of not less than forty acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section; or 
6.  A division of real property or interests therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition or other civil judgments or decrees; or 
7.  Any other division of real property which would otherwise require a parcel map. 
C.  Upon waiving the parcel map requirements, the city engineer shall cause to be filed with the county recorder a certificate of compliance for the land to be divided. 
D.  A parcel map waived by the department of planning and community development may be conditioned to provide for payment of park land, drainage and other fees by a method approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 810 § 24, 1994; Ord. 656 § 1, 1988: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.040 - Form and contents. 
A.  The tentative parcel map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one sheet. The scale shall be as approved by the city engineer and all lettering shall be one-eighth inch minimum in height. The final form shall be as approved by the city engineer. The tentative parcel map shall show the following information: 
1.  Name and address of legal owner, subdivider and the person preparing the map (including registration number); 
2.  Assessor's parcel number; 
3.  Date prepared, north arrow, scale and contour interval; 
4.  Existing and proposed land use; 
5.  Title; 
6.  A vicinity map, sufficient to show the relation to the local community; 
7.  Existing topography of the site and within at least one hundred feet from its boundary, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Existing contours at two-foot intervals, if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and not less than five-foot intervals for existing ground slope greater than or equal to ten percent. Existing contours shall be represented by screened or dashed lines, 
b.  Type, circumference and dripline of existing trees. Any trees proposed to be removed shall be so indicated, 
c.  The approximate location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be so marked, 
d.  The location, width and direction of flow of each watercourse, 
e.  The location, pavement and right-of-way width and grade and name of existing streets or highways, 
f.  Location and type of street improvements, 
g.  The location, size and slope of existing storm drains. The location of existing overhead utility lines on peripheral streets, 
h.  The location, width and identity of existing easements; 
8.  Any improvements proposed by the owners shall be shown; 
9.  If the site is to be graded, proposed contours shall be shown or an approved grading plan shall be submitted; 
10.  The proposed lot layout and lot areas; 
11.  Proposed easements or rights-of-way; 
12.  The source and date of existing contours; 
13.  A preliminary report of title showing the current vested owner; 
14.  A soils and/or engineering geology report which conforms to the requirements of Section 18.10.030 may be required by the city engineer; 
15.  Show any known archaeological sites. 
B.  The city engineer may waive any of the foregoing requirements upon finding that the location or nature of the proposed minor subdivision is such as not to necessitate compliance with these requirements; or may require additional information as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. 810 § 25, 1994; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.050 - Submittal to planning and community development department. 
A.  Any person making a division of land for which a parcel map is required shall, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, file the number of prints determined by the director of planning and community development, together with any deposits toward plan checking and review fees as may be required, to the planning and community development department. 
B.  The tentative parcel map shall be considered filed only when such map conforms to Section 18.20.040 and when all accompanying data or reports as required have been submitted and accepted by the planning and community development department and when the environmental impact study has been completed and the appropriate environmental document is prepared and approved in accordance with CEQA. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.060 - Planning and community development department review. 
The planning and community development department shall forward copies of the tentative parcel map to the affected public agencies as determined by the director of planning and community development in accordance with Government Code Sections 66454 through 66455.7, which may, in turn, forward to the planning and community development department their findings and recommendations thereon. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.070 - Development advisory conference. 
Upon completion of review by the planning and community development department and prior to the date the tentative map is scheduled for planning commission action, the planning and community development department shall hold a development advisory conference. Advance written notice of the development advisory conference shall be given to the subdivider or his agent and to all affected agencies. The results of the development advisory conference shall be reported to the planning commission. A copy of the staff report shall be served on the subdivider at least three days prior to any hear ing or action on such map by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.080 - Review and notice of public hearings. 
The tentative parcel map shall be reviewed by the planning and community development department for compliance to all applicable cit ordinances and the state Subdivision Map Act. Upon completion of the review and upon receipt of a valid application for the tentative parcel map, the director of planning and community development shall set the matter for public hearing. At least ten calendar days before the public hearing, he shall cause notice to be given of the time, date and place of said hearing including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected and the street address, if any, of the property involved in the same manner as required for tentative maps. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.085 - Planning commission approval. 
The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the parcel map within fifty days after the parcel map has been considered filed in accordance with Section 18.20.050. 
(Ord. 810 § 26, 1994.)  
18.20.090 - Approval and/or denial. 
A.  Upon completion of the public hearing, the planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative parcel map. If the map is approved, it shall be signed and dated by the director of planning and community development or his authorized representative. A notice of the action taken, along with any conditions imposed, shall be sent to the subdivider and engineer. If the subdivision is denied, the subdivider or the engineer shall be so notified in writing with a statement of the reasons for denial. 
B.  In approving or conditionally approving the tentative parcel map, the planning commission shall find that the proposed subdivision, together with its provisions for its design and improvements, is consistent with applicable general or specific plans by the city. 
C.  The tentative parcel map may be denied for failure to comply with city ordinances, resolutions or standards, or the state Subdivision Map Act. The planning commission shall deny approval of the tentative parcel map if it makes any of the findings contained in Section 18.10.110. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.100 - Conditions of approval. 
A.  In approving the tentative parcel map, the planning commission may impose as conditions of filing a parcel map any or all, but not limited to the following requirements: 
1.  Frontage improvements; 
2.  Reasonable on-site improvements; 
3.  Reasonable off-site improvements; 
4.  Dedications; 
5.  Applicable fees; 
6.  A soils and/or engineering geology report. 
B.  These requirements shall be in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.110 - Dedication of streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way or easements. 
As a condition of approval or a parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights; drainage, public greenways, scenic easements; public utility easements; and other public easements. In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights; drainage; public utility easements; and other public easements. Improvements and dedications shall be in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.115 - Cable access. 
As a condition of approval of a final map, the subdivider shall provide access to all cable operators within the city. 
(Ord. 678 § 16, 1989.)  
18.20.120 - Appeal of planning commission action. 
A member of the city council or any interested person adversely affected by a decision of the planning commission with respect to the tentative parcel map, may within ten days of such decision, file an appeal with the secretary of the planning commission. Any such appeal must be accompanied by an administrative fee in an amount set by city council resolution. The city council shall consider the appeal within thirty days. This appeal shall be a public hearing with notice being given pursuant to Section 18.10.080 and with additional notice to be given to the subdivider. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall, within ten days, declare its findings. The city council may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the planning commission and may make such findings as are consistent with the provisions of this chapter or the state Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 950 § 14, 2002: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.130 - Expiration of tentative parcel map. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of the tentative parcel map shall expire twenty-four months from the date of its approval. However, if the subdivision is subject to a requirement of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars or more to construct, improve, or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, (excluding improvements of public rights-of-way which abut the boundary of the property to be subdivided and which are reasonably related to the development of that property), each filing of a final map authorized by Government Code Section 66463.1 shall extend the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map by thirty-six months from the date of its expiration, as provided in this section, or the date of the previously filed final map, whichever is later. The extensions shall not extend the tentative parcel map more than ten years from its approval or conditional approval. A tentative parcel map on property subject to a development agreement authorized by Government Code Section 65864 et seq. may be extended for the period of time provided for in the agreement, but not beyond the duration of the agreement. 
B.  The period of time specified in subsection (A) of this section, including any extension granted pursuant to Section 18.20.140, shall not include any period of time in which a development moratorium is in existence in accordance with Government Code Section 66463.5. 
C.  The period of time specified in subsection (A) of this section, including any extension granted pursuant to Section 18.20.140, shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative parcel map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the city council. After service of the initial petition or complaint upon the city, the subdivider shall, in writing to the director of planning and community development, request a stay in the time period of the tentative map. Within forty days after receiving such request, the city council shall either stay the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay. The request for the stay shall be a hearing with notice to the subdivider and to the appellant, and upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall, within ten days, declare its findings. 
D.  The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map shall terminate all proceedings, and no parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within such tentative parcel map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative parcel map. However, if a map which is ready for recordation is submitted to the city engineer prior to the expiration date, the city may process, approve and record the map after the expiration date. Delivery to the city engineer shall be deemed a timely filing for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. 810 § 27, 1994: Ord. 678 § 17, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.140 - Extensions of tentative parcel map. 
A.  The subdivider may request an extension of the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map, not exceeding a total of three years, by written application to the planning and community development department. The application shall be filed prior to the expiration date as determined by Section 18.20.130 and shall state the reasons for requesting the extension. The period of extension specified in this section is in addition to the period of time provided for in Section 18.20.130(A) Upon a timely request for an extension, the map shall automatically be extended for sixty days or until the application for extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the planning commission, whichever occurs first. 
B.  Time extension requests shall be processed and noticed in the same manner as the original approval hearing. 
C.  The planning commission shall review the request for extension for approval, conditional approval or denial. Not more than three extensions shall be approved for a tentative parcel map and the period of each extension shall not exceed twelve months. The extension of time shall commence with the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map. The approved new expiration date shall not extend more than three years beyond the original expiration date of the tentative parcel map. 
D.  As a condition of the extension of a tentative parcel map, the planning commission may recommend new conditions, or revise existing conditions, on the approved tentative parcel map as recommended by the planning and community development department, or as it may find necessary, provided the applicant agrees to these conditions or revisions. 
E.  If the planning commission denies a subdivider's application for extension, the subdivider may appeal to the city council within fifteen days after the planning commission has denied the extension. Appeals shall be in accordance with Section 18.20.120 of this chapter. 
F.  Prior to the expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map, upon the application by the subdivider to extend that map, the map shall automatically be extended sixty days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. 810 § 28, 1994; Ord. 678 § 18, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.150 - Amendments to the approved tentative parcel map. 
A.  Minor amendments to the tentative map may be approved by the planning and community development department upon application by the subdivider or on its own initiative; provided: 
1.  No lots, units or building sites are added; 
2.  Such changes are consistent with the intent of the original tentative map approval; 
3.  There are no resulting violations of this code. 
B.  The director of planning and community development or his authorized representative may require a new tentative parcel map application in lieu of the above procedure when, in their opinion, requested changes are substantial. 
C.  Any revision to conditions shall be approved by the planning commission. The revision shall be denoted on the approved tentative map and/or in writing to the subdivider, whichever is appropriate. Any amendment shall not affect the expiration date of the approved tentative parcel map. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.160 - Lot line adjustment application. 
The application for a parcel map for a lot line adjustment shall include a map in the form specified by Section 18.20.040 and include such other and further information as the director of planning and community development may require. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.170 - Requirements. 
The director of community development may approve or conditionally approve the request for a lot line adjustment in writing after investigation and receipt of reports from other departments, if he the director finds that the proposed lot line adjustment conforms to all the following requirements: 
A.  Conforms with the city's general plan; 
B.  The lots adjoin one another; 
C.  Does not create an additional lot; 
D.  Does not reduce the area or width of any lot in any zone below the minimum area of the zone; 
E.  Does not cut off any lot from frontage on a public street or alley access to a public utility easement or create a need for utility easements; 
F.  Does not cut off any lot from any utility service available prior to before the lot line adjustment; 
G.  Does not cause an existing building to be in violation of the zoning ordinance, building code or state housing law by reasons of its proximity to or encroachment on a proposed new lot line; 
H.  No new public street or easement or extension of any existing public street or easement is required. 
I.  Complies with requirements as to area, improvement, design, floodwater drainage, sanitary disposal facilities and water supply availability. 
(Ord. 952 § 2, 2002: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.180 - Lot line adjustment procedures for approval or denial. 
A.  Within thirty days after receiving a request for lot line adjustment, the director of planning and community development shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the request. All applications not approved or conditionally approved within the time limit shall be deemed denied, unless by mutual agreement between the director of planning and community development and the person proposing the lot line adjustment, the time for approval is extended. 
B.  If the director of planning and community development approves or conditionally approves the map as provided in this chapter, he shall so certify the map and the city engineer shall file it with the county recorder after the appeal period has expired. 
C.  If the lot line adjustment application is denied by the director of planning and community development, it shall proceed and be handled in the same manner as a parcel map pursuant to Chapters 18.20 and 18.25 of this title. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.20.190 - Lot line adjustment appeal. 
Within ten days after a request for lot line adjustment has been approved or conditionally approved, any aggrieved person or member of the planning commission may file an appeal of the approval, or conditional approval, with the city clerk. Appeals must be in writing and accompanied by an administrative fee in an amount set by city council resolution. If an appeal is timely and complete, the planning commission shall hear and determine the matter at the earliest convenient date. 
(Ord. 950 § 15, 2002: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.25 - FINAL PARCEL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
18.25.010 - Final parcel maps—General. 
The form and contents, submittal, approval and filing of parcel maps shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and the state Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.25.020 - Survey required. 
A.  An accurate and complete field survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor authorized to practice land surveying in the state. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the parcel map shall not exceed 1/10,000 for field closures and 1/20,000 for calculated closures. 
B.  At the time of making the survey for the parcel map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards described in Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one exterior boundary line shall be monumented prior to recording the parcel map. Other monuments shall be set as required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.25.030 - Form and contents. 
A.  The form of the final parcel map shall conform to final map form and content requirements as specified by Sections 18.15.020 and 18.15.030 of this title as amended by this chapter. 
B.  Statements shall be in accordance with Government Code Sections 66445 and 66449. 
C.  Lots shall be designated by letters commencing with "A." 
(Ord. 810 § 29, 1994: Ord. 678 § 19, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.25.040 - Preliminary submittal. 
A.  The subdivider shall submit five sets of prints of the final parcel map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by two copies of the data, plans, reports and documents as required for final maps by Section 18.15.040, Preliminary Submittal, and as modified herein. 
B.  The city engineer may waive any of the requirements upon finding that the location and nature of the proposed subdivision is such as not to necessitate compliance with the requirements of Section 18.25.030. 
C.  Any additional information or documents required shall be as specified with the conditions of approval of the tentative parcel map. 
(Ord. 810 § 30, 1994; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.25.050 - Approval by city engineer. 
A.  Upon completing preliminary check, the city engineer shall note the required corrections on the preliminary prints, reports and data and return one set to the subdivider's engineer for revision. 
B.  The subdivider's engineer shall submit two sets of the revised map, reports and data to the city engineer. After checking the revisions, one set shall be returned to the subdivider's engineer marked, "approved as submitted," "approved when corrected as noted," or "revise and resubmit." 
C.  Upon receipt of an approved print, the subdivider shall submit the original tracing or the revised map, prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter and corrected to its final form, and signed by all parties required by the Map Act and this title to execute the certificates or statements to the city. 
D.  The city engineer shall complete his or her certificate or statement as required by Government Code Section 66450 within twenty days from the time the parcel map is submitted for approval by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 810 § 31, 1994; Ord. 678 § 20, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.25.060 - Filing with the county recorder. 
Within twenty days from the time the parcel map is submitted for approval by the subdivider, the city engineer, the city clerk or authorized agent shall transmit the approved parcel map directly to the county recorder. 
(Ord. 810 § 32, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.25.070 - Multiple parcel maps. 
A.  Multiple final parcel maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative parcel map if either condition is satisfied: 
1.  The subdivider, at the time the tentative parcel map is filed, provides a written notice to the director of planning and community development of the subdivider's intention to file multiple parcel maps on the tentative map; or 
2.  After filing of the tentative parcel map, the planning commission and the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple parcel maps. 
B.  In providing the notice specified in subsection (A)(1) of this section, the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple parcel maps. The filing of a parcel map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map shall not invalidate any part of the tentative parcel map. The right of the subdivider to file multiple parcel maps shall not limit the authority of the city to impose reasonable conditions relating to the filing of multiple parcel maps. 
(Ord. 810 § 33, 1994.)  
Chapter 18.30 - PARK LAND DEDICATION 
Sections: 
 
18.30.010 - General. 
The provisions of this chapter are enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 66477 of the Government Code of the state of California. The park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by these sections are in accordance with the definite principles and standards contained in the adopted recreation element of the general plan of the city. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.) 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 3, 9-26-2018)  
18.30.020 - Requirements. 
A.  As a condition of approval of a tentative subdivision map or land division, the subdivider will dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu to the Pleasant Valley Recreation and Park District ("park district"), or both, at the option of the city and after consultation with the park district, for park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in these sections. If a subdivision has less than fifty parcels, the city may only require the payment of an in lieu fee. However, if the subdivision includes more than fifty dwelling units, dedication of land may be required. 
B.  Subdivisions not used for residential purposes are exempted from the requirements of this section; provided, however, that a condition may be placed on the approval of such parcel map that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels within four years, the fee may be required to be paid by the owner of each such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. 678 § 21, 1989: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.) 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 3, 9-26-2018)  
18.30.030 - General standard. 
It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that five net acres of property for each one thousand persons (or two hundred seventeen and eight-tenths square feet per person) residing within this city be devoted to local park and recreational purposes and that the amount of the existing neighborhood and community park area as calculated pursuant to this chapter exceeds that limit. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.) 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 3, 9-26-2018)  
18.30.040 - Standards and formula for dedication of land. 
A.  Where a park or recreational facility has been designated in the city's park and recreation element of the general plan, and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider may dedicate land for a local park sufficient in size and topography to serve the residents of the subdivision. 
B.  The amount of land to be dedicated for parks will be two hundred seventeen and eight-tenths square feet for each person anticipated to be living in the development. The number of persons anticipated to be living in the development is calculated by multiplying the number of units within the development of a particular class by the average household size of such class of unit and adding the calculated figures for each class of unit within the development. There is a rebuttable presumption that the average size of each class of household is the same as that disclosed by the most recent available federal census, or census taken pursuant to Government Code section 40200 and following. 
C.  In the event the area to be dedicated is bounded or abutted by existing or proposed street frontage, the subdivider will, at the time of approval of the tentative map or land division, obligate himself by condition to the map to provide curbs, gutters, sidewalk, drainage facilities, street lighting, stoplights, street signs, pavement, six-foot high wall or decorative fence between the park and homes abutting on the park (if needed), and street trees to full city standards. In such event, the subdivider will also obligate the subdivider to stub-in requested utility line services to the parkway and to perform the initial on-site grading required for developing the park facility. The subdivider will bond to guarantee construction of such improvements as part of the land dedication. 
D.  If the subdivider installs any park improvements, such as playground equipment and restrooms, the cost of park and recreational improvements will constitute a credit towards the subdivider's land dedication/in lieu fee requirement. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.) 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 3, 9-26-2018)  
18.30.050 - Amount of fee in lieu of land dedication. 
A.  When a fee is to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of such fee will be based upon the fair market value of the amount of usable park land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 18.30.040 and will be determined according to the following formula: Number of acres of land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated multiplied by the average fair market value of an acre of usable park land within the subdivision which will be determined as of the time of filing the application of the parcel or final map to the city and which must be consistent with the zoning applicable to the land at that time. Fair market value is determined as follows: 
1.  The fair market value will be determined by the application of accepted appraisal methods upon the advice of the Ventura County assessor; or 
2.  The city, the parks district, and the subdivider may agree to the fair market value: or 
3.  If the subdivider, city, or the parks district objects to the fair market value determined in subsection (1), any party may, at the subdivider's expense, obtain an appraisal of the property by an impartial qualified real estate appraiser approved by the city, which appraisal may be considered as to the fair market value. 
B.  The in-lieu fee will also include an amount sufficient to provide curbs, gutters, drainage facilities, street lights, stop-lights, street signs, sidewalks, pavement and street trees to full city standards, and for stubbing-in of utility services to the park property and initial on-site grading required for developing the park facility or rehabilitation of existing parks. The procedure for calculating the amount pursuant to this section will be as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
C.  If a park is indicated on the general plan within the subdivision, the site may be reserved for purchase by the park district. 
D.  If a park site is shown within or partially within the subdivision and the park site exceeds the amount of land area required to be dedicated based on this title, the additional land would be reserved on the map for purchase by the park district. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.) 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 3, 9-26-2018)  
18.30.060 - Criteria for requiring both dedication and fee. 
In subdivision of over fifty lots, the subdivider may be required to both dedicate land and pay a fee in lieu according to the following formula: 
A.  When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is shown in the city's general plan as the site for a local park, such portion may be dedicated for local park purposes and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.30.050 may be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 18.30.040. 
B.  When a major part of the local park or recreational site has already been acquired by the park district and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, such remaining portion may be dedicated and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.30.050 may be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land which would otherwise have been required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 18.30.040, such fees to be used for the improvement of the existing park and recreation facility or for the improvement of other local parks and recreational facilities in the area serving the subdivision. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.) 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 3, 9-26-2018)  
18.30.070 - Credit for private open space. 
Where usable private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the homeowner's association of the subdivision, partial credit, not to exceed thirty percent of the park land dedication requirement may be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu if the city council finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all of the following standards are met: 
A.  That yards, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building provisions of this title will not be included in computing the amount of such private open space; 
B.  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space will be adequately provided for in writing; 
C.  That the use of the private open space will be restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of the property within the subdivision and which cannot be eliminated without the consent of the city; 
D.  That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, space, topography, geology, access and the location of the private open space; 
E.  That the facilities proposed for private open space are in substantial compliance with the provisions of the recreation element of the city of Camarillo general plan, the requirements of the city and the park district; 
F.  Before credit is given, the city council must make written findings that the above standards are met; 
G.  Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities must be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final subdivision map and must be recorded contemporaneously with the final subdivision map; 
H.  Said credit may be accumulated over an entire project and allocated to various phases of a multi-phase map when the open space for an individual phase is not sufficient to meet the requirements, cash deposit will be required equal to phase requirements to guarantee future dedication or open space credit. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.) 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 3, 9-26-2018)  
18.30.080 - Method of dedication of land and/or payment of fees. 
The procedure for dedication of land, payment of a fee, or both, is as follows: 
A.  When land dedication is required, it will be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of Section 18.30.040 of this chapter. When fees are required, they will be deposited directly with the park district, which is to receive the fee prior to recordation of the parcel or final map and will be held until such time as the parcel or final map is approved, rejected or withdrawn by the subdivider. If the parcel or final map is rejected or withdrawn, the funds will be returned by the district. A copy of the district's receipt must be presented to the city prior to the final map being approved and recorded. 
B.  In the instance of payment of the lieu fee per residence, in-lieu fee must be paid to the park district at the earlier of the city's final inspection or the city's issuance of the certificate of occupancy, in accordance with Government Code section 53077.5. A copy of the district's receipt must be presented to the city at the time of the final inspection or the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Nothing herein prevents the district from collecting fees at an earlier time if the conditions of Government Code section 53077.5(b) are met. 
(Ord. 664 § 1, 1988;Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.) 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 3, 9-26-2018)  
18.30.090 - Conveyance of land. 
Real property dedicated under the provisions of Section 18.30.040 and following of this title must be conveyed by grant deed in fee simple absolute to the park district by the subdivider free and clear of all encumbrances except those which will not interfere with use of the property for park and recreational purposes and which the district agrees to accept. Required deeds must be deposited with the park district prior to recordation of the parcel or final map, who will indicate their intent to accept the deeds. The deeds will be held by the park district until such time as the parcel or final map is approved, rejected or withdrawn by the subdivider. If the parcel or final map is rejected or withdrawn, the deeds will be returned to the subdivider. The subdivider must provide all fees and instruments required to convey the land plus a preliminary title report and title insurance in favor of the park district in an amount equal to the value of the property being conveyed. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.) 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 3, 9-26-2018)  
18.30.100 - Time of commencement of development. 
At the time the tentative map or tentative parcel map is approved, the planning commission or the city council, whichever acts last on the tentative map, upon the recommendation of the park district, will designate the time when development of the park or recreational facilities should be commenced and where the fees will be utilized for park or recreational purposes. Development of park or recreational facilities must be committed in not more than five years after payment of such fees or issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots of the subdivision created, whichever occurs later. In the event the park district does not commit the fees within the required time period, the fees will be returned in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.) 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 3, 9-26-2018)  
18.30.110 - Limitation on use of land and fees. 
A.  The land and fees received under Section 18.30.040 and following, of this title may be used only for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing park and recreational facilities to serve the subdivision, and the amount and location of land to be dedicated, the fees to be paid in-lieu, or any combination of dedications and fees must bear a reasonable relationship to the use of park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision. 
B.  However, the fees may also be used for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreational facilities in a neighborhood other than the neighborhood in which the subdivision for which fees were paid as a condition to the approval of a tentative map or parcel map is located, if all of the requirements under Government Code section 66477(a)(3)(B) are met. The "specified radius" for which the fees may be used includes all areas within the city's sphere of influence. The "legislative body" under section 66477(a)(3)(B) is the park district to which the land or fees are conveyed or paid to. 
C.  Under Government Code section 66477(a)(6), the park district to which the land or fees are conveyed or paid is the local public agency that must develop a schedule specifying how, when, and where it will use the land or fees, or both, to develop park or recreational facilities to serve the residents of the subdivision. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.) 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 3, 9-26-2018)  
18.30.120 - Industrial, commercial, and residential apartment condo conversion subdivisions. 
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to commercial or industrial subdivisions; nor do they apply to condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.) 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 3, 9-26-2018)  
Chapter 18.40 - SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION 
Sections: 
 
18.40.010 - General. 
As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map, a subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions within a school district shall dedicate to the school district such lands as the city council shall deem to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon schools necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate elementary school service. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.40.020 - Procedure. 
The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative map. If within thirty days after the requirement of dedication is imposed by the city the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, the requirement shall be automatically terminated. The required dedication may be made any time before, concurrently with, or up to sixty days after the filing of the final map on any portion of the subdivision. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.40.030 - Payments to subdivider for school site dedication. 
The school district shall, if it accepts the dedication, repay to the subdivider or his successors the original cost to the subdivider of the dedicated land, plus a sum equal to the total of the following amounts: 
A.  The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider; 
B.  The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the school district's offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication; 
C.  Any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintenance of such dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such land. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.40.035 - Notification. 
Whenever there is consideration of an area within a development for a public school site, the director of planning and community development shall give the State Department of Education written notice of the proposed site. 
(Ord. 810 § 34, 1994.)  
18.40.040 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter, except Section 18.40.035, shall not be applicable to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than ten years prior to the filing of the tentative maps. 
(Ord. 810 § 35, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.45 - RESERVATIONS/DEDICATIONS TO PUBLIC 
Sections: 
 
18.45.010 - General. 
As a condition of approval of a map, the subdivider shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and location for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.45.020 - Standards for reservation of land. 
Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library or other public use is shown on an adopted specific plan or adopted general plan containing policies and standards for those uses, and the required reservations are in accordance with those policies and standards, the subdivider may be required by the city to reserve sites as so determined by the city or county. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible. The reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific plan or general plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period. 
(Ord. 678 § 22, 1989: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1983.)  
18.45.030 - Procedure. 
The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless such period of time is extended by mutual agreement. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.45.040 - Payment to subdivider. 
The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map, or tentative parcel map, plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such reserved area. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.45.050 - Termination. 
If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into such a binding agreement, the reservation of such area shall automatically terminate. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.45.055 - Public dedication certificate. 
A.  When property is dedicated to the city in fee for public purposes, or for making public improvements or constructing public facilities, other than for open space, parks, or schools, the city shall record a certificate with the county recorder. The certificate shall be attached to the map and shall contain all of the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the subdivider dedicating the property; 
2.  A legal description of the real property dedicated; and 
3.  A statement that the city shall reconvey the property to the subdivider if the city makes a determination pursuant to this section that the same public purpose for which the property was dedicated does not exist, or the property or any portion thereof is not needed for public utilities, as specified in subsection (C) of this section. 
B.  The subdivider may request that the city make the determination that the same public purpose for which the dedication was required still exists, after payment of a fee which shall not exceed the amount reasonably required to make the determination. The determination may be made by reference to a capital improvement plan, an applicable general or specified plan requirement, the subdivision map, or other public documents that identify the need for the dedication. 
C.  If the city determines that the same public purpose for which the dedication was required does not exist, it shall reconvey the property to the subdivider or the successor in interest, as specified in subsection (A) of this section, except for all or any portion of the property that is required for that same public purpose or for public utilities. 
D.  If the city decides to vacate, lease, sell, or otherwise dispose of the dedicated property, it shall give at least sixty days notice to the subdivider whose name appears on the certificate before vacating, leasing, selling, or otherwise disposing of the dedicated property. This notice is not required if the dedicated property will be used for the same public purpose for which it was dedicated. 
(Ord. 810 § 37, 1994.)  
Chapter 18.50 - CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION 
Sections: 
 
18.50.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is as follows: 
A.  To establish criteria for the conversion of the existing multiple family rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperatives and any other subdivision which is a conversion of existing rental housing; 
B.  To reduce the impact of such conversions on residents in rental housing who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of apartments to condominiums by providing for procedures for notification and adequate time and assistance for such relocation; 
C.  To assure that purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed as to the physical conditions of the structure which is offered for purchase; 
D.  To ensure that converted housing achieves a high degree of appearance, quality and safety and is consistent with the goals of the city; 
E.  Attempt to provide a reasonable balance of ownership and rental housing in Camarillo and a variety of choices of tenure, type, price and location of housing; 
F.  Attempt to maintain a supply of rental housing for low- and moderate-income persons. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.020 - General. 
In addition to the requirements and procedures as set forth by this title and the State Subdivision Map Act, conversions of existing multiple family rental housing condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperatives and any other subdivision which is a conversion of existing rental housing shall be subject to the additional requirements provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 678 § 23, 1989: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.030 - Physical elements report. 
A report on the physical elements of all structures and facilities shall be submitted with the tentative subdivision or parcel map. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  A report detailing the structural condition of all elements of the property, including foundations, electrical, plumbing, utilities, walls, ceilings, windows, recreational facilities, sound transmission of each building, mechanical equipment, parking facilities and appliances. 
Regarding each such element, the report shall state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant, when such element was built; the conditions of each element; when said element was replaced; the approximate date upon which said element will require replacement; the cost of replacing said element; and any variation of the physical condition of said element from the current zoning and city building code in effect on the date that the last building permit was issued for the subject structure. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed; 
B.  A report from a licensed structural pest control operator, approved by the city, on each structure and each unit within the structure; 
C.  A report on any known soil and geological conditions regarding soil deposits, rock formations, faults, ground-water and landslides in the vicinity of the project and a statement regarding any known evidence of soils problems relating to the structures. Reference shall be made to any previous soils reports for the site and a copy submitted with said report; 
D.  A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider necessary to refurbish and restore the project to achieve a high degree of appearance and safety. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.040 - Additional submittals. 
A.  A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions which would be applied on behalf of any and all owners of condominium units within the project. The declaration shall include, but not be limited to, the conveyance of units; the assignment of parking; an agreement for common area maintenance, including facilities and landscaping, together with an estimate of any initial assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance, description of a provision for maintenance of all vehicular access areas within the project; an indication of appropriate responsibilities for maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit; 
B.  Specific information concerning the demographic characteristics of the project, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Square footage and number of rooms in each unit; 
2.  Rental rate history for each type of unit for previous five years; 
3.  Vacancy rate in the city for each month during preceding two years; 
4.  Makeup of existing tenant households, including family size, length of residence, age of tenants, and whether receiving federal or state rent subsidies; 
5.  Proposed sale price of units; 
6.  Proposed homeowners' association fee; 
7.  Financing available; and 
8.  Names and addresses of all tenants. 
When the subdivider can demonstrate that such information is not available, this requirement may be modified by the planning and community development department; 
C.  Signed copies from each tenant of notice of intent to convert, as specified in Section 18.50.110. The subdivider shall submit evidence that a certified letter of notification was sent to each tenant for whom a signed copy of said notice is not submitted; 
D.  Any other information which, in the opinion of the planning and community development department, will assist in determining whether the proposed project will be consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.050 - Acceptance of reports. 
The final form of the physical elements report and other documents shall be as approved by the city. The reports in their acceptable form shall remain on file with the planning and community development department for review by any interested persons. The report shall be referenced in the subdivision report to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.060 - Copy to buyers. 
The subdivider shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all reports (in their final, acceptable form), except the information required by Section 18.50.040(B) and (C) prior to said purchaser executing any purchase agreement or other contract to purchase a unit in the project, and said developer shall give the purchaser sufficient time to review said reports. Copies of the reports shall be made available at all times at the sales office and shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the city, at the project site. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.070 - Public hearing. 
In conjunction with tentative map and tentative parcel map approval, the planning commission and city council will hold a public hearing. Notice of each hearing will be provided in accordance with Sections 19.84.030 and 19.84.040 of this code. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(B), 5-25-2018)  
18.50.080 - Final information submitted. 
Prior to the close of escrow on the last unit and yearly until such time, the subdivider shall submit the following information to the planning and community development department: 
A.  Name, address and phone number of homeowners' association; 
B.  Actual sale price of units; 
C.  Actual homeowners' association fee; 
D.  Number of prior tenants who purchased units; 
E.  Number of units purchased with intent to be used as rentals. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.090 - Adequate physical condition. 
A.  To achieve the purpose of this chapter, the city council shall require that all condominium conversions conform to this code, in effect at the time of tentative map approval except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
B.  All provisions of this code must be met and violations corrected prior to the approval of the final map, or upon approval of the planning and community development department, funds shall be adequately escrowed or bonded to assure completion of such corrective work, prior to the closing of escrow of any unit in the project. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.100 - Specific physical standards. 
The city council shall require conformance with the following standards in approving the map: 
A.  Building Regulations. The project shall be found to be in compliance with the Uniform Building Code, Chapter 16.04 of this code, in effect on the date that the last building permit was issued for the subject structure or structures except as herein provided. 
B.  Fire Prevention. 
1.  Smoke Detectors. Each living unit shall be provided with approved detectors of products of combustion other than that conforming to the latest Uniform Building Code standards, mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes. 
2.  Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems. All fire hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers and other fire protective appliances shall be retained in an operable condition at all times. 
C.  Sound Transmission. 
1.  Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment, such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors, which is determined by the building official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the building official. 
2.  Noise Standards. The structure shall conform to all exterior and exterior sound transmission standards of Chapter 35 (Appendix) of the Uniform Building Code and Chapter 16.04 of this code. In such cases where present standards cannot reasonably be met, the standard may be modified by the city council, and it may require the applicant to notify potential buyers of the noise deficiency currently existing within these units. 
D.  Utility Metering. 
1.  Each dwelling unit shall be separately metered for gas, water and electricity. Where the subdivider can demonstrate that the standard cannot be reasonably met, the standard may be modified by the city council. 
2.  If the development cannot be reasonably converted to individual meters for buildings constructed prior to this title, then the city or water purveyor shall bill against the master meters at the rate charged to individually metered single-family residential units. The CC and R's (covenants, conditions and restrictions) shall contain a system for equitable sharing of communal water metering charges. 
3.  Similar modifications to the policies may be made by the city council for other utilities. 
4.  All apartment units constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall be designed to provide for conversion to individual meters. 
E.  Private Storage Space. Each unit shall have at least two hundred cubic feet of enclosed weather-proofed and lockable private storage space in addition to guest, linen, pantry and clothes closets customarily provided. Such space may be provided in any location approved by the planning and community development department, but shall not be divided into two or more locations. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the city council. 
F.  Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided in each unit; or if common laundry areas are provided, such facilities shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and dryer for each five units or fraction thereof. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the city council. 
G.  Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance. All landscaping and irrigation systems shall be restored as necessary and maintained to achieve a high degree of appearance and quality. 
H.  Condition of Equipment and Appliances. The developer shall provide written certification to the buyer of each unit at the close of escrow that any dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves, refrigerators, hot water tanks and air conditioners that are provided are in operable working condition as of the close of escrow. At such time as the homeowners' association takes over management of the development, the developer shall provide written certification to the association that any pool and pool equipment (filter, pumps, chlorinator) and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the association is in operable working condition. 
I.  Refurbishing and Restoration. All main buildings, structures, fences, patio enclosures, carports, accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas, irrigation systems and additional elements as required by the planning and community development department shall be refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve a high degree of appearance, quality and safety. 
J.  Drainage. Drainage shall be corrected if necessary, at the applicant's expense, in order to comply with the applicable grading standards currently in effect. 
K.  Water Design. The applicant shall comply with Section VI of the city's water division, Manual of Design and Construction Standards. 
(Ord. 678 § 24, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.105 - Inspection and permits. 
A.  The applicant shall apply for a code compliance inspection for each dwelling unit. 
B.  The applicant shall, at his own expense, expose any structural members or electrical, plumbing, or mechanical system, when deemed necessary by the inspector to determine compliance with applicable codes and standards, or to determine the extent of suspected deterioration in such systems or materials. 
C.  The necessary permits shall be obtained for all repairs and/or modifications. 
(Ord. 678 § 25, 1989.)  
18.50.110 - Notice of intent. 
A notice of intent to convert shall be delivered to each tenant at least sixty days prior to filing of the tentative map. Evidence of receipt by each tenant shall be submitted with the tentative map. The form of the notice shall be as follows: 
To the occupant(s) of ___________ 
(address) 
The owner(s) of this building, at (address), plans to file a tentative map with the City, to convert this building to a (condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project). You shall be given notice of each hearing for which notice is required pursuant to Section 66451.3 and 66452.5 of the Government Code, and you have the right to appear and the right to be heard at any such hearing. 
__________________ 
(Signature of owner or owner's agent) 
__________________ 
(date) ;hn0; (Ord. 678 § 26, 1989: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.115 - Tenants to receive staff report. 
Any report or recommendation by staff on a tentative map for a conversion shall be served on each tenant of the subject property at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by such advisory agency or legislative body. 
(Ord. 678 § 27, 1989.)  
18.50.120 - Tenant's right to purchase. 
As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(d), any present tenant or tenants of any unit shall be given a nontransferable right of first refusal to purchase the unit occupied at a price no greater than the price offered to the general public. The right of first refusal shall extend for at least ninety days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report or commencement of sales, whichever date is later. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.130 - Vacation of units. 
Each nonpurchasing tenant not in default under the obligations of the rental agreement or lease under which he occupies his unit, shall have not less than six months from the approval date of the final subdivision map to find substitute housing and relocate. The subdivider shall notify each tenant immediately prior to the time of final map approval of the anticipated date required to vacate the unit and when the six-month period will begin. Evidence of receipt by each tenant shall be submitted prior to approval of the final map. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.140 - No increase in rents. 
A tenant's rent shall not be increased for two years from the time of filing of the application by the planning and community development department of the tentative map until the unit is sold or until the subdivision is denied or withdrawn. At the end of the two-year period, rent increases will be limited to the increase in the Consumer Price Index, Los Angeles-Long Beach SMA. The increase in rent on a unit which has been vacated after receipt of the application by the planning and community development department shall be limited to the Consumer Price Index, Los Angeles-Long Beach SMA. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.150 - Special cases. 
Any nonpurchasing tenant aged sixty-two or older or handicapped or with minor children in school shall be given at least an additional six months beyond the period specified in Section 18.50.130 in which to find suitable replacement housing. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.160 - Moving expenses. 
The subdivider shall provide moving expenses of two times the monthly rent to any tenant household living in any unit of the project at least three months' time prior to and on the date of tentative map approval as provided in this title. A tenant moving in after tentative map approval will not be required to be provided with moving expenses. Eligible tenants will receive moving expenses when they relocate, except when the tenant has given notice of his intent to move prior to receipt of notification from the subdivider of his intent to convert. The subdivider shall also provide each tenant with a monthly list of other rentals available in the Ventura County area beginning from the time of tentative map approval until each tenant relocates or decides to purchase a unit. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.170 - Notice to new tenants. 
After submittal of the tentative map, any prospective tenants shall be notified in writing of the intent to convert prior to leasing or renting any unit. The form of the notice shall be as follows: 
To the prospective occupant(s) of 
___________(address): 
The owner(s) of this building, at (address), has filed or plans to file a tentative map with the City to convert this building to a (condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project). No units may be sold in this building unless the conversion is approved by the City and until after a public report is issued by the Department of Real Estate. If you become a tenant of this building, you shall be given notice of each hearing for which notice is required pursuant to Sections 66451.3 and 66452.5 of the Government Code, and you have the right to appear and the right to be heard at any such hearing. 
___________ 
(Signature of owner 
or owner's agent) 
___________ 
(dated) 
I have received this notice on _______ (date). 
___________ 
(Prospective tenant's 
signature) 
(Ord. 678 § 28, 1989: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.180 - Senior citizens. 
At the time of final map approval, all tenant households in which the head of household or spouse is age sixty-two or older shall be offered a lifetime lease with reasonable annual rent increases. Starting rents shall be the rent at the time of tentative map application. Lease forms shall be submitted to the planning and community development department for review prior to final map approval. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.190 - Low-and-moderate-income tenant. 
At the time of final map approval, all tenant households which meet the income limits of the HUD Section 8 program will be considered low-and-moderate-income households and shall be offered at minimum a three-year lease with reasonable annual rent increases. Starting rents shall be the rent at the time of tentative map application. Lease forms shall be submitted to the planning and community development department for review prior to final map approval. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.200 - Effect of proposed conversion on the city's low-and-moderate-income housing supply. 
A.  In order to reduce the effect of conversions on the city's housing supply and to minimize the displacement of tenants, the number of conversions shall be limited to no more than five percent of the city's potentially convertible rental stock in any one calendar year. Conversion applications will be processed in the order that completed applications are submitted. A proposed project that has more units than the permitted number of units in a given year, if approved, will be considered to have used the permitted number for as many future years until the number of units equals the permitted number. 
B.  The potentially convertible rental stock is defined as follows: the number of rental units in buildings of two or more units, as determined by the most recent census, plus any new rental units constructed since the census, minus any units which have received tentative map approval to convert since the census. 
C.  Once the yearly limit has been reached, a project may be approved for conversion only if the city council makes one or more of the following findings: 
1.  The developer will provide for a significant increase in housing for low-and-moderate-income households or senior citizen households over and above the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  The developer will provide for the construction of new rental housing; 
3.  The developer will donate an acceptable site or an acceptable amount of funds to the city for construction of new rental or senior citizen housing; 
4.  The need and demand for low cost homeownership to be provided for by this project will outweigh the detriment caused by further reduction of the rental stock. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.50.210 - Findings. 
The city council shall not approve an application for conversion unless the city council finds that: 
A.  All provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act are met, including all notices required pursuant to Government Code Section 66427.1; 
B.  The proposed conversion is consistent with the city of Camarillo general plan; 
C.  The proposed conversion will conform to this code, in effect at the time of tentative map approval, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
D.  The overall design and physical conditions of the condominium conversion achieves a high degree of appearance, quality and safety; 
E.  The proposed project will not convert during the current calendar year more than five percent of the potentially convertible rental units in the city for the current calendar year except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 678 § 29, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.52 - MOBILEHOME PARK CONVERSION 
Sections: 
 
18.52.010 - Conversion impact report. 
A.  At the time of filing a tentative or parcel map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of a mobilehome park to another use, the subdivider shall also file a report on the impact of the conversion upon the displaced residents of the mobilehome park to be conveyed. In determining the impact of the conversion on displaced mobilehome park residents, the report shall address the availability of adequate replacement space in mobilehome parks. 
B.  The subdivider shall make a copy of the report available to each resident of the mobilehome park at least fifteen days prior to the hearing on the map by the planning commission. 
C.  The city council, or planning commission in the case of a parcel map, may require the subdivider to take steps to mitigate any adverse impact of the conversion on the ability of displaced mobilehome park residents to find adequate space in a mobilehome park. 
(Ord. 810 § 38 (part), 1994.)  
18.52.020 - Option to purchase. 
The subdivider shall offer each existing tenant an option to purchase his or her condominium unit which is to be created by the conversion of the park into condominium interests or to continue residency as a tenant. In the event that the tenant elects to continue residency as a tenant in a park created pursuant to Chapter 11 (commencing with Section 50780) of Part 2 of Division 31 of the Health and Safety Code, Government Code Section 66427.5 shall be applicable. 
(Ord. 810 § 38 (part), 1994.)  
18.52.030 - Map waiver/map requirements. 
A.  When at least two-thirds of the owners of mobilehomes who are tenants in the mobilehome park sign a petition indicating their intent to purchase the mobilehome park for purposes of converting it to resident ownership, and a field survey is performed, the requirement for a parcel map or a tentative and final map shall be waived unless any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  There are design or improvement requirements necessitated by significant health or safety concerns; 
2.  The city determines that there is an exterior boundary discrepancy that requires recordation of a new parcel or tentative and final map; 
3.  The existing parcels which exist prior to the proposed conversion were not created by a recorded parcel or final map; or 
4.  The conversion would result in the creation of more condominium units or interests than the number of tenant lots or spaces that exist prior to conversion. 
B.  The petition signed by owners of mobilehomes in a mobilehome park proposed for conversion to resident ownership pursuant to subsection (A) of this section shall read as follows: 
"MOBILEHOME PARK PETITION 
AND DISCLOSURE STATEMENT 
SIGNING THIS PETITION INDICATES YOUR SUPPORT FOR CONVERSION OF THIS MOBILEHOME PARK TO RESIDENT OWNERSHIP. THIS DISCLOSURE STATEMENT CONCERNS THE REAL PROPERTY SITUATED IN THE CITY OF CAMARILLO, COUNTY OF VENTURA, STATE OF CALIFORNIA, DESCRIBED AS _______. THE TOTAL COST FOR CONVERSION AND PURCHASE OF THE PARK IS $_____ TO $_____, EXCLUDING FINANCING COSTS. IF TWO-THIRDS OF THE RESIDENTS IN THIS PARK SIGN THIS PETITION INDICATING THEIR INTENT TO PURCHASE THE MOBILEHOME PARK FOR PURPOSES OF CONVERTING IT TO RESIDENT OWNERSHIP, THEN THE REQUIREMENTS FOR A NEW PARCEL, OR TENTATIVE AND FINAL SUBDIVISION MAP IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE SUBDIVISION MAP ACT MUST BE WAIVED, WITH CERTAIN VERY LIMITED EXCEPTIONS. WAIVING THESE PROVISIONS OF LAW ELIMINATES NUMEROUS PROTECTIONS WHICH ARE AVAILABLE TO YOU. 
_____
Buyer, Unit #, Date 	_____
Petitioner, Date" 
 
C.  The city shall provide an application for waiver pursuant to this section. After the waiver application is deemed complete pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, the city shall approve or deny the application within fifty days. The applicant shall have the right to appeal that decision to the city council in the case of a parcel map. 
D.  If a tentative or parcel map is required, no off-site design or improvement requirements shall be imposed unless these are necessary to mitigate an existing health or safety condition. No other dedications, improvements, or in-lieu fees shall be required by the city. In no case shall the mitigation of a health or safety condition have the effect of reducing the number, or changing the location, of existing mobilehome spaces. 
E.  If the city imposes requirements on an applicant to mitigate a health or safety condition, the applicant and the city shall enter into an unsecured improvement agreement. The city shall not require bonds or other security devices for the performance of that agreement. The applicant shall have a period of one year from the date the agreement was executed to complete those improvements. 
F.  If the waiver application provided for in this section is denied by the city pursuant to the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, the applicant may proceed to convert the mobilehome park to a tenant-owned, condominium ownership interest, but shall file a parcel map or a tentative and final map. The city may not require the applicant to file and record a tentative and final map unless the conversion creates five or more parcels shown on the map. The number of condominium units or interests created by the conversion shall not determine whether the filing of a parcel or a tentative and final map shall be required. 
G.  For the purposes of this section, "resident ownership" means, depending on the context, either the ownership by a resident organization (as defined in section 50781 of the Health and Safety Code), of an interest in a mobilehome park which entitles the resident organization to control the operations of the mobilehome park for a term of no less than fifteen years, or the ownership of individual interests in a mobilehome park, or both. 
(Ord. 810 § 38 (part), 1994.)  
18.52.040 - Other requirements. 
The provisions of this chapter are in addition to any requirements imposed pursuant to Sections 19.18.340 and 19.18.360 of this code. 
(Ord. 810 § 38 (part), 1994.)  
Chapter 18.55 - SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
18.55.005 - Applicability of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter relating to subdivision improvements shall apply to all types of development regardless of whether a subdivision is involved; for purposes of this chapter the term "subdivider" shall mean "developer." 
(Ord. 810 § 39, 1994.)  
18.55.010 - General. 
A.  The subdivider shall construct all required improvements both on-site and off-site according to approved standards. 
B.  No final map shall be presented to the council or parcel map to the city engineer for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements or enters into an agreement with the city agreeing to do such work. 
C.  1.  A subdivision of land which is not a subdivision of five or more lots shall be limited to the dedication of rights-of-way, easements and the construction of reasonable off-site and on-site improvements for the parcels being created. Requirements for the construction of off-site and on-site improvements shall be noticed by a statement on the parcel map, or by a separate instrument and shall be recorded on, concurrently with, or prior to the parcel map or instrument of waiver of a parcel map being filed for record. 
2.  Fulfillment of the construction requirements shall not be required until the time a permit or other grant of approval for development of the parcel is issued by the city or, where provided by ordinance, until the time the construction of the improvements is required pursuant to an agreement between the subdivider and the city (or other local agency), except that in the absence of an agreement, the city may require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the parcel map and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a parcel upon a finding by the city that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for either of the following reasons: 
a.  The public health and safety; or 
b.  The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. 
D.  Completion of improvements shall be in accordance with Chapter 18.65. 
(Ord. 810 § 40, 1994; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.55.020 - Work required. 
The improvements required by this chapter shall consist of the following work and such other work as may be required by policies established by the city council as a condition of acceptance of any street, alley, pedestrianway, easement or other right-of-way: 
A.  Grade and fill to approved grade, and construct all necessary grade crossings, culverts, bridges and other related works; 
B.  Construct and install all drains, drainage facilities, channel improvements and other drainage works required to provide adequate drainage for every lot and to protect all lots from flood or overflow by storm or floodwaters, in accordance with the approved plans for drains and drainage works. Stormwater runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain system shall be designed for ultimate development of the upstream watershed. The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff attributed to the development; off-site storm drain improvements and/or stormwater acceptance deeds may be required to satisfy this requirement; 
C.  Construct and install concrete curbs and gutters on both sides of every interior street within the subdivision and on the proximate side of each existing or dedicated street bordering the subdivision. If a street is an extension of a turnaround or temporary turnaround, the bulbed cul-de-sac portion shall be removed and the required improvements be installed: 
D.  Install or provide for the installation of all water and sewer mains, including dry sewers when required by the department of engineering services, and all utilities, utility lines and appurtenances, including fire hydrants, gas mains and all laterals required to serve each lot, telephone, electric and cable television lines and all appurtenant equipment. When such facilities are located in a street, laterals shall be laid to the property line of each lot. All required facilities installed in a street shall be laid before the street is paved, and shall extend at least to the subdivision boundary: 
E.  Relocate or provide for the relocation of any underground or utility, including irrigation lines, the relocation of which is necessitated by development of the subdivision; 
F.  Install asphalt concrete or portland cement concrete pavement, base and sub-base material and seal coat in all existing or dedicated street and alley rights-of-way or portions thereof as required by the pave-out policy of the city council; 
G.  Install concrete sidewalks adjacent to the curbline, except where this requirement is specifically waived by the city engineer; install concrete driveway approaches, and install concrete pavement for pedestrianways and/or bicycle paths; 
H.  Plant or provide for the planting of trees of the variety, number, size and condition prescribed by the city in accord with the approved plans and specifications therefor, including necessary irrigation systems and appurtenances. Remove, and where required by the city, transplant designated trees that are located in the line of construction of improvements. Provide maintenance for all trees and landscaped areas until the same are accepted by the city; 
I.  Install or provide for the installation of street lights of approved design and illumination intensity in the locations and manner approved by the city engineer; 
J.  Install all required street signs and painted legends including street name signs, warning signs and regulatory signs where required, and traffic lane stripping and raised pavement markers as required by the city engineer; 
K.  Construct and install street barricades where required; 
L.  Where any boundary line of a subdivision is adjacent to cultivated land or is adjacent to or across a public street, alley or pedestrianway from an open and unfenced canal, storm channel, railroad, quarry, airport or other hazardous facility, construct a six-foot chain link fence or masonry wall along such subdivision boundary line, or construct the equivalent length of fence or wall along the nearest right-of-way line of such canal, channel, railroad, airport or other hazardous facility; as well as adjacent to all controlled access highway rights-of-way which abut or pass through the subdivision. Textured block walls, chain link type fencing, ornamental wrought iron, etc., or combinations thereof as approved by the director of planning and community development may be substituted; 
M.  Construct such acceleration and deceleration lanes, raised mediates and other traffic channelization devices in streets as are deemed necessary by the engineering services department to control traffic; 
N.  The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this chapter, making the necessary arrangements with the serving utility and securing appropriate permits. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by gas (if required), electric, telephone and CATV facilities. All utilities within the subdivision and along peripheral streets shall be placed underground pursuant to the underground utilities ordinance, Chapter 13.08 of this code; 
O.  Such other work as may be required by the planning commission or city council as a condition of approval. 
(Ord. 810 § 41, 1994; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.55.040 - Improvements on remainders. 
Where remainders are made part of a final or parcel map, the city may enter into an agreement with the subdivider to construct improvements within the remainder at some future date and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a remainder parcel. Said improvements shall be at the developer's expense. In the absence of such an agreement, the city council may require fulfillment of such construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the map, and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a remainder parcel, upon a finding that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of: 
A.  The public health and safety; or 
B.  The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. 
(Ord. 678 § 30, 1989: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.60 - SUBDIVISION DESIGN 
Sections: 
 
18.60.005 - Applicability of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter relating to subdivision design shall apply to all types of development, regardless of whether a subdivision is involved; for purposes of this chapter the term "subdivider" shall mean "developer." 
(Ord. 810 § 34, 1994.)  
18.60.010 - Improvement design. 
The design and layout of all required improvements both on-site and off-site, private and public, shall conform to generally acceptable engineering standards and to such standards as approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.60.020 - Design—Energy conservation. 
A.  The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required pursuant to this title, shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision. 
1.  Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure in an east-west alignment for southern exposure and solar easements. 
2.  Examples of passive or natural cooling opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes. 
B.  In providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the design of a subdivision, consideration shall be given to local climate, to contour, to configuration of the parcel to be divided, and to other design and improvement requirements, and such provision shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time the tentative map is filed. 
C.  The requirements of this section do not apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building when no new structures are added. 
D.  For the purposes of this section, "feasible" means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.60.030 - Design—Access. 
A.  The subdivision shall abut upon or have an approved access to a public street. Minimum lot frontage shall be as prescribed in the zoning ordinance with forty-foot minimum cul-de-sac bulbs, knuckles, curved streets and twenty feet for flag-shaped lots. 
B.  Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall have an approved access to a public or private street. 
C.  Street layout shall be designed to provide for future access to, and not impose undue hardship upon, property adjoining the subdivision. 
D.  Reserve strips, or nonaccess at the end of streets or at the boundaries of subdivisions, shall be dedicated unconditionally to the city when required. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.65 - IMPROVEMENT PLANS 
Sections: 
 
18.65.005 - Applicability of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter relating to improvement plans shall apply to all types of development, regardless of whether a subdivision is involved; for purposes of this chapter, the term "subdivider" shall mean "developer." 
(Ord. 810 § 44, 1994.)  
18.65.010 - General. 
Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by a registered civil engineer licensed by the State of California. Improvement plans shall include, but not be limited to, grading, storm drains, landscaping, streets, water, sewer, public utilities, and related facilities. Landscaping plans shall be prepared by a registered architect or by a registered landscape architect. 
(Ord. 685 § 1, 1989: Ord. 678 § 31, 1989: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.015 - Improvement plans, time limits to act, extensions. 
A.  An improvement plan shall be acted on within sixty working days of its submittal, except that at least fifteen working days shall be provided for processing any resubmitted improvement plan. The sixty working day period shall not include any days during which the improvement plan has been returned to the applicant for correction, has been subject to review by other than the city or, following that review, has been returned to the applicant for correction. 
B.  The time limits specified in this section for acting on improvement plans may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the advisory agency or legislative body required to act. However, no advisory agency or legislative body may require a routine waiver of time limits as a condition of accepting the improvement plan. A routine waiver may be obtained for the purpose of permitting concurrent processing of other requirements related to the improvement plan or map. 
C.  If, at the time of submittal or resubmittal, the city or designee determines it is unable to meet the time limits of this section, the city or designee shall, upon request of the subdivider and for purposes of meeting the time limits, contract or employ a private entity or persons on a temporary basis to perform services necessary to permit the agency or designee to meet the time limits. However, a city or designee need not enter into a contract or employ those persons if it determines either of the following: 
1.  No entities or persons are available or qualified to perform the services; 
2.  The city or designee would be able to perform services in a more rapid fashion by modifying its own work schedule than would any available and qualified persons or entities. 
The city may charge the subdivider fees in an amount necessary to defray costs directly attributable to employing or contracting with entities or persons performing services pursuant to this section. 
D.  "Improvement plan" means the plan for public improvement as described in Sections 66418 and 66419 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 810 § 45, 1994; Ord. 678 § 32, 1989.)  
18.65.020 - Form. 
A.  Plans, profiles and details shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced on twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets. A border shall be made on each sheet providing one-half inch at top, bottom and right side and one and one-half inch on the left side. 
B.  A suitable title block shall be placed in the lower right corner or along the right edge and provide adequate space for approval by the city engineer and for approval of plan revisions. 
C.  Plan and profiles shall be drawn to the scale of one inch equals forty feet or larger unless approved by the city engineer. Details shall be drawn to such scale that clearly shows the facility being constructed. The scales for various portions of the plans shall be shown on each sheet. 
D.  A vicinity map shall be shown on the first sheet of all sets of plans. 
E.  A north arrow shall be shown on each sheet when applicable. 
F.  Plans shall be laid out to orient north to the top or right edge of the sheet unless approved otherwise by the city engineer. 
G.  All lettering shall be one-eighth inch minimum if handwritten and one-tenth inch minimum if computer drawn (CAD). 
H.  If the plans include three or more sheets, a cover sheet showing the streets, lots, easements, storm drains, index and vicinity map shall be included. 
I.  The form of all plans shall conform to such additional requirements as may be established by the city engineer. The final form of all plans shall be as approved by the City engineer. 
(Ord. 810 § 46, 1994; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.030 - Contents. 
The improvement plans shall show complete plans, profiles and details for all required improvements to be constructed, both public and private (including common areas). References may be made to the city of Camarillo, Ventura County or state standard plans in lieu of duplicating the drawings thereon. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.040 - Supplementary plans and calculations. 
Hydrology, hydraulic plans and calculations, bond estimates and any structural calculations as may be required, shall be submitted with the improvement plans to the city engineer. All calculations shall be legible, systematic and signed and dated by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state and in a form as approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.050 - Review by the city engineer. 
The subdivider shall submit four sets of improvement plans and two copies of all computations to the city engineer for review. Upon completion of his review, one set of the preliminary plans, with the required revisions indicated thereon, will be returned to the subdivider's engineer. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.060 - Approval by the city engineer. 
A.  After completing all required revisions, the subdivider's engineer shall transmit the originals of the improvement plans to the city engineer for his signature. 
B.  Upon finding that all required revisions have been made and that the plans conform to all applicable city ordinances, design review requirements and conditions of approval of the tentative map, the city engineer shall sign and date the plans. The originals will be returned to the subdivider's engineer for preparation of distribution prints. 
C.  Approval by the city engineer shall in no way relieve the subdivider or his engineer from responsibility for the design of the improvements and for any deficiencies resulting from the design thereof or from any required conditions of approval for the tentative map. 
(Ord. 810 §§ 47, 48, 1994; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.070 - Revision of approved improvement plans—By subdivider. 
Requests by the subdivider or the engineer for revisions to the approved plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be submitted in writing to the city engineer or his appointee and shall be accompanied by two sets of revised drawings showing the proposed revisions. If the revision is acceptable. the originals shall be submitted to the city engineer's office for initialing. The originals shall be returned to the subdivider's engineer and two sets of the revised plans shall be immediately transmitted to the city engineer. Construction of any proposed revision will not be permitted to commence until revised plans have been received and forwarded to the city's engineering inspection division. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.080 - Revision of approved improvement plans—By city engineer. 
A.  When revisions are deemed necessary by the city engineer to protect public health and safety, or as field conditions may require, a request in writing shall be made to the subdivider and his engineer. The subdivider's engineer shall revise the plans and transmit the originals to the city engineer for initialing within such time as specified by the city engineer. Upon receipt of the initialed originals, the subdivider's engineer shall immediately transmit two sets of revised drawings to the city engineer. Construction of all or any portion of the improvements may be stopped by the city engineer until revised drawings have been submitted. 
B.  The subdivider may appeal revisions required by the city engineer to the city council by filing an appeal with the city clerk within two working days following receipt of the request to revise the plans. The appeal shall be heard by the city council within thirty days. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.090 - Plan checking and inspection costs for revisions. 
Costs incurred by the city for the checking of plans or calculations or inspection as a result of revisions to the approved plans shall be borne by the subdivider at actual cost. A deposit, when required, shall be submitted with the revised prints; such deposit shall be applied toward the actual costs. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.100 - Uncompleted improvements. 
A.  If, at the time of approval of the final map, any public improvements required by the city or other local agency pursuant to the State Subdivision Map Act or this title have not been completed and accepted in accordance with standards established by ordinance applicable at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, then the city council or city engineer in the case of a parcel map, as a condition precedent to the approval of the final map, shall require the subdivider to enter into one of the following agreements specified by the city: 
1.  An agreement with the city to complete the improvements at the subdivider's expense; or 
2.  An agreement with the city to initiate and consummate proceedings under an appropriate special assessment act or the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982, (commencing with Government Code Section 53311) for the financing and completion of all of the improvements. This agreement shall provide that if the improvements are not completed under a special assessment act or the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982, the subdivider shall complete the improvements at the subdivider's expense. 
B.  The agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney and may be required to be recorded. 
C.  The city shall require that performance of an agreement entered into pursuant to this section be guaranteed by the security specified in Section 18.65.110. 
(Ord. 810 § 49, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.110 - Improvement security. 
A.  Any improvement agreement, contract or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act, for which security is required, shall be secured in accordance with Section 66499 of the Government Code and as provided herein. 
B.  No final map or parcel map shall be signed by the city engineer or recorded until all improvement securities required by this section have been received and approved. 
C.  The form of security shall be one or the combination of the following at the option and subject to the approval of the city: 
1.  Bond or bonds by one or more corporate sureties duly authorized to do business in the state of California and with a minimum rating as determined necessary by the director of finance, in a form acceptable to the city attorney. 
2.  A deposit, either with the local agency or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the city, or money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys, other than a cash deposit. In the case of a passbook, certificate of deposit or like instrument which is in the name of the subdivider, the subdivider shall provide the city with an assignment agreement, assigning subdivider's interest in the security to the city. 
3.  An instrument or letter of credit, or a set-aside letter from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment. 
(Ord. 810 § 50, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.130 - Amount of security. 
A.  A performance bond or security in the amount of one hundred percent of the estimated construction cost to guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements shall be required of all subdivisions. An additional amount of one hundred percent of the estimated construction cost of improvements shall be required to guarantee the payment to the subdivider's contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements. 
B.  If a set-aside letter is used as security, an additional twenty percent of the estimated construction cost will be required in addition to the percentage as stated above. 
C.  The estimate of improvement costs shall be as approved by the city engineer and shall provide for: 
1.  Not less than ten percent of the total construction cost for contingencies; 
2.  Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated midpoint of construction; 
3.  All utility installation costs or a certification acceptable to the city engineer from the utility company that adequate security has been deposited to insure installation; 
4.  In addition to the full amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including attorneys' fees, incurred in enforcing the obligation secured. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.150 - Warranty security. 
Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the city council, or by the city engineer for parcel maps, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount as required by the city engineer to guarantee the improvements throughout the warranty period. The amount of the warranty security shall be not less than twenty-five percent of the cost of the construction of the improvements, shall be retained for the one-year warranty period, and shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney. 
(Ord. 810 § 52, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.160 - Release of performance security. 
The performance security shall be released only upon acceptance of the improvements by the city and when an approved warranty security has been filed with the city engineer. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.170 - Release of material and labor security. 
Security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment may, six months after the completion and acceptance of the improvements by the city council, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all claims therefor filed and of which notice has been given to the city council. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all such claims and obligations for which the security was given. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.180 - Release of warranty security. 
The warranty security shall be released upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period provided: 
A.  All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected; 
B.  Not less than twelve months have elapsed since the acceptance of the improvements by the city council or by the city engineer for parcel maps. 
(Ord. 810 § 53, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.190 - Improvement construction. 
A.  The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to the standards specifications of the city as adopted by council resolution. The general provisions of the city's standard specifications shall apply to the developer where applicable. 
B.  Construction shall not commence until required improvement plans have been approved by the city engineer. 
C.  All improvements are subject to inspection by the city engineer or authorized personnel in accordance with the city's standard specifications. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.200 - Preconstruction conference. 
Prior to commencing any construction, the developer shall arrange for a preconstruction conference with the department of engineering services. 
(Ord. 570, § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.210 - Final inspection and deficiency list. 
A.  Upon completion of the subdivision improvements, the developer shall apply in writing to the city engineer for a preliminary final inspection. The city engineer or authorized representative shall schedule a preliminary final inspection. 
B.  A deficiency list shall be compiled during the inspection, noting all corrections or any additional work required. If the number of items are excessive or the subdivision appears incomplete, the preliminary final inspection may be halted and rescheduled on a date as determined by the city engineer or authorized representative. 
C.  When the preliminary final inspection has been completed, a copy of the deficiency list shall be transmitted to the developer for correction. 
D.  Upon having completed all corrections or additional work as outlined by the deficiency list, the developer shall certify in writing that all corrections have been completed satisfactorily and request a final inspection. The city engineer or authorized representative shall then make a final inspection. 
E.  Upon finding that all items on the deficiency list have been corrected and receipt of as-built improvement plans, the subdivision shall be placed on the council agenda for acceptance, or acceptance by the city engineer for parcel maps. 
F.  The completion of corrections indicated by the deficiency list shall not relieve the developer from the responsibility of correcting any deficiency not shown on the list that may be subsequently discovered during the warranty period. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.220 - Completion of improvements—Subdivisions. 
A.  Improvements for subdivisions of five or more parcels shall be completed by the developer within such time as approved by the city engineer, not to exceed a period of twenty-four months, from the recording of the final map, unless an extension is granted by the city engineer upon written request of the developer setting forth good cause. 
B.  Should the subdivider fail to complete the improvements within the specified time, the city engineer may cause any or all uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the surety or sureties shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs therefor. 
(Ord. 810 § 54, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.230 - Completion of improvements—Parcel maps/individual developments. 
A.  Completion of improvements for subdivisions of four or less parcels will not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a specified parcel is issued. Improvements shall be completed prior to final building inspection or occupancy of any unit within the development, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
B.  The completion of the improvements for subdivisions of four or less parcels may be required by a specified date prior to development of a parcel when the completion of such improvements are found to be necessary for public health or safety or for the orderly development of the surrounding area. This finding shall be made by the city engineer or authorized representative. 
(Ord. 810 § 55, 1994: Ord. 678 § 34, 1989; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.240 - Extensions. 
A.  The completion date may be extended by the city engineer upon written request by the developer and the submittal of adequate evidence showing good cause to justify the extension. The request should be made not less than thirty days prior to expiration of the improvement agreement. 
B.  The subdivider shall enter into an extension agreement with the city. The agreement shall be signed by the city engineer, in a form acceptable to the city attorney. 
C.  In consideration of an extension agreement, the following may be required: 
1.  Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the city engineer; 
2.  Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current improvement costs as approved by the city engineer; 
3.  Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction estimates; 
4.  Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction costs; 
5.  Such other additional requirements which the city engineer deems necessary as a condition to approving any time extension for the completion of improvements. 
D.  The costs incurred by the city in processing the extension agreement, including attorney's fees shall be borne by the developer at actual cost. 
(Ord. 810 § 56, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.250 - Acceptance of improvements—Generally. 
When all improvement deficiencies have been corrected and "as built" improvement plans filed, the subdivision improvements shall be considered by the city for acceptance. Subdivisions of five (5) or more parcels must be accepted by the city council. The city engineer or authorized representative shall be responsible for the acceptance of subdivisions of four (4) or less parcels. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.260 - Notice of completion. 
If the subdivision has been accepted by the city, the city clerk shall cause to be filed with the county recorder a notice of completion. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.65.270 - Acceptance of a portion of the improvements. 
A.  When requested by the subdivider in writing, the city may consider acceptance of a portion of the improvements as recommended by the city engineer. The improvements will be accepted by the city only if it finds that it is in the public interest and such improvements are for the use of the general public. 
B.  Acceptance of a portion of the improvements shall not relieve the developer from any other requirements imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.70 - SUBDIVISION FEES 
Sections: 
 
18.70.010 - Drainage and sanitary sewer fees. 
A.  Fees shall be required for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and stormwaters from local or neighborhood drainage areas and of constructing planned sanitary sewer facilities for local sanitary sewer areas. 
B.  These facilities shall be as identified in the adopted master plans and amendments thereto for storm drains and sewer facilities and amendments thereto which contain an estimate of the total costs of constructing the local drainage or sanitary sewer facilities required by the plan, and a map of such area showing its boundaries and the location of such facilities. 
C.  The fees are to be based upon findings by the city council, and the Ventura County Flood Control District and/or Camarillo sanitary district where appropriate, that: 
1.  Subdivision and development of property within the local drainage area or sanitary sewer area will require construction of the facilities described in the drainage or sewer plan; and 
2.  That the fees are fairly apportioned within the area on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for subdivision. 
D.  The fee as to any property proposed for subdivision within the city shall be apportioned uniformly on a per-acre basis. 
E.  Consideration in lieu of the payment of fees may be accepted. The term "fee," as used in this section, shall include consideration in lieu of fees. 
F.  The drainage or sanitary sewer facilities planned shall be in addition to existing facilities serving the area at the time of the adoption of such a plan for the city. 
G.  Such fees shall be paid to the local agencies which provide drainage or sanitary sewer facilities, and shall be deposited by such agencies into a planned local drainage facilities fund and a planned local sanitary sewer fund, respectively. Separate funds shall be established for each local drainage and sanitary sewer area. Moneys in such funds shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of local drainage or sanitary sewer facilities within the area from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, or to reimburse the local agency for the cost of engineering and administrative services to form the district and design and construct the facilities. 
H.  The agency which provides the facilities described above may advance money from its general fund to pay the costs of constructing such facilities within a local drainage area, or local sanitary sewer area, and reimburse its general fund for such advances from the planned local drainage fund for the local drainage or from the planned local sanitary sewer fund for the local sanitary sewer area in which the drainage or sanitary sewer facilities were constructed. 
I.  The agency receiving fees pursuant to this section may incur an indebtedness for the construction of drainage or sanitary sewer facilities within a local drainage or sanitary sewer area; provided that the sole security for repayment of such indebtedness shall be moneys in the planned local drainage or sanitary sewer facilities fund. 
J.  After completion of the facilities and the payment of all claims from any planned local drainage facilities fund, the city council shall determine by resolution the amount of the surplus, if any, remaining in any of those funds. Any surplus shall be used, in those amounts as the city council may determine, for one or more of the following purposes: 
1.  For transfer to the general fund of the city, provided that the amount of the transfer shall not exceed five percent of the total amount expended from the particular fund, and provided that the funds transferred are used to support the operation and maintenance of those facilities for which the fees were collected; 
2.  For the construction of additional or modified facilities within the particular drainage or sanitary sewer area; or 
3.  As a refund in the manlier provided in subsection (K). 
K.  Any surplus remaining shall be refunded as follows: 
1.  There shall be refunded to the current owners of the property for which a fee was previously collected, the balance of such moneys in the same proportion which each individual fee collected bears to the total of all individual fees collected from the particular drainage or sewer area; 
2.  Where property for which a fee was previously collected has subsequently been subdivided into more than one lot, each current owner of a lot shall share in the refund payable to the owners of the property for which a fee was previously collected in the same proportion which the area of each individual lot bears to the total area of the property for which a fee was previously collected; and 
3.  There shall be transferred to the general fund of the city any remaining portion of the surplus which has not been paid to or claimed by the persons entitled thereto within two years from the date either of the completion of the improvements, or the adoption by the city council of a resolution declaring a surplus, whichever is later to occur. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.70.020 - Bridge and major thoroughfare fees. 
A.  Cost of Bridges or Major Thoroughfares; Conditions. Pursuant to Sections 66484 and 66489 of the Government Code of California, the city may require the payment of a fee as a condition of approval of a final subdivision map, or as a condition of issuing a building permit for purposes of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways and canyons, or constructing major thoroughfares, upon compliance with the procedure and conditions set forth in this chapter. 
B.  General Plan. Such construction shall comply with the circulation element of the general plan of the city as approved by the city council and, in the case of bridges, to the transportation or flood control provisions thereof which identify railways, freeways, streams or canyons for which bridge crossings are required on said general plan or local roads and in the case of major thoroughfares, to the provisions of such circulation element which identify those major thoroughfares whose primary purpose is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to the state highway system; provided, such circulation element, transportation or flood control provisions have been adopted by the city thirty days prior to the filing of a map or application for a building permit. 
C.  Hearing. Payment of a fee shall not be required nor made a condition for approval of a subdivision map nor made a condition for the issuance of a building permit until the area benefited shall be determined by the city council. There shall be a public hearing held by the city council for each area benefited. 
1.  Notice of Hearing. The hearing shall be set before the city council and notice thereof shall be given pursuant to Government Code Section 65905 at least ten calendar days before the hearing date. 
2.  Contents of Notice. Such notice shall also contain preliminary information related to the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated cost and method of fee apportionment. The area of benefit may include land or improvements in addition to the land or improvements which are the subject of any map or building permit application considered at such proceedings. 
D.  Establishment of Boundaries, Etc. At the conclusion of such public hearing, the city council by resolution shall establish the boundaries of the area of benefit, the costs, whether actual or estimated, and a fair method of allocation of costs to the area of benefit and fee apportionment. The city may impose a reasonable charge on property within the area which in the opinion of the city council is benefited by the construction of the bridge or major thoroughfare. The method of fee apportionment, in the case of major thoroughfares, shall not provide for higher fees on land which abuts the proposed improvement except where the abutting property is provided direct usable access to the major thoroughfare. A description of the boundaries of the area of benefit, the property or properties within said area which in the opinion of the city council are benefited by the construction of the improvement, the costs, whether actual or estimated, and the method of fee apportionment and imposition of charges on properties within the area, as established at the hearing, shall be incorporated in said resolution of the city council, a certified copy of which shall be recorded by the city council with the county recorder. Such apportioned fees shall be applicable to all property within the area of benefit and shall be payable as a condition of approval of a final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for such property or portions thereof. Where the area of benefit includes lands not subject to the payment of fees pursuant to these sections, the city council shall make provision for payment of the share of improvement costs apportioned to such lands from other sources. 
E.  Payment of Fees Regarding Major Thoroughfares. Payment of fees with respect to major thoroughfares shall not be required unless the major thoroughfares are in addition to, or a reconstruction of, any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
F.  Payment of Fees Regarding Bridge Facility. Payment of fees with respect to a bridge facility shall not be required unless the planned bridge facility is an original bridge serving the area or an addition to any existing bridge facility serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. Such fees shall not be expended to reimburse the cost of existing bridge facility construction. 
G.  Major Protest. 
1.  Protests against the proposed improvement, the requirement of payment of fees, the apportionment of the fees or the determination of the boundaries of the area of benefit may be filed at any time prior to the hour set for hearing. If there is a written protest filed with the clerk of the city council by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefited by the improvement and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented to less than one-half of that to be benefited, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned, and the city council shall not, for one year from the filing of that written protest, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement or acquisition under the provisions of these sections. 
2.  Nothing in this section shall preclude the processing and recordation of maps in accordance with other provisions of the law and ordinances relating to maps if the proceedings under these sections are abandoned. 
3.  Any protest may be withdrawn by the owner making the same, in writing, at any time prior to the conclusion of the aforesaid public hearing held pursuant to this title. 
4.  If any majority protest is directed against only a portion of the improvement, then all further proceedings under the provisions of these sections to construct that portion of the improvement so protested against shall be barred for a period of one year, but the city council shall not be barred from commencing new proceedings not including any part of the improvement or acquisition so protested against. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city council, within such one-year period, from commencing and carrying on new proceedings or the construction of a portion of the improvements so protested against if it finds, by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of its members, that the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefited are in favor of going forward with such portion of the improvement or acquisition. 
H.  Fees. 
1.  Fees or charges paid pursuant to these sections shall be deposited in a planned bridge facility or major thoroughfare fund. A fund shall be established for each planned bridge facility project or each planned major thoroughfare project. If the benefit area is one in which more than one bridge is required to be constructed, a fund may be so established covering all of the bridge projects in the benefit area. Moneys in such fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of the improvement serving the area to be benefitted and from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, or to reimburse the city for the cost of constructing the improvement. 
2.  The fees or charges collected shall be paid to the city or the subdivider constructing the bridge or major thoroughfare, and the city, with respect to any property within its jurisdiction which in the opinion of the city council is benefitted by the construction of the bridge or major thoroughfare, may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider. 
3.  In lieu of the payment of fees, the city may accept other considerations which it deems equivalent. 
4.  The city may advance money from its general fund or road fund to pay the cost of constructing improvements and may reimburse the general fund or road fund for such advances from planned bridge facility funds or major thoroughfare funds established to finance the construction of such improvements. 
I.  Interest-bearing Indebtedness; Other Funds. 
1.  The city, when imposing fees pursuant to these sections, may incur an interest-bearing indebtedness for the construction of such bridge facilities or major thoroughfares; provided, that the sole security for repayment of such indebtedness shall be moneys deposited as aforesaid in planned bridge facility or major thoroughfare funds. 
2.  The term "construction," as used in this chapter, includes, without limitation, design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts and actual construction. 
3.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude the city from providing funds for the construction of bridge facilities or major thoroughfares in order to defray costs not allocated to the area of benefit. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.75 - REIMBURSEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
18.75.010 - Supplement size, capacity or number required. 
Improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision shall contain supplemental size, capacity, number, or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and such improvements shall be dedicated to the public. Supplemental length may include minimum sized off-site sewer lines necessary to reach a sewer outlet in existence at that time. 
(Ord. 810 § 57, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.75.020 - Reimbursement agreement. 
The city shall enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only, and the actual cost of such improvements, including an amount attributable to interest. 
(Ord. 810 § 58, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.75.030 - Method of reimbursement. 
In order to pay the costs as required by the reimbursement agreement, the city may: 
A.  Collect from other persons, including public agencies, using such improvements for the benefit of real property not within the subdivision, a reasonable charge for such use. 
B.  Contribute to the subdivider that part of the cost of the improvements that is attributable to the benefit of real property outside the subdivision and levy a charge upon the real property benefitted to reimburse itself for such cost, together with interest thereon, if any, paid to the subdivider. 
C.  Establish and maintain local benefit districts for the levy and collection of such charge or costs from the property benefitted. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.75.040 - Reimbursement for drainage and sanitary sewer facilities. 
The city council may adopt the plan and map designated in Section 66483 of the Government Code and Section 18.70.010 and impose a reasonable charge on property within the area which, in the opinion of the city council, is benefitted by such drainage or sanitary sewer facilities. The charge collected must be paid to the city or subdivider constructing such drainage or sanitary sewer facilities, and any local agency within the drainage or sanitary sewer area may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.75.050 - Reimbursement for bridges or major thoroughfares. 
The city council may establish an area of benefit pursuant to Section 66484 of the Government Code and Section 18.70.030 and may impose a reasonable charge on property within the area which, in the opinion of the city council, is benefitted by the construction of the bridge or major thoroughfare. The charge collected shall be paid to the city agency or subdivider constructing the bridge or major thoroughfare. and any local agency having jurisdiction over any property which, in the opinion of the city council, is benefitted by the construction of the bridge or major thoroughfare may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.80 - REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE 
Sections: 
 
18.80.010 - General. 
Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to provisions of this chapter and the state Subdivision Map Act. This chapter shall apply to final maps and parcel maps. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.80.020 - Initiation of proceedings—By owners. 
Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition of all of the owners of record of tile property. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the city engineer. The petition shall contain tile information required by Section 18.80.040 and such other information as required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.80.030 - Initiation of proceedings—By city council. 
The city council, at the request of any person or on its own motion may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The city council shall direct the city engineer to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.80.040 - Contents of petition. 
The petition shall contain, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Evidence of title to the real property; and 
B.  Evidence of the consent to all of the owners of an interest in the property; or 
C.  Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final map or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or 
D.  Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for record; 
E.  A tentative map or tentative parcel map in the form prescribed by Section 18.10.020 or Section 18.20.040; 
F.  A final or parcel map in the form prescribed by Sections 18.15.020 and 18.15.030 or Section 18.25.030 of this title which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion. Final or parcel maps shall be conspicuously designated with the title, "The Purpose of this Map is a Reversion to Acreage"; 
G.  A deposit as required by the city engineer toward processing and plan checking costs in accordance with the city's established fees and charges. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.80.050 - Submittal of petition to the city engineer. 
A.  The final map or parcel map for the reversion together with all other data as required by this chapter shall be submitted to the city engineer for his review. 
B.  Upon finding that the petition meets with all the requirements of this chapter and the state Subdivision Map Act, the city engineer shall submit the final map or parcel map, together with his report and recommendations of approval or conditional approval of the reversion to acreage, to the city council for their consideration. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.80.060 - City council approval. 
A.  A public hearing shall be held by the city council on all petitions for initiations for reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 66451.3 of the Government Code. The city engineer may give such other notice that he deems necessary or advisable. 
B.  The city council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records by resolution that: 
1.  Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and 
2.  Either: 
a.  All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion; or 
b.  None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or 
c.  No lots shown on the final or parcel map were filed for record. 
C.  The city council may require as conditions of the reversion: 
1.  The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights-of-way or easements. 
2.  The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvement securities if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.80.070 - Filing with county recorder. 
A.  Upon approving the reversion to acreage, the city engineer shall transmit the final map or parcel map, together with the city council resolution approving the reversion, to the county recorder for recordation. 
B.  Reversion shall be effective upon the final map being filed for record by the county recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final map for reversion shall be of no further force and effect. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.85 - CORRECTION AND AMENDMENTS OF MAPS 
Sections: 
 
18.85.010 - Requirements. 
After a final or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map: 
A.  To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon; 
B.  To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom; 
C.  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map; 
D.  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice, or replacement of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments; 
E.  To show the proper location of any monument which has been changed in location, or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character; 
F.  To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the city engineer, which does not affect any property right. 
As used in this section, "error" does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the final or parcel map. 
(Ord. 810 § 59, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.85.020 - Form and contents. 
The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor authorized to practice land surveying in this state. The certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction. 
A.  Except as specified below, the form and contents of the amending map for a final map shall conform to the requirements of Sections 18.15.020 and 18.15.030. The following subsections of Section 18.15.030 need not be followed for an amending map: subsections (C)(4), (5), (7) and (8), and subsections (H), (L), (M) and (P). 
B.  Except as specified below, the form and contents of the amending map for a parcel map shall conform to the requirements of Sections 18.15.020 and 18.15.030, as amended by Chapter 18.25 of this code. The following subsections of Section 18.15.030 need not be followed for an amending map: subsections (C)(4), (5), (7) and (8), and subsections (H), (L), (M) and (P). Only the certificate of the owner of record shall be required under subsection (C)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. 810 § 60, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.85.030 - Submittal and approval by the city engineer. 
A.  The amending map or certificate of correction, complete as to final form, shall be submitted to the city engineer for his review and approval. 
B.  The city engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and if done in conformance with law and if the only changes made are those set forth in Section 18.85.010, he shall certify to this fact on the amending map or certificate of correction. 
C.  The certificate of correction shall be processed within the time frames set forth in Government Code Section 66471. 
(Ord. 810 § 61, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.85.040 - Filing/recording with the county recorder. 
The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the city engineer shall be filed or recorded in the office of the county recorder in which the original map was filed. Upon such filing or recordation, the original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected and thereafter shall impart constructive notice of all such corrections in the same manner as though set forth upon the original map. 
(Ord. 810 § 62, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.85.050 - Fee. 
A fee shall be required for checking, processing and recording the amended map or certificate of correction in accordance with the city's resolution establishing fees and charges. A deposit to be applied toward this fee may be required by the city engineer upon submittal of the amended map or certificate of correction for his review. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.85.060 - Additional conditions. 
A.  During the five year period after a tentative map or parcel map for residential use is recorded, the city may not require as a condition to the issuance of a building permit or any other entitlement, conformance with or the performance of any conditions that the city could have lawfully imposed as a condition to the previously approved tentative or parcel map. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A, a permit or other entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition perilous to their health and/or safety; 
2.  The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state and/or federal law. 
(Ord. 678 § 35, 1989.)  
Chapter 18.90 - ENFORCEMENT OF TITLE PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
18.90.010 - Prohibition. 
A.  No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map or parcel map is required by this title, or the state Subdivision Map Act, until such map has been filed with the county recorder for recordation in full compliance with the provisions of this title and the state Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel map is required by this title shall not be made by parcel or block number, initial or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed with the county recorder for recordation. 
C.  Subsections (A) and (B) of this section do not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law (including a local ordinance), regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established. 
D.  Nothing contained in subsection (A) of this section shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon which such sale, lease or financing or the commencement of such construction is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final subdivision map or parcel map as required by the state Subdivision Map Act or this title. 
E.  For the purposes of this section, the limitation period for commencing an action, either civil or criminal, against the subdivider or an owner of record at the time of a violation of this title or of the State Subdivision Map Act, shall be tolled for any time period during which there is no constructive notice of the transaction constituting the violation, because the owner of record, at the time of the violation or at any time thereafter, failed to record a deed, lease, or financing document with the county recorder. 
(Ord. 810 § 63, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.90.020 - Remedies. 
A.  Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title or state Subdivision Map Act, is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, his heirs, personal representative or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy, within one year after the date of discovery of the violation, but the deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his assignee, heir or devisee. 
B.  Any grantee, or his successor in interest, or real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title or the state Subdivision Map Act may, within one year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the superior court to recover any damages he has suffered by reason of such division of property. The action may be brought against the person who divided the property in violation and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property. 
C.  The provisions of this title shall not apply to the conveyance of any parcel of real property identified in a certificate of compliance filed pursuant to Section 66499.35 of the Government Code or identified in a recorded final map or parcel map, from and after the date of recording. 
D.  The provisions of this title shall not limit or affect in any way the rights of a grantee or his successor in interest under any other provisions of law. 
E.  This title does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may otherwise be entitled, and the city or other public agency, or such person, firm or corporation may file a suit in the superior court of Ventura County to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision for sale, lease or financing in violation of this title. 
F.  The city shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title or the state Subdivision Map Act if it finds that development of such real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny such a permit or such approval shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the owner of the real property at the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefor is the current owner of the real property with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of his interest in such real property. 
G.  The city, in issuing a permit or granting approval for the development of any such real property, may impose those additional conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property, and which had been established at such time by this division or local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto, except that if a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record under the provisions of this title, only such conditions stipulated shall be applicable. 
(Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.90.030 - Certificate of compliance. 
A.  Any person owning real property within the city may request the city engineer to determine whether such real property complies with the provisions of this title and the state Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Upon making such determination, the city engineer, after conferring with the director of planning and community development, shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division of land complies with applicable provisions of this code and the state Subdivision Map Act. 
C.  1.  If the city engineer determines that such real property does not comply with the provisions of this code or the state Subdivision Map Act, he may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose such conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the applicant acquired his or her interest therein, and which had been established at such time by this title. Where, however, the applicant was the owner of record at the time of the initial violation of the provisions of this title who by a grant of the real property created a parcel or parcels in violation of this title; and such person is the current owner of record of one or more of the parcels which were created as a result of the grant in violation of the state Subdivision Map Act and this title thereto, then the city engineer may impose such conditions as would be applicable to a current division of the property. 
2.  Upon making such a determination and establishing such conditions, the city engineer or authorized representative shall cause a conditional certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. Such certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner who has applied for the certificate pursuant to this section, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that the fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. 
3.  Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued. 
D.  A recorded final map, parcel map, official map, or an approved certificate of exception shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. 
E.  For the purposes of administration of this section, any parcel that is shown on the county assessor's maps prior to January 1, 1980, shall be considered as a conforming parcel. 
F.  A fee to be charged at actual cost shall be charged to the applicant for making the determination and processing the certificate of compliance. A deposit may be required to be applied toward this fee. 
(Ord. 810 § 64, 1994; Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
18.90.040 - Certificate of noncompliance. 
A.  Whenever the city engineer has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of this title or the state Subdivision Map Act, he/she shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then current owner of record a notice of intention to record a notice of violation (certificate of noncompliance) with the county recorder. 
B.  The notice of intention shall describe the real property in detail, name the owners thereof, and describe the violation and explain why the subject parcel is not a lawful subdivision under Government Code Section 66412.6. The notice of intention shall state that an opportunity will be given to the owner to present evidence to the city engineer as to why such notice of violation should not be recorded. The notice shall specify the day, time and place of the hearing which shall take place no sooner than thirty days and no later than sixty days from the date of mailing the notice of intention. The notice of intention shall also provide that if an objection is not filed with the city engineer within fifteen days of receipt of the notice, the city shall record the notice of intention with the county recorder. 
C.  If, after the owner has presented evidence, the city engineer determines that there has been no violation, a release of the notice of intention shall be filed with the county recorder if needed, and a letter of clearance shall be mailed to the then current owner of record. If however, after the owner has presented evidence, the city engineer determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, then the city engineer shall record the notice of violation with the county recorder. 
D.  The tentative or final notice, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. 
(Ord. 810 § 65, 1994: Ord. 570 § 3 (part), 1984.)  
Chapter 18.95 - MERGER OF PARCELS 
Sections: 
 
18.95.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The purpose of this section and the following sections relating to merger of parcels is to provide a procedure by which two or more contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner may be merged. This procedure is adopted pursuant to Sections 66451.10 through 66451.21, inclusive, of the California Government Code, and this Code. 
(Ord. 608 § 2 (part), 1986.)  
18.95.020 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions and procedures set forth herein for the merger of parcels shall be applicable to two or more contiguous parcels of land held by the same owner where: 
1.  The city initiates the merger; 
2.  The parcels were created under the provisions of the Camarillo Municipal Code regulating subdivisions (Sections 18.01, et seq.) or any prior state law or ordinance regulating the division of land, or which were not subject to any prior law regulating the division of land; and 
3.  At least one of the contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size to permit use or development under the city's zoning ordinance. 
B.  Nothing in the provisions relating to the merger of parcels is meant to abrogate or limit the authority of the city or a subdivider with respect to the following procedures within the Subdivision Map Act: 
1.  Lot line adjustments; 
2.  Amendment or correction of a final or parcel map; 
3.  Reversions to acreage; 
4.  Exclusions; or 
5.  Tentative, parcel or final maps which create fewer parcels. 
C.  Nothing in the provisions relating to merger of parcels shall be construed or interpreted to prohibit the sale, lease or financing of such contiguous parcels of land, or any of them, where the same have not been merged pursuant to the procedure set forth herein. 
(Ord. 656 § 2, 1988: Ord. 608 § 2 (part), 1986.)  
18.95.030 - Requirements for merger. 
Any two or more contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner which are subject to the merger procedures set forth as provided in Section 18.95.020 of this chapter may be merged if all of the following requirements are satisfied: 
A.  At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit. 
B.  With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists: 
1.  Comprises less than five thousand square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger; 
2.  Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation; 
3.  Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply; 
4.  Does not meet slope stability standards; 
5.  Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability; 
6.  Its development would create health or safety hazards; 
7.  Is inconsistent with the applicable general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards. 
C.  The requirements set forth in subsection B of this section shall not be applicable if any of the conditions set forth in Section 66451.11(b)(A) through (E) of the California Government Code exist. 
(Ord. 608 § 2 (part), 1986.)  
18.95.040 - Determination of ownership. 
For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels or units are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that notice of intention to determine status is recorded pursuant to Section 18.95.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 608 § 2 (part), 1986.)  
18.95.050 - Notice of intention to determine status. 
Whenever the director of planning and community development has knowledge that real property may be merged pursuant to the merger provisions of this chapter, he shall: 
A.  Mail by certified mail to the then current record owner of the property a notice of intention to determine status. Such notice shall state that: 
1.  The affected parcels may be merged pursuant to the merger provisions of Sections 18.95.010 through 18.95.100, inclusive of this chapter, 
2.  The owner may file a request with the planning and community development department any time within thirty days after the date the notice of intention to determine status is recorded for a hearing before the planning commission and may present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the requirements for merger, and 
3.  That the notice of intention to determine status was filed for recording with the county recorder's office on the same date such notice was mailed to the property owner; and 
B.  File for record with the county recorder's office, on the same date that the notice is mailed to the property owner, the notice of intention to determine status. 
(Ord. 608 § 2 (part), 1986.)  
18.95.060 - Hearing date—Presentation of evidence—Planning commission determination. 
A.  Upon receipt of a request for a hearing on determination of status, the director of planning and community development shall fix a time, date and place for a hearing to be conducted by the planning commission, and shall so notify the property owner by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted not more than sixty days following the receipt of the property owner's request thereof, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the planning commission and the property owner. 
B.  At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the requirements for merger as set forth in Sections 18.95.020 and 18.95.030 of this chapter. 
C.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall make a determination as to whether the affected parcels are to be merged and shall notify the owner of its determination as soon thereafter as practicable, but no later than five working days after the determination has been reached. If such notification cannot be made at the time of the hearing to the owner in person, the notification shall be made by certified mail. 
The planning commission may, at the close of the hearing, determine that the parcels are not to be merged notwithstanding the fact that the affected parcels have met all the requirements set forth in Sections 18.95.020 and 18.95.030 of this chapter for a merger. 
(Ord. 678 § 36, 1989; Ord. 608 § 2 (part), 1986.)  
18.95.070 - Notice of merger—Effective date of merger. 
A.  If the planning commission determines that the affected parcels are merged, the director of planning and community development shall file for record with the county recorder's office a notice of merger specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property to be merged. 
B.  The notice of merger shall be filed no later than thirty days after the conclusion of the hearing on determination of status, unless a timely appeal from the commission's determination is filed pursuant to Section 18.95.100 of this chapter. 
C.  A merger of parcels becomes effective on the date the notice of merger is duly filed with the county recorder's office. 
(Ord. 608 § 2 (part), 1986.)  
18.95.080 - Release of notice of intention to determine status. 
If the planning commission determines that the affected parcels are not to be merged, the director of planning and community development shall: 
A.  File for record with the county recorder's office a release of the notice of intention to determine status, recorded pursuant to Section 18.95.050 of this chapter, specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property to be merged; and 
B.  Mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record; 
C.  The release and clearance letter shall be filed and mailed, respectively, within five working days of the date of the planning commission's determination. 
(Ord. 608 § 2 (part), 1986.)  
18.95.090 - Planning commission determination without hearing—Notice to owner. 
If the property owner fails to file a request for heating within the thirty-day period as provided in Section 18.95.050 of this chapter, the planning commission may, at any time thereafter, make a determination as to whether the affected parcels are to be merged. 
A.  If the planning commission makes a determination of merger, the director of planning and community development shall file a notice of merger no later than ninety days after the mailing of the notice of opportunity for hearing as provided in Section 18.95.050 of this chapter, and shall notify the property owner of such determination by certified mail. 
B.  If the planning commission makes a determination of nonmerger, the director of planning and community development shall follow the procedure set forth in Section 18.95.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 608 § 2 (part), 1986.)  
18.95.100 - Appeal. 
A.  The property owners, a member of the city council or any interested person adversely affected by a decision of the planning commission with respect to the merger, may within ten days of such decision, file an appeal with the secretary of the planning commission. The city council shall consider the appeal within thirty days. This appeal shall be a public heating with notice being given pursuant to Section 18.10.080 and with additional notice to be given to the property owner. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall within ten days declare its findings. The city council may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the planning commission and may make such findings as are consistent with the provisions of this chapter or the state Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  All decisions of the planning commission regarding the merger or nonmerger of parcels shall be final, unless appealed from as prescribed in this section, or until any condition precedent to its effectiveness has been fulfilled, whichever is later in time. 
C.  If the city council affirms the decision of the planning commission or the action of the commission becomes final, the director of planning and community development shall, within thirty days of the decision of the city council, file for record a notice of merger with the county recorder's office, and mail a copy of such notice to the property owner. 
D.  If the city council reverses the decision of the planning commission, the director of planning and community development shall, within thirty days of the decision of the city council, file for record a release of the notice of intention to determine status with the county recorder's office, and mail a copy of such release to the property owner. 
(Ord. 608 § 2 (part), 1986.)  
Chapter 18.100 - HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
18.100.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to implement the goals and policies of the general plan and the various elements contained therein as they relate to the development of the hills, mountains and natural land forms within the city and to ensure the maintenance of open space, the retention of scenic resources of the city, and addressing the general design, which includes cut-and-fill slopes, soil stabilization and drainage to further enhance the public health, safety and welfare by regulating development in hillside areas. 
(Ord. 682 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
18.100.020 - Applicability. 
A.  In addition to the foregoing provisions of Title 18 relating to subdivisions, this chapter shall also apply to any subdivision upon which there exists a developable open space of land which has any portion of the natural undeveloped land with slopes of fifteen percent or greater. This chapter shall not apply to administrative lot line adjustments. 
B.  The hillside development standards set forth in this chapter shall be considered as part of a parcel map or tentative tract map application in order to avoid the creation of undevelopable parcels of land. 
C.  Any subdivision of land proposed in areas falling wholly or partially under the provisions of these hillside development standards shall not be divided into such a fashion as to preclude the reasonable use of any resulting parcel(s). Developable land may not be divided from land substantially undevelopable under the provisions of these development standards unless: 
1.  The undevelopable parcels are to be held in common by the owner(s) of the resulting developable parcel(s); or 
2.  The undevelopable parcel(s) is conveyed to and accepted by an appropriate public agency or other party (e.g., homeowners' association) to be used for other than residential purposes, such as, but not limited to, parks, flood control facilities, campgrounds, agriculture, or other uses consistent with the open space element of the general plan; and 
3.  An open space easement over the undevelopable, parcel(s) specifying the allowable nonresidential or, alternatively, the prescribed uses, is dedicated to the city or other appropriate agency; 
4.  If a parcel of land is proposed for division into two or more parcels, each parcel shall have a proportionate share of the total developable land; 
5.  Any parcel created pursuant to the provisions of these development standards and entirely in fifteen percent or greater slope, or designated as open space in the general plan, shall be ten acres or greater in size. 
(Ord. 652 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
18.100.030 - Development standards. 
The following development standards will be used by the planning commission and/or the city council in evaluating and reviewing hillside development proposals and to determine consistency with the general plan and hillside development standards. Should these development standards conflict with any other provisions of the city's municipal code or other standards adopted by the city, the stricter of the standards shall prevail. 
A.  Grading Standards. Proposed grading shall respect the natural contour of the subject terrain wherever possible. In addition, the city's general plan and various elements contained therein that apply to hillside development, as well as other applicable grading requirements, shall be used. The following grading standards shall apply to all grading of land (if more than one thousand cubic yards): 
1.  Manufactured slopes should not exceed thirty feet in height. Slopes may exceed thirty feet in height if no feasible alternative exists; and 
2.  Where grading is necessary, the following principles of contour grading should be employed: 
a.  Manufactured slopes should be rounded and shaped to simulate the natural terrain, 
b.  Grading should follow the natural topographic contours as much as possible, 
c.  Manufactured slopes should blend with naturally occurring slopes at a radius compatible with the existing natural terrain, 
d.  Grading on naturally occurring slopes of fifteen percent grade or more which has a vertical height of more than thirty feet shall not occur unless such grading becomes necessary and is specifically approved by the planning commission and/or the city council after making the appropriate findings as part of the parcel map or tentative tract map review. A detailed plan for slope stabilization shall be submitted by the applicant, 
e.  No manufactured slope shall have a slope angle steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1). Shallower slope angles may be required if detailed soils and geologic investigations indicate such, and 
f.  Manufactured slopes shall be landscaped to screen views under or behind buildings. 
B.  Drainage Standards. Natural habitats and vegetation shall be considered and preserved wherever possible. To this extent all proposed drainage facilities shall respect the natural (before development) hydrologic characteristics of the subject terrain; where feasible, drainage channels shall be preserved in the natural state; where preservation is not feasible, drainage channels shall be designed in such a manner as to simulate the natural environment and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. The provisions of the following standards shall apply to all land subject to these regulations, and shall be in addition to the provisions of the adopted version of the city master drainage plan, and any other applicable drainage requirements: 
1.  Alterations to the drainage courses may be allowed if the application of this section will result in upstream or downstream flooding hazards for which there is no other feasible means of mitigation consistent with the findings. In order to preserve natural habitat and vegetation, replanting may be required upon recommendation of the director of planning and community services in conjunction with the director of engineering services, or their designees. 
2.  In the event that off-site drainage facilities will be required to handle increased runoff from any development subject to these regulations, interim drainage facilities which provide for no increase in peak runoff from a calculated average fifty-year storm shall be constructed and maintained until such time as the permanent facilities are completed. 
3.  The overall drainage system, including interim erosion-control measures, shall be completed and made operational at the earliest possible time during construction, or shall otherwise be provided for in a manner acceptable to the city. If a development is to be phased, all downstream (including interim facilities within the project area, or required interim off-site drainage facilities) elements of the approved drainage facilities will be completed or otherwise provided for in a manner acceptable to the city before the completion of upstream phases. 
C.  Street Standards. The design of streets and the circulation pattern within any proposed project governed by these regulations shall be such as to minimize grading requirements; shall, to the maximum feasible extent, complement the natural contours of the land; shall serve to retain the natural features of the impacted hillsides; and shall be designed in such a manner as to reduce street mileage to a minimum. 
1.  Local Street Widths. In order to encourage a rural feeling, local street widths shall comply with city council Policies No. 8-1 and No. 8-3. 
2.  Driveway Grade Access. Where access to isolated land areas with less than twenty percent slope can be provided only by constructing a roadway traversing natural slopes in excess of twenty percent, such a roadway shall not traverse twenty percent slopes for more than a cumulative distance of one hundred feet. 
3.  Special Streets. Special streets, such as one-way streets, split-level streets and dead-end streets, may be acceptable when their use is justified by detailed engineering studies submitted by the applicant, approved by the city engineer and in consultation with the director of planning and community development, or their designees, and are found to be necessary for the full achievement of the findings of these development standards. The final design of these streets shall be approved by the planning commission and/or city council. 
4.  Applicability of City Road Standards. In all other respects, any proposed trafficways shall comply with the city road standards. Exceptions to the city road standards may be granted under these development standards if the city engineer, in consultation with the director of planning and community development or their designees, or the planning commission, or the city council, determines that the findings of these development standards serve to be furthered by such an exception and all possible plan alternatives that attempt to meet existing standards have been exhausted. 
D.  Design Standards. Applicants are encouraged to employ site planning and architectural techniques which implement the findings of these development standards. In general, any proposed residential land use must be planned and designed in such a fashion as to complement and preserve the hillside terrain as well as provide a safe living environment. 
1.  Buildings. 
a.  Those building styles and lot configurations which lend themselves to hillside development, or those which are easily adapted to meet the special design and terrain requirements presented by hillside areas are encouraged. The intent is to encourage building methods in ten to twenty percent slope areas which minimize terrain disruption and blend with the natural contours of the subject hillside terrain. 
b.  Buildings and grading should be planned in such a manner as to hide necessary grading under or behind buildings. An example of such a technique would be split-level construction. 
2.  Viewshed. 
a.  View from land subject to the provisions of these development standards should be respected through design. 
b.  Living areas of dwelling units should be faced onto open, green or view areas. 
c.  Proposed structures should be located in such a manner as to avoid as much as possible interference with the view from other existing or proposed dwelling units. 
E.  Ridgeline Development Standards. In order to implement the findings of these development standards, there shall be no development along ridgelines easily visible from the valley floor in order to preserve the existing backdrop to the community, and to maintain the open character of the visually prominent ridgelines surrounding Camarillo. The purpose of this section is to set forth standards for maintaining such ridgelines and their immediate adjacent slopes. 
1.  Areas to Remain Undeveloped. 
a.  Structures subject to the provisions of these development standards shall not be constructed on top of any visually prominent ridgeline, unless the planning commission and/or city council after considering evidence determines that there is no feasible alternative. 
b.  No point on any structure subject to the provisions of these development standards shall be closer to a visually prominent ridgeline than one hundred and fifty feet measured horizontally on a topographic map or fifty feet measured vertically on a cross-section, whichever is more restrictive, except that this requirement shall not affect the location of structures where the highest portion of the structure is below the visible elevation of a prominent ridgeline. 
2.  Definitions. 
a.  A "visually prominent ridgeline" means any hill location visible from the valley floor, measured from a distance of five hundred feet back from the toe of the slope which is a slope of five percent or less, as determined by the director of planning and community development or his designees. 
F.  Landscaping Standards. All hillside property subject to these development standards shall be landscaped and irrigated, where determined necessary, in such a manner to reduce fire hazard, stabilize cut/fill slopes, reduce erosion, retain moisture, and enhance the natural scenic beauty of the valley. 
1.  Retention of Vegetation. Wherever possible, well-adapted, drought-resistant natural flora shall be retained. 
2.  Major Tree Planting. The planting of major trees in areas to remain in natural open space should include, but not be limited to, the following native species: 
a.  Juglans California hindsi (California Black Walnut); 
b.  Plantanus racemosa (California Sycamore); 
c.  Quercus agrifolia (California Live Oak); 
d.  Quercus lobata (Valley Oak). 
3.  Landscaping in Application Area. Landscaping in application area should be integrated with other elements of the proposal and comply with other guidelines for the preservation of natural topographic features, the view of ridgelines from the valley floor and the preservation of vistas. 
(Ord. 652 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
18.100.040 - Required technical reports and materials. 
At the time of submittal for subdivision application, certain technical reports and materials shall also be submitted in addition to those required by Section 18.10.030. No application for a subdivision will be accepted as complete until all required reports and materials have been submitted. Such reports and materials will be used to determine the suitability of the subject site for development and to suggest special construction and design measures necessary to mitigate identified problems which may endanger the public health, safety and welfare. The report and materials shall include the following: 
A.  Site Plan and Elevations. The applicant shall submit, as part of the subdivision application, adequate samples of materials, elevations, drawings and site plans necessary to make a determination as to the extent to which the development standards are being met. The site plan shall show all property lines, existing and proposed building locations, driveways, open space areas, parking and landscaped areas. The site plan shall also show the topography of the lot, abutting streets, highways, topographic features located within one hundred fifty feet of all lot lines and any additional data which may be required by the commission to determine compliance with this chapter. The building elevations shall be dimensioned and show all walls, buildings and structures along with samples of the colors and materials. 
B.  Slope Analysis. The applicant shall submit as part of the subdivision application an analysis of the existing slope of the property. The slope analysis will be used to determine the appropriate slope of any land, and the square footage or acreage within any slope category. "Slope" means and is defined as the relationship between the change in elevation (rise) of land and the horizontal distance (run) over which that change in elevation occurs. The percentage of any given slope is determined by dividing the rise by the run on the natural slope of land, multiplied by one hundred. 
1.  Slope Map Requirements. For the purpose of determining the amount and location of land falling into each slope category, the applicant shall submit to the department of planning and community development at the time of application a base topographical map of the subject site prepared by a registered civil engineer licensed to survey or land surveyor. Such a map shall have a scale of not less than one inch to one hundred feet and a contour interval of not more than two feet, provided that the contour interval may be ten feet when the slope is more than twenty percent. This base topographical map shall include all adjoining properties within one hundred fifty feet of the site boundaries. Slope bands in the range of zero to ten percent, ten to fifteen to twenty percent, and twenty percent or greater shall be shown on the map. The base topographical map shall also include, or be accompanied by, a tabulation of the land area in each slope category, specified in acres. The exact method for computing the percent slope and area by percent slope category should be sufficiently described and presented so that a review can be readily made. 
2.  Slope Mapping Method. 
a.  The percent slope of any particular piece of land shall be plotted on the slope map by dividing the vertical rise between the contours employed by the horizontal distance between the same contours, multiplied by one hundred. The minimum contour interval employed shall be two feet and the maximum contour interval employed ten feet, with the ten-foot interval being preferred. 
b.  In preparing a slope map, isolated slope areas (i.e., surrounded by a flatter or steeper slope category) with a horizontal run of less than one hundred feet and a vertical rise of less than thirty feet shall be disregarded and the area thereof classified as being within the adjacent category. 
c.  In preparing a slope map, those portions of ravines, ridges and terraces of less than one hundred and fifty feet in width at their widest measurement which are in an area generally sloping at twenty percent slope or greater shall be regarded as being of twenty percent slope or greater, and shall be included as part of the bordering twenty percent slope or greater band. 
C.  Geotechnical Reports. The applicant shall submit, as part of the subdivision application, a geotechnical study in accordance with Chapter 16.38. 
D.  Drainage. The applicant shall submit, as part of the subdivision application, a drainage plan, including text, calculations, maps and diagrams. The director of engineering services in consultation with the director of planning and community development, or their designees, shall review these submissions for completeness, adequacy and conformance with the above and other applicable standards. 
1.  The report shall include, but not be limited to the hydrologic conditions on the site, possible on-site flood inundation, downstream flood hazards, identification of natural drainage courses, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of hydrologic conditions on the proposed development, opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of the sites to be developed, and design criteria to mitigate any identified hydrologic hazards consistent with these regulations. 
2.  The investigation and report shall be completed by a registered civil engineer experienced in the science of hydrology and hydrologic investigation. 
3.  Recommendations included in the report and approved by the director of engineering services in consultation with the director of planning and community development, or their designees, shall be incorporated into the subject application and all associated plans and maps. 
E.  Grading. At the time of formal application, a preliminary grading plan shall be submitted detailing the extent and nature of proposed grading. Such a plan should include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Preliminary cross-sections detailing both the original and proposed ground surfaces, with grades, slopes and elevations needed; 
2.  A preliminary soil stabilization report including proposed final groundcover, landscaping and erosion control; 
3.  Erosion control measures to prevent soil loss when grading is in process; 
4.  Certification by the registered geologist who prepares the geotechnical study required by Section 18.100.040C that the proposed grading is consistent with the findings and recommendations of said report. 
F.  Landscape Plan. 
1.  A preliminary landscaping plan prepared by a registered landscape architect or contractor and acceptable to the director of planning and community development shall be submitted at the time of application. Such a plan shall outline all proposed planting in graded and nongraded areas, means of irrigation, proposed timing of landscape installation, and the manner in which landscaping will be maintained. A precise landscape plan shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a grading permit. 
2.  Plans and proposed programs for the ongoing maintenance of landscaped areas shall be submitted at the time of application. Such plans shall include, but not be limited to, responsible parties or agencies, the nature and extent of each agency's and party's responsibility, and the financial arrangements for maintenance. The director of planning and community development shall review these plans for completeness, adequacy and conformance with applicable standards. 
G.  Report Waiver. Any or all of the above required reports may be waived by the director of planning and community development in consultation with the city engineer, or their designees, under the following conditions: 
1.  The existence of recently completed and satisfactory reports covering the same subject matter on the same site; 
2.  Any or all of the above reports are included as part of an environmental impact report or negative declaration if either is required, or has been satisfactorily completed for the proposal, on the site; or 
3.  The proposed development is comprised of one or more residential structure(s) on a single parcel, wherein the minimum average amount of land per structure equals five acres or more, no structure is located on a fifteen percent or greater slope, and grading of land is less than one thousand cubic yards. 
(Ord. 652 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
18.100.050 - Considerations—Hillside development. 
In approving, conditionally approving, or denying any subdivision subject to the development standards set forth in this chapter, the planning commission and/or the city council shall consider the following: 
A.  That grading has been kept to a minimum in order to maintain the natural character of the hillsides and unavoidable grading complements natural land forms; 
B.  That mass grading of large pads and excessive terracing has been avoided; 
C.  That significant natural landmarks and other outstanding features have been maintained in their natural state; 
D.  That there is no development along prominent ridgelines easily visible from the valley floor for the purposes of preserving the existing backdrop of the community; 
E.  That proposed development plans have utilized varying setback and heights for buildings, building techniques, building forms, materials and colors which ensure the compatibility of structures with the surrounding terrain; 
F.  That street and circulation design respects the natural contours of the land, minimizes grading requirements, and minimizes the percentage of land devoted to streets; 
G.  Any other such matters which directly relate to the project. 
(Ord. 652 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
18.100.060 - Exceptions. 
These development standards shall not apply to those subdivisions involving one or more of the following circumstances: 
A.  Any tentative map or parcel map approved prior to the enactment of this chapter, unless the director of planning and community development, or the planning commission on appeal, or the city council on further appeal, find any modification to the above entitlement to be a major modification of such a magnitude as to alter the original intent of the project approval; 
B.  Any time extension for a previously approved tentative map or parcel map valid as of the date of enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter subject to the following conditions: 
1.  That such time extension has been filed and has been accepted as complete by the department of planning and community development at least thirty days prior to the expiration of the original tentative map, planned development permit, conditional use permit or any other similar entitlement, 
2.  That such time extension does not contain any modification to the original entitlement of such a magnitude as to alter the original intent of the project approval; 
C.  An existing residential dwelling unit and accessory building(s) on a legally subdivided parcel as of the date of adoption of the chapter; 
D.  Any residential parcel having only isolated land forms with slopes of fifteen percent or greater which have a horizontal run less than one hundred feet and a vertical rise of less than thirty feet. 
(Ord. 652 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
18.100.070 - Waiver of liability—Hold harmless and indemnification agreement. 
A.  Each applicant receiving an approval for a subdivision shall be required to sign a form of awareness statement that the area in which the applicant is developing is subject to physical hazards of a geologic nature. 
B.  Each applicant receiving subdivision approval shall be required to sign a "hold harmless and indemnity agreement" regarding the approval of a subdivision in an area subject to physical hazards of a geological nature. 
(Ord. 652 § 2 (part), 1988.)  
Title 19 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— Prior history: Ord. 438 
 
I. - INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS  
Chapter 19.02 - PURPOSE AND SCOPE—SHORT TITLE 
 
19.02.010 - Purpose and scope. 
A.  The purpose of this title is to consolidate and coordinate all existing zoning regulations and provisions into one comprehensive zoning plan in order to designate, regulate and control the location and use of buildings, structures and land for residence, commerce, trade, industry or other purposes; to regulate and limit the height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures, hereafter erected or altered; to regulate and determine the size of yards and other open spaces and to regulate and limit the density of population; and for such purposes to divide the city into zones of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations and to provide for the enforcement thereof. 
B.  Further, such regulations are deemed necessary in order to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to conserve and stabilize the value of property; to provide adequate open spaces for light and air and to prevent and fight fires; to prevent undue concentration of population; to lessen congestion on streets; to facilitate adequate provisions for community utilities and facilities such as transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; and to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public, all in accordance with a comprehensive zoning plan. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code 9300.)  
19.02.020 - Private agreements. 
The provisions of this title are not intended to interfere with or abrogate or negate any easements, covenants or existing agreements between parties. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.1.)  
19.02.030 - Conflicts. 
Whenever the provisions of this title impose a more stringent regulation upon buildings or structures and the use of them or the use of land or premises and require larger open spaces or yards or setbacks imposed or required by other ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this title shall govern. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.2.)  
19.02.040 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this title shall be known as the official zoning ordinance of the City of Camarillo. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.3.)  
Chapter 19.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
19.04.005 - Intent—Interpretation. 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this title, the word "phrase" and "term" included in this chapter shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them as follows. Headings contained in this title shall not be construed to govern, modify, limit or in any manner affect the scope, meaning and/or intent of any definition thereof. When consistent with context, words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in a singular number include the plural and those in the plural number include the singular: "or" includes "and;" "and" includes "or." The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. "Used" or "occupied" includes "intended, designated, or arranged to be used or occupied." 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5 (part).)  
19.04.010 - Abut or abutting. 
"Abut" or "abutting" means contiguous or the same as adjoining. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(1).)  
19.04.015 - Access. 
"Access" means the place or way by which pedestrians and/or vehicles have safe, adequate and usable ingress or egress to a property or use as required by this title. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(2).)  
19.04.020 - Accessory building. 
"Accessory building" means a building or structure which is subordinate to and the use of which is incidental to and detached from the main building, structure or use on the same lot. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(3).)  
19.04.030 - Accessory use. 
"Accessory use" means use incidental and subordinate to the principal use established on the same lot or parcel of land or building site. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(5).)  
19.04.033 - Agricultural plant nursery, retail. 
"Agricultural plant nursery, retail" means a facility engaged in the retail sale of plants, where the majority of the plants for sale are farmed and grown on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 3, 10-8-2008)  
19.04.035 - Agricultural uses. 
"Agricultural uses" means use pertaining to the science and art of farming, producing crops or floriculture or horticulture, the working and/or cultivating of the soil. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(6).)  
19.04.037 - Agricultural winery. 
"Agricultural winery" means a facility used for the growing of grape crops that also ferments and processes grape juice into wine. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 4, 10-8-2008)  
19.04.040 - Aircraft. 
"Aircraft" means any device used or designed for flight in the air and capable of conveying persons or goods. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(7).)  
19.04.045 - Airport. 
"Airport" means any area of land or water which is used, or intended to be used, for landing and taking off of aircraft and any appurtenant areas used, or intended to be used, for airport buildings, airport facilities or right-of-way. "Airport" includes heliport or helistop. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(8).)  
19.04.047 - Alcoholic beverage establishment, off-sale. 
"Off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment" means any business engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises. Typical uses include but are not limited to liquor stores, convenience stores, drug stores, and grocery stores. 
(Ord. 1029 § 3, 2008.)  
19.04.050 - Alley. 
"Alley" means a public or private way primarily reserved for the secondary means of access to abutting property. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(9).)  
19.04.055 - All purpose room. 
"All purpose room" means a room containing no cooking equipment other than barbecue or similar apparatus for the purpose of preparing snacks for guests, used as incidental to the main use. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(10).)  
19.04.060 - Amendment. 
"Amendment" means a change in the wording, content or substance of a municipal code or in the zone boundaries of the zoning map which is part of the municipal code when adopted by the city council in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(11).)  
19.04.062 - Amusement machine. 
"Amusement machine" means a coin or token operated game of skill and/or similar entertainment or amusement devices, such as, but not limited to, pinball machines, video games, electronic games, mechanical shooting galleries, or muscle testers. 
(Ord. 537 § 6, 1982.)  
19.04.063 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Urgency Ord. No. 1108, § 3A, adopted March 11, 2015 and Ord. No. 1109, § 3A, adopted March 25, 2015, repealed § 19.04.063, which pertained to antennas and derived from Ord. 730 § 1, 1990.  
19.04.065 - Apartment. 
"Apartment" means a suite of one or more rooms in a multidwelling occupied or suitable for occupancy as a residence and having kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of only one family, which suite is rented for use by the occupants. 
(Ord. 491 § 1, 1981: Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(12).)  
19.04.070 - Architectural projection. 
"Architectural projection" means any projection which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building used exclusively for ornamentation. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(13).)  
19.04.072 - Arcade. 
An "arcade" is any premises, or a portion thereof, open to the public which contains 13 or more amusement machines as defined in Section 19.04.062. "Arcade" does not include temporary carnivals or fairs for which a permit from the city regulating such activities must be obtained. 
(Ord. 827 § 1, 1995: Ord. 537 § 7, 1982; Ord. No. 1114, § 3, 9-9-2015)  
19.04.075 - Automobile dismantling. 
"Automobile dismantling" means the dismantling or wrecking of vehicles, including of parts or components thereof, and the storage of dismantled or wrecked inoperative vehicles. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(14).)  
19.04.078 - Special event. 
A "special event" means an event which occupies any parcel of land or public right-of-way for a period of more than one hour within a twenty-four-hour period, but less than the maximum time limits set forth in Chapter 19.63 and does not utilize any permanent structures except as otherwise permitted in Chapter 19.63 of the Camarillo Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 628 § 1, 1987.)  
19.04.080 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1111, § 4, adopted Nov. 11 2015, repealed § 19.04.080, which pertained to bachelor apartments and derived from Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(16).  
19.04.085 - Basement. 
"Basement" means that portion of the building between the floor and ceiling which has more than fifty percent below the natural or finished grade of the exterior ground surface. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(16).)  
19.04.087 - Bed and breakfast inn. 
"Bed and breakfast inn" means an establishment that provides for lodging accommodations and breakfast to overnight guests that also functions as a primary residence for the owner or manager. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 5, 10-8-2008)  
19.04.090 - Bedroom. 
"Bedroom" means a room so designed as to be used for sleeping purposes and the storage of clothing. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(17).)  
19.04.095 - Beginning of construction. 
"Beginning of construction" means assemblage of material and labor as required for work process for completion of construction of buildings or structures. The storage of material alone or excavation of the foundation alone shall not constitute beginning of construction. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(18).)  
19.04.097 - Birds, large. 
"Large birds" means exotic (nonnative) birds over one pound or greater in weight as determined by the low end of the weight range set forth in Clinical Avian Medicine and Surgery by Harrison and Harrison, kept for domestic use, caged or uncaged, such as macaws, large hookbills, parrots and cockatoos, excluding peafowl. For the purpose of this chapter, all macaws shall be considered large birds. 
(Ord. 781 § 1 (part), 1993.)  
19.04.098 - Birds, medium. 
"Medium birds" means exotic (nonnative) birds one-half pound up to one pound in weight as determined by the low end of the weight range set forth in Clinical Avian Medicine and Surgery by Harrison and Harrison, kept for domestic use, caged or uncaged, such as cockatoos, Mexican red-headed parrots, African greys, excluding macaws. 
(Ord. 781 § 1 (part), 1993.)  
19.04.099 - Birds, small. 
"Small birds" means exotic (nonnative) birds less than one-half pound in weight as determined by the low end of the weight range set forth in Clinical Avian Medicine and Surgery by Harrison and Harrison, kept for domestic use, caged or uncaged, such as perching birds (e.g., canaries and finches), parakeets, small hookbills, small parrots and domestic songbirds. 
(Ord. 781 § 1 (part), 1993.)  
19.04.100 - Board and care. 
"Board and care" means board and licensed care for the ambulatory aged or infirmed, not involving a physician residing on the premises. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(19).)  
19.04.105 - Boardinghouse. 
"Boardinghouse" means a lodginghouse other than a hotel, motel, or dormitory where for compensation for days, week or greater term, table and board is provided for five or more persons. Meals may be furnished to occasional or transient customers. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(20).)  
19.04.110 - Boarding school. 
"Boarding school" means schools providing lodging and meals for pupils. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(21).)  
19.04.115 - Borrow pit. 
For a definition of "borrow pit," see "quarry," Section 19.04.660. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(22).)  
19.04.117 - Buffer Area. 
"Buffer area" means an area of land which surrounds certain land uses and on which activities are restricted to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and the environment from existing or potential hazards. 
(Ord. 763 § 1, 1992.)  
19.04.120 - Buildable area. 
"Buildable area" means the portion of a lot or parcel remaining after required yard setbacks have been provided. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5 (24).)  
19.04.125 - Building. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for a shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(23).)  
19.04.130 - Building facade. 
"Building facade" means that portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(25).)  
19.04.135 - Building height. 
"Building height" means the vertical distance from the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the structure exclusive of chimneys and ventilators. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(26).)  
19.04.140 - Building, main. 
"Main building" means the principal building or buildings within which is conducted the principal use permitted on the lot. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(27).)  
19.04.145 - Building setback line. 
"Building setback line" means the minimum distance as prescribed by the zone between the property line of a lot or parcel of land or any other reference line as specified at any point on a building or structure related thereto. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(28).)  
19.04.150 - Building site. 
"Building site" means the ground area of a building or a group of buildings together with all open space as required by this title. The building site may encompass more than one lot. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(29).)  
19.04.155 - Business or commerce. 
"Business or commerce" means and includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles, and appurtenances used therein, including both profit and nonprofit businesses. Businesses, professions, and trades shall include, without being limited thereto, trades and occupations of all and every kind of calling carried on within the city for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit in whole or part whether paid for in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, and whether the business has a fixed place of business in the city. 
(Ord. 763 § 2, 1992: Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(30).)  
19.04.157 - Business park development. 
"Business park" means a contiguous group of four or more buildings on individual parcels served by common drives and improved with compatible landscape and architectural features. 
(Ord. 792 § 1, 1993.)  
19.04.160 - Camper. 
"Camper" means a structure designed to be mounted upon a motor vehicle to provide facilities for temporary habitation or camping purposes. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(31).)  
19.04.165 - Carport. 
"Carport" means a permanently roofed structure open on one or more sides, used or intended to be used for vehicular parking. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(32).)  
19.04.170 - Cellar. 
"Cellar" means the same as basement. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(33).)  
19.04.175 - Church. 
"Church" means any building, structure or use which is utilized primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
(Ord. 851 § 9, 1996: Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code 9300.5(34).)  
19.04.180 - Club. 
"Club" means an association of persons for some common purpose, but not including groups organized permanently to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(35).)  
19.04.185 - Club, country. 
"Country club" means a club organized and operated for social purposes and possessing indoor or outdoor recreational facilities, such as a golf course, tennis courts or similar facilities. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(36).)  
19.04.187 - Code. 
"Code" means and include the Camarillo Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, the official zoning ordinance of the city, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 851 § 3, 1996.)  
19.04.190 - Commercial recreation. 
"Commercial recreation" includes any place of amusement erected, or maintained, for amusement or entertainment purposes where the public or members are invited or allowed to attend or assemble, except city, county or state park and recreation areas. Although not intended to be specifically limited thereby, examples of commercial recreation are carnivals, side shows, and circuses, wherein are exhibited feats of horsemanship, trained animals, clowns, acrobats or trapeze performers or amusement devices, games or other forms of skill or amusement; bowling alleys, golf courses or private tennis centers, billiard or pool halls, theaters, private stadiums and recreation areas. Commercial recreation shall not include card rooms. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(37).)  
19.04.195 - Commission. 
"Commission" means the planning commission. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(39).)  
19.04.200 - Common wall. 
"Common wall" means the wall separating two dwellings in a multiple-family dwelling or condominium. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(38).)  
19.04.205 - Communication equipment building. 
"Communication equipment building" means buildings housing operating electrical and mechanical equipment necessary for the conduct of a public utility communication business with or without personnel. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(40).)  
19.04.210 - Community apartment project. 
"Community apartment project" means a project in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment or unit located thereon. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(41).)  
19.04.215 - Community center. 
"Community center" means a meeting place where people living in the same community may carry on cultural, recreational or social activities and may include outdoor recreational facilities such as golf courses, tennis courts or polo grounds. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(42).)  
19.04.220 - Condominium. 
"Condominium" means an estate of real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with the separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building or such real property, such as a residential apartment, apartment house, office or offices, store or stores. A condominium may include in addition a separate interest in other portions of such real property. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(43).)  
19.04.225 - Condominium project. 
"Condominium project" means the entire parcel of real property divided or to be divided into condominium, including all structures thereon. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(44).)  
19.04.230 - Conforming building. 
"Conforming building" is one which wholly meets the requirements of the building code and zoning ordinance as they pertain to residential, commercial or industrial development. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(45).)  
19.04.235 - Convalescent homes. 
For a definition of "convalescent homes," see "rest homes," Section 19.04.675. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(46).)  
19.04.240 - Core hole drilling. 
For a definition of "core hole drilling," see "geological core hole drilling," Section 19.04.345. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(47).)  
19.04.245 - Court. 
"Court" means an open space on a lot other than a yard, designed to be partially surrounded by dwellings. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(48).)  
19.04.250 - Coverage. 
"Coverage" means that portion of a lot or building site which is occupied by any building or structure regardless of whether such building or structure is intended for human occupancy. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(49).)  
19.04.255 - Dairy. 
"Dairy" means an establishment or enterprise maintaining more than two cows for the commercial production and sale of milk and/or dairy products. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(50).)  
19.04.258 - Day care, large family. 
"Large family day care" means a home which provides family day care for seven to twelve children, or up to fourteen children, inclusive, if two of the children are six years of age or older. Children under the age of ten years who reside at the home shall be counted. 
(Ord. 773 § 1 (part), 1993.)  
19.04.259 - Day care, small family. 
"Small family day care" means a home which provides family day care for six or fewer children, or eight or fewer children if two of the children are six years of age or older. Children under the age of ten years who reside at the home shall be counted. (Ord. 773 § 1 (part), 1993.)  
19.04.260 - Day care facility. 
"Day care facility" means providing care for children during daytime hours, including parent cooperative nursery schools, play groups for preschool children, afterschool care for school children, provided such establishment is institutional in character and is licensed by the state or county and conducted in accordance with state requirements. 
(Ord. 773 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(51).)  
19.04.262 - Day spas. 
"Day spa" means a spa offering a variety of professionally administered spa services such as facials and massage to clients on a day use basis. 
(Ord. 1013 § 4 (part), 2007.)  
19.04.265 - Dedication. 
"Dedication" means setting aside of land for some public use by an owner or developer and its acceptance by the city or affected agency. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(52).)  
19.04.270 - Density. 
"Density" means the number of units allowed to be built upon an acre of land. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(53).)  
19.04.272 - Department. 
"Department" means the department of planning and community development. 
(Ord. 736 § 1 (part), 1990.)  
19.04.273 - Director. 
"Director" means the director of community development or the director's designated representative. 
(Ord. 763 § 3, 1992: Ord. 736 § 1 (part), 1990.) 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 6, 9-25-2013)  
19.04.274 - Disposal. 
"Disposal" means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any waste so that the waste or any constituent of the waste is or may be emitted into the air or discharged into or on any land or water, including groundwater, or may otherwise enter the environment. Disposal includes the abandonment of any waste or material. 
(Ord. 763 § 4, 1992.)  
19.04.275 - Dormitory. 
"Dormitory" means a building used partially for sleeping and eating accommodations and where such facilities are related to educational or public institution including religious institutions, fraternities or sororities. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(54).)  
19.04.278 - Drinking establishment. 
"Drinking establishment" means an establishment engaged in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, but does not include a "tasting area" as defined in this chapter. Typical uses include bars, brew pubs, cocktail lounges, taverns and similar uses other than ancillary to restaurant uses where the sale of food is fifty-one percent or more of total sales. 
(Ord. 871 § 1, 1997.) 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
19.04.280 - Drive-in or drive-through restaurant. 
"Drive-in or drive-through restaurant" means a restaurant which provides service directly to the motorist either for consumption upon the site or elsewhere, including establishments whose customers may serve themselves. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(55).)  
19.04.285 - Dwelling. 
"Dwelling" means a building, or portion thereof, designed exclusively for residential purposes and including kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of only one-family, but not including hotels or motels. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(56).)  
19.04.290 - Dwelling, multiple. 
"Multiple dwelling" means a building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other with each provided with kitchen facilities. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(59).)  
19.04.295 - Dwelling, one-family. 
"One-family dwelling" means a building designed for occupancy by one-family and containing one dwelling unit and including kitchen facilities designed to serve such family. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(57).)  
19.04.300 - Dwelling, two-family. 
"Two-family dwelling" means a building designed for occupancy by two families living independently of each other with each unit being provided with separate kitchen facilities. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(58).)  
19.04.305 - Educational institution. 
"Educational institution" means a public or private institution conducting regular academic instruction at daycare, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, elementary, secondary or collegiate levels; and including graduate schools, universities, nonprofit research institutions and religious institutions. Such institution must either: (1) offer general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the state board of education; or (2) confer degrees as a college or university of undergraduate or graduate standing; or (3) conduct research or religious instruction. This definition does not include commercial or trade schools. Educational institution, when used in conjunction with regulations pertaining to sexually oriented businesses shall mean any child care facility, or any institution of learning which is attended by minors under the age of eighteen years, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to educational standards set by the laws of the state of California. Educational institutions include day care schools, kindergarten, elementary schools, junior high schools and senior high schools. Educational institution when used in conjunction with regulations pertaining to sexually oriented businesses does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college or university. 
(Ord. 851 § 13, 1996: Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(60).)  
19.04.306 - Emergency shelter. 
"Emergency shelter" means a residential facility, other than a community care facility and other than temporary shelters provided by not-for-profit entities following a disaster, operated by a provider that provides temporary accommodations to persons or families with lower incomes. The term "temporary accommodations" mean that a person or family will be allowed to reside at the shelter for a time period not to exceed six months. For the purpose of this definition, a "provider" means a government agency or private nonprofit organization that provides or contracts with recognized community organizations to provide emergency or temporary shelter, and may also provide meals, counseling and other services, as well as common areas for residents of the facility. Such facility may have individual rooms, but is not developed with individual dwelling units, with the exception of a manager's unit. 
(Ord. 977 § 2, 2005.)  
19.04.307 - Entertainer. 
"Entertainer" means any person who as an employee or independent contractor of a sexually oriented business, or any person who, with or without any form of compensation, performs live entertainment for patrons of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. 851 § 14, 1996.)  
19.04.308 - Facility. 
"Facility" is defined as all contiguous land and structures, other appurtenances, and improvements on the land used for the treatment, transfer, storage, resource recovery, or recycling of hazardous materials or hazardous waste. 
(Ord. 763 § 5 (part), 1992.)  
19.04.309 - Factory outlet center. 
"Factory outlet center" means a shopping center which includes a variety of retail stores and ancillary uses. The individual retail stores are operated predominantly by the companies that either directly manufacture or control the production of the merchandise being sold. 
(Ord. 830 § 1, 1995.)  
19.04.310 - Family. 
For a definition of "Family" see Section 19.04.403, "Household." 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(61).) 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 9-8-2010)  
19.04.312 - Farm animal. 
"Farm animal" means sheep, cows, steers, burros, jacks, jennies, donkeys, llamas, goats, horses, bovine, mules, rabbits, chickens, ducks, geese, rooster, turkeys, swine including miniature pot-bellied pigs, ponies, ducks or similar animal or fowl typically found on a farm. 
(Ord. 767 § 1 (part), 1992.)  
19.04.313 - Farmers market, certified. 
A "certified farmers market" means an event for which a special event permit has been issued pursuant to this title, allowing the sale of certain: (1) foodstuff grown by a person holding a certificate issued by the agricultural commissioner of the county in which the foodstuff was grown by such certified person; (2) baked goods that are not a certified farmers market product; and (3) merchandise offered for sale by the permittee. 
(Ord. 800 § 1, 1993: Ord. 726 § 1 (part), 1990.)  
19.04.314 - Farmworker housing. 
"Farmworker housing" means housing for persons performing agricultural labor who either work on or are hired from the property. 
(Ord. No. 1069, § 3, 1-11-2012)  
19.04.315 - Floor area. 
"Floor area" includes all floor area within a building exclusive of elevator shafts, light and stairwells. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(62).)  
19.04.317 - Foodstuff. 
"Foodstuff" as used in this title, means fruits, nuts, vegetables, flowers, plants and honey grown by a person who is a farmer or grower who holds a certificate issued pursuant to law by the agricultural commissioner of a county in California or another authorized official. 
(Ord. 726 § 1 (part), 1990.)  
19.04.320 - Foster care home. 
"Foster care home" means a dwelling occupied by a family which accepts and cares for children as full-time residents as a part of the family and which children are assigned by an authorized public or semipublic authority. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(63).)  
19.04.325 - Frontage. 
"Frontage" means that portion of a parcel which abuts and has access to a public or approved private street or highway where access is provided, measured along the public or approved private street or highway or future street line as indicated on the general plan or approved subdivision or division map. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(64).)  
19.04.330 - Garage, private. 
"Private garage" means an accessory building, or an accessory portion of a main building, enclosed on at east three sides with the fourth being provided with a door for access of the automobile and designed or used for the shelter or storage of vehicles of the occupants of the main building. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(65).)  
19.04.335 - Garage, public. 
"Public garage" means a building other than a private garage, enclosed on all sides and used for the care, repair or equipping of vehicles, or where such vehicles are kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(66).)  
19.04.340 - General plan. 
"General plan" means the projected growth plan for the city of Camarillo which includes a statement of development policies and includes a diagram and text setting forth objectives, principles and plan proposals and includes the various elements required by the state of California. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(67).)  
19.04.345 - Geological exploration core hole, temporary. 
"Temporary geological exploration core hole" means a test hole or exploratory core hole, used, or intended to be used, exclusively for geographical or geological land exploration preliminary to possible land development exploration for oil, natural gas or other hydrocarbons to be drilled and abandoned within thirty days from the time of commencement of drilling operations. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(68).)  
19.04.350 - Governmental facilities. 
"Governmental facilities" include federal, state, city or county buildings, or institutions, or other special districts. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(69).)  
19.04.355 - Grade, ground level. 
"Grade, ground level," is the average of the finish ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case the walls are parallel to and within five feet of sidewalk, the above ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(70).)  
19.04.360 - Gradient. 
"Gradient" means the rate of vertical change of the ground surface expressed as a percent figure. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(70).)  
19.04.362 - Gross receipts. 
"Gross receipts," when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes the total amounts of cash, checks or credit slips actually received from the sale, trade, rental, display or presentation of services, materials or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(Ord. 851 § 4, 1996.)  
19.04.364 - Guest bungalows (golf course). 
Guest bungalows are individual living units built on a single parcel of land and operated as part of a private golf course offering independent living as temporary accommodations not to exceed thirty consecutive days for members of the golf course country club or their guests. The units may include provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, sanitation and parking. 
(Ord. 996 § 3 (part), 2006.)  
19.04.366 - Hazardous material. 
"Hazardous material" means a substance or combination of substances which because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may either (a) cause, or contribute to, an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; or (b) pose a present or potential hazard to human health or environment due to the manner in which it is transported, utilized or disposed of or otherwise managed. 
(Ord. 763 § 5 (part), 1992.)  
19.04.367 - Hazardous waste. 
"Hazardous waste" is a waste or combination of wastes which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristic may either (a) cause, or contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; or (b) pose a present or potential hazard to human health or environment due to the manner in which it is treated, stored, transported, utilized, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
(Ord. 763 § 5 (part), 1992.)  
19.04.370 - Heliport. 
"Heliport" means any helicopter landing area used, designed or intended to be used for the receiving or discharging of passengers, cargo; also included are any appurtenant facilities for passengers, cargo or for the service or repair, shelter or storage of helicopters. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1986: prior code § 9300.5(72).)  
19.04.375 - Helistop. 
"Helistop" means any helicopter landing area used, designed or intended to be used, including other appurtenant facilities permitted at a heliport, other than shelter for passengers. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(73).)  
19.04.377 - Home improvement showrooms. 
A home improvement showroom means a facility used to display kitchen and bath fixtures, and home theatre systems to contractors, designers, builders and other individuals for demonstrating various means that home improvement can be designed. Showrooms may offer a range of products for sale associated with kitchen, bath and home theatre systems. Materials sold at the showroom are warehoused and shipped from other off-site warehouse facilities. Showrooms may also include a location for service and repair calls and limited space for on-site retail sales of kitchen/bath and home theatre products. 
(Ord. 942 § 1, 2001.)  
19.04.380 - Home for the aged. 
"Home for the aged" means any institution, boarding home or other place for the reception and care of persons over the age of sixty not related to the proprietor by blood or affinity within the second degree; and when boarding care is provided for three or more such aged persons. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(75).)  
19.04.385 - Home occupation. 
"Home occupation" means any occupation conducted in the main building on a lot by a member of a family residing therein as an incidental use in connection with the primary residential use thereof. 
(Ord. 713 § 1, 1990: Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(74).)  
19.04.387 - Horizontal mixed-use development. 
"Horizontal mixed-use development" means a cohesive development project that provides for the functional and physical integration of residential and commercial uses in separate structures on the same site. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 3, 6-24-2009)  
19.04.390 - Hospital. 
"Hospital" means an institution providing physical or mental health service, in-patient or overnight accommodations and medical and surgical care of the sick or injured. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(76).)  
19.04.395 - Hospital, animal. 
"Animal hospital" means a place where small animals or domestic pets are given medical or surgical treatment and cared for during time of such treatment. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(77).)  
19.04.400 - Hotel. 
"Hotel" means a building, or portion of a building with access provided through a common entrance, lobby or hallway to six or more guest rooms designed to be rented, hired out or occupied as temporary accommodations with the combined stays by any guest in a hotel not to exceed a total of one hundred eighty days in any one-year period. This one-year period shall be calculated starting from the initial date of registration by the guest in the hotel. The definition of "hotel" shall not include "residential hotel," as that term is defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 50519. 
(Ord. 897 § 1, 1998: Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(78).)  
19.04.401 - Hotel, senior. 
"Senior hotel" means a building or buildings designed for senior citizens with access provided through a common entrance, lobby, or hallway to six or more guest rooms designed to be rented or hired out by the day, week, month, or longer period of time, and includes a central dining area where all meals are provided to the guests as part of the rental rate for the rooms, plus other types of facilities or services designed to address the needs for seniors which may include activity rooms and transportation and shall not include any in-room cooking facilities except a microwave and a small under-counter refrigerator and sink. 
(Ord. 680 § 1, 1989.)  
19.04.402 - Household pets and domestic animals. 
"Household pets and domestic animals" means cats, dogs, canaries, parrots, parakeets, pigeons, and other birds, small caged rodents, and nonpoisonous reptiles less than six feet in length which are usually and ordinarily kept as household pets. This definition specifically excludes wild mammals, peafowl, poisonous reptiles, farm animals, reptiles longer than six feet, and similar animals kept for fur, food, or hobby. 
(Ord. 781 § 2, 1993: Ord. 767 § 2, 1992: Ord. 523 § 1, 1982.)  
19.04.403 - Household. 
"Household" means one or more persons living together in a dwelling unit with common access to, and common use of, all living, kitchen and eating areas within the dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 3, 9-8-2010)  
19.04.405 - Industrial park. 
"Industrial park" means any planned industrial district in which special attention is given to aesthetic and community compatibility; subdivided and developed according to a comprehensive plan which includes streets and utilities and provides serviced sites for a variety of industry oriented uses. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(79).)  
19.04.407 - Individual viewing area. 
"Individual viewing area" when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes a viewing area located in a sexually oriented arcade, designed for occupancy by one person; each individual viewing area shall be open to view from the manager's station, but without any means of direct visual or physical access between another individual viewing area. No individual viewing area shall contain booths, stalls, or partitions nor shall an individual viewing area have doors, curtains or portal partitions, unless such individual viewing areas containing booths, stalls or partitioned portions have at least one side open to the manager's station and visible to such manager's station. Each individual viewing area shall be constructed so as to allow twelve inches of open space between the bottom of the stall or partition and the floor. Such open space shall remain unobstructed at all times. 
(Ord. 851 § 5, 1996.)  
19.04.410 - Junk or salvage yards. 
"Junk or salvage yards" means any premises used for keeping or storage of junk, including but not limited to iron and scrap metal, paper, rags, glass, wood, or similar materials or the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles, trucks or machinery or the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from dismantling or wrecking operations on said premises or elsewhere; or the baling of cardboard boxes, paper and paper cartons. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(80).)  
19.04.415 - Kennel. 
"Kennel" means any lot or premises on which four or more dogs or cats, four months of age or older, are kept, boarded or trained with or without special buildings or runways. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(81).)  
19.04.420 - Kitchen. 
"Kitchen" means any space within a building designed and intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(82).)  
19.04.425 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1069, § 4, adopted Jan. 11, 2012, repealed § 19.04.425, which pertained to labor camp housing and derived from prior Code § 9300.5(83); Ord. 347, § 1 (part), adopted 1976.  
19.04.430 - Landscaping. 
"Landscaping" means the planting and maintenance of a combination of trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, flowers or lawn. The combination or design may include natural features such as rocks and stone. Structural features include, but are not limited to, fountains, reflecting pools, art work, screen walls, fences and benches. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(84).)  
19.04.431 - Landscaping, residential. 
"Landscaping, residential," includes any combination of trees, shrubs, vines, groundcover, plants, succulents, flowers, cacti and/or lawn which shall cover front and side yard areas which are visible from a public street excluding driveway and walkways. The combination or design may include structural features or natural features such as rock and stone. Structural features include, but are not limited to, fountains, reflective ponds, screen walls, fences and benches. Rock or stone groundcover may be used in combination with plant materials located in the front yard area or in the side yard area visible from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 829 § 3 (part), 1995.)  
19.04.432 - Landscaping, residential irrigation system. 
"Landscaping, residential irrigation system," means a manual system consisting of a hose bib and hose sufficient to cover the landscaping area or an inground sprinkler system without a clock or timer, or an automatic irrigation system which operates a series of sprinklers and emitters designed to provide permanent, adequate irrigation coverage for required landscaping. Each such irrigation system shall be designed and used in compliance with the city's water waste ordinance. 
(Ord. 829 § 3 (part), 1995.)  
19.04.435 - Laundry, self-service. 
"Self-service laundry" means any establishment for laundering which uses automatic washers and dryers or extractors where there is no pickup or delivery service and no steam or hand laundry of any type. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(85).)  
19.04.440 - Livestock feeding yards. 
"Livestock feeding yards" means any area on which livestock are kept for fattening or dairy purposes and are fed by any method other than grazing. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(86).)  
19.04.442 - Live/work unit. 
A live/work unit is an integrated residence and working space, occupied and utilized by a single household in a structure, either single-family or multi-family, that has been designed or structurally modified to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work activity. 
(Ord. 1013 § 4 (part), 2007.)  
19.04.445 - Loading space. 
"Loading space" means an off-street space or berth clear of the driving lane on the same lot or parcel of land with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings for designated temporary parking of commercial vehicles while unloading merchandise or material. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(88).)  
19.04.450 - Lodginghouse. 
"Lodginghouse" means any establishment where for compensation and for definite periods by the week or greater term room and board is provided guests and others for five or more persons but wherein meals are not furnished to guests or to occasional transient customers. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(87).)  
19.04.455 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zone in which it is located. It shall have frontage on an improved public street or approved private street. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(89).)  
19.04.460 - Lot area. 
"Lot area" means the total area measured in a horizontal plane included within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(90).)  
19.04.465 - Lot, corner. 
"Corner lot" means a lot or parcel of land situated at an intersection of two or more streets, which streets have an angle or intersection measured along such lot frontage of not more than one hundred and thirty-five degrees. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(91).)  
19.04.470 - Lot, corner, reversed. 
"Reversed corner lot" means a corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot or parcel of land to its rear, whether across an alley or not. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(92).)  
19.04.475 - Lot, cul-de-sac. 
"Cul-de-sac lot" means a lot fronting on, or with more than one-half of its lot frontage on the turnaround end of a cul-de-sac street. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(93).)  
19.04.480 - Lot depth. 
"Lot depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(94).)  
19.04.485 - Lot, flag. 
"Flag lot" means a lot or parcel of land where the major portion of the lot area is removed from the street with access provided by a narrow portion of the lot twenty feet in width connecting to the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(95).)  
19.04.490 - Lot, interior. 
"Interior lot" means a lot or parcel of land, other than a corner lot, with only one frontage on a street. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(96).)  
19.04.495 - Lot, key. 
"Key lot" means any lot where the side lot line abuts the rear lot line of one or more other lots, and not separated by an alley. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(97).)  
19.04.500 - Lot line, front. 
"Front lot line" means the line separating an interior lot from a street or a line separating the narrower portion of the lot from the street for a corner lot. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(98).)  
19.04.505 - Lot line, rear. 
"Rear lot line" means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, the rear lot line means a line not less than ten feet in length within the lot which is parallel to the front lot line, or parallel to the cord of a curbed front lot line, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(99).)  
19.04.510 - Lot line, side. 
"Side lot line" means any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(100).)  
19.04.515 - Lot, through. 
"Through lot" means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(101).)  
19.04.520 - Lot, width. 
"Lot, width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot line measure at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines, and at the lot front line. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(102).)  
19.04.523 - Manage. 
"Manage" means to direct administer, or control the use of any project, business, or use. 
(Ord. 763 § 5 (part), 1992.)  
19.04.525 - Manufacturing. 
"Manufacturing" means the making of goods or products by hand or by machinery. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(103).)  
19.04.527 - Martial arts studio. 
Martial arts studio means a facility where martial arts, including judo, karate and similar programs are practiced through instruction and training. A martial arts studio includes a training floor area and may also include related office areas and changing rooms. 
(Ord. 888 § 1, 1997.)  
19.04.530 - Mechanical and electrical equipment, at ground level. 
"Mechanical and electrical equipment, at ground level" means an installation on the surface of the ground which through its operation, such as air conditioning, electrical equipment, but not limited thereto, which provides service or convenience to a building or structures. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(104).)  
19.04.535 - Mechanical and electrical equipment, roof. 
"Mechanical and electrical equipment, roof" means an installation placed upon the surface of the roof of a building or structure which through its operation, such as air conditioning, electrical equipment but not limited thereto, which provides a service or convenience to that building or structure. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(105).)  
19.04.540 - Medical clinic. 
"Medical clinic" means any facility providing physical or mental health service, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, but not including in-patient or overnight accommodations. "Medical clinic" includes health center, health clinic and doctors' offices. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(106).)  
19.04.543 - Mini-mart. 
"Mini-mart" means a small retail grocery store which may be ancillary to another function. 
(Ord. 712 § 1, 1990.)  
19.04.544 - Minor. 
"Minor" when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes any natural person under the age of eighteen years. 
(Ord. 851 § 6, 1996.)  
19.04.545 - Mobilehome. 
"Mobilehome" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped for human habitation, and shall not include a recreational vehicle or commercial coach. 
(Ord. 485 § 1, 1981: Ord. 474 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(107).)  
19.04.546 - Mobilehome accessory building or structure. 
"Mobilehome accessory building or structure" means any awning, portable, demountable or permanent cabana, ramada, storage cabinet, carport, fence, windbreak or porch established for the use of the occupant of the mobilehome. 
(Ord. 474 § 2 (part), 1980.)  
19.04.547 - Mobilehome lot. 
"Mobilehome lot" means a portion of the land in a mobilehome park or mobilehome subdivision which is designated or used for the occupancy of one mobilehome. 
(Ord. 474 § 2 (part), 1980.)  
19.04.550 - Mobilehome park. 
"Mobilehome park" means any area or tract of land where two or more mobilehome lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobilehomes or modular homes used for human habitation. 
(Ord. 474 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(108).)  
19.04.552 - Mobilehome subdivision. 
"Mobilehome subdivision" means any area or tract of land where two or more lots to accommodate mobilehomes or modular homes used for human habitation are owned separately, rather than rented from the owner of a mobilehome park, and shall include a condominium, stock cooperative, planned unit development or any other form of ownership. 
(Ord. 474 § 2 (part), 1980.)  
19.04.555 - Modular home. 
"Modular home" means a dwelling partially or entirely built up of prefabricated standardized components, intended to be erected permanently on a site but capable of being disassembled, moved, and re-erected; not equipped with wheels or licensed or intended for towing on public streets and highways. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(109).)  
19.04.560 - Motel. 
"Motel" means one or more buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling units with one or more such rooms or units having a separate entrance leading directly from outside of the building or from an inner court or hallway and with automobile space provided in connection therewith. Such facilities are designed or intended to be used, rented, occupied or hired out for temporary accommodations offered primarily to automobile tourists or business representatives with the combined stays by any guest in a motel not to exceed a total of one hundred eighty days in any one-year period. This one-year period shall be calculated starting from the initial date of registration by the guest in the motel. "Motel" includes auto courts, guest bungalows, motor lodges, tourist courts and motor hotels. Utility service to motel units shall be provided through a single master meter and no individual metering of individual units shall be permitted. Guest rooms or dwelling units may include kitchen facilities. The definition of "motel" shall not include "residential hotel," as that term is defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 50519. 
(Ord. 996 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 897 § 2, 1998: Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(110).)  
19.04.565 - Motor vehicle. 
"Motor vehicle" means a self-propelled device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a street or highway, excepting a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(111).)  
19.04.570 - Net area. 
"Net area" means an area of land exclusive of all public streets or alleys or land dedicated or offered for street or alleys. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(112).)  
19.04.575 - Net developed area. 
"Net developed area" means that portion of a parcel of land which has been improved with a building or structure including all related appurtenances thereto exclusive of public streets or alleys on land dedicated or reserved for such uses. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(113).)  
19.04.580 - Nonconforming building. 
"Nonconforming building" means a building, or portion thereof, which was lawfully erected or altered and maintained but which because of the application of this title to it, no longer conforms to the regulations set forth in this title applicable to the zone in which such building is located. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(114).)  
19.04.585 - Nonconforming use. 
"Nonconforming use" means a use which was lawfully established and maintained but which, because of the application of this title to it, no longer conforms to the regulations of the zone in which it is located. A nonconforming building, or nonconforming portion of the building, shall be deemed to constitute a nonconforming use of the land upon which it is located. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(115).)  
19.04.587 - Nurseries, plant. 
"Plant nurseries" means a place where flowers, trees, or shrubs are grown, usually for transplanting, sale or experiment. 
(Ord. 881 § 1, 1997: Ord. 773 § 1 (part), 1993.)  
19.04.588 - Nursing homes. 
For a definition of "nursing homes," see "Rest homes," Section 19.04.675. 
(Ord. 881 § 2, 1997.)  
19.04.589 - Owner. 
"Owner" when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes all of the following: 
A.  A sole proprietor, a partnership, a corporation or other legal entity which owns and/or operates a sexually oriented business; or 
B.  Any general partner of a partnership which owns and/or operates a sexually oriented business; or 
C.  The principal officers of a corporation which owns and/or operates a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. 851 § 7, 1996.)  
19.04.590 - Parapet. 
"Parapet" means a wall at the edge of the portion of the roof of sufficient height behind which roof top equipment, where provided, would be screened from public view of those at ground level. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(116).)  
19.04.595 - Parcel of land. 
"Parcel of land" means the same as "lot." 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(117).)  
19.04.600 - Parking area, private. 
"Private parking area" means an open area, other than a street, used for parking of vehicles and restricted from general public use. Such areas shall have frontage on or access to a dedicated street or alley. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(118).)  
19.04.605 - Parking area, public. 
"Public parking area" means an area, other than a private parking area or street, used for the parking of vehicles and available for public use either free or for remuneration. Such areas shall have frontage or access to a dedicated public street or alley. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(119).)  
19.04.610 - Parking space. 
"Parking space" means a readily accessible area, not including driveways, ramps, loading or work areas, maintained exclusively for the parking of one motor vehicle. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(121).)  
19.04.615 - Park, playground, public. 
"Public park or playground" means land acquired or maintained by the city, county, state or federal government or special district for park and recreational purposes for the general public. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(120).)  
19.04.620 - Permanent watering system. 
"Permanent watering system" means a watering system constructed in a permanent manner which would utilize stationary pipes buried below the surface of the ground to transfer water to bubblers or sprinklers for irrigation purposes. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(122).)  
19.04.623 - Plan. 
"Plan" shall mean a document containing the location and dimensions of all proposed or existing buildings, parking, landscaping, setbacks, walls and fences; exterior elevations with colors and materials called out; floor plans submitted with square footage; and, exterior dimensions including public improvements adjacent to the parcel. 
(Ord. 736 § 1 (part), 1990.)  
19.04.625 - Planned development. 
"Planned development" means the planning, construction, or implementation and operation of any use or structure, or a combination of uses or structures, on a single parcel of land based on a comprehensive and complete design or plan treating the entire complex of land, structures, and uses as a single project. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(123).)  
19.04.630 - Poultry. 
"Poultry" includes chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, pigeons, and other fowl. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(124).)  
19.04.635 - Private drive, road. 
"Private drive or road" means a way or place in private ownership and use for vehicular travel by the owner and those having expressed or implied permission from the owner but not by other members of the public. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(125).)  
19.04.640 - Private school. 
"Private school" means a building used for the purpose of elementary or secondary education and having a curriculum essentially the same as ordinarily given in a public school. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(126).)  
19.04.645 - Professional office. 
"Professional office" means an office maintained and used as a place of business, conducted by persons engaged in the recognized professions, and others whose business activities consist principally of services to the persons as distinguished from the handling of commodities. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(127).)  
19.04.650 - Public utility facility. 
"Public utility facility" includes the land, buildings, fixtures of any utility providing service to the public and subject to the jurisdiction of other governmental agencies; and in addition, but not limited thereby, storage and maintenance yards, pump stations, well sites, storage tanks, generating plants, substations, telephone exchanges, and public transportation terminals such as airports, heliports, helistops, railroad bus repair shops, railroad yards and related facilities and roundhouses. "Public utility" does not include public utility transmission lines. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(128).)  
19.04.655 - Public utility transmission facilities. 
"Public utility transmission facilities" includes gas, water, electrical or telephone transmission, distribution or delivery pipes, lines or conduits, located on poles or underground, railroad tracks and appurtenances. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5 (129).)  
19.04.660 - Quarry and borrow pit. 
"Quarry and borrow pit" means any place on a parcel of land where topsoil, subsoil, sand, gravel, rock, clay or similar material is removed by excavation. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(130).)  
19.04.663 - Reception window. 
A reception window is the area within the direct line between the satellite antenna and those orbiting satellites carrying desired programming. 
(Ord. 634 § 1, 1987.)  
19.04.665 - Recreational vehicle. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a self-propelled or towed vehicle, privately owned, licensed or unlicensed for street use, such as a travel trailer, tent trailer, dune buggy, or motorhome, but not including aircraft, boats, and motorcycles. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(131).)  
19.04.666 - Recycling facility. 
"Recycling facility" means a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials, excluding petroleum, hazardous materials and automobile dismantling. 
(Ord. 640 § 1 (part), 1987.)  
19.04.667 - Recycling facility—Intermediate. 
"Recycling facility—Intermediate" means: 
A.  A fixed (not including vehicles) collection facility not to exceed five hundred square feet for the collection of newspapers, glass, plastic, aluminum and bi-metal containers; 
B.  A mobile recycling unit as defined by Government Code Section 66787.6(b). 
(Ord. 640 § 1 (part), 1987.)  
19.04.668 - Recycling facility—Large. 
"Recycling facility—Large" means: 
A.  A fixed complex, which may include a transfer or processing station, set up for the collection and processing of mixed municipal solid waste and recyclable materials including paper products, glass, plastic, aluminum, bi-metal containers, ferrous and nonferrous metals, wood, organic waste, and green waste but excluding hazardous materials. Processing means the reduction, recovery, conversion, or recycling of solid waste and the preparation of material for shipment, by such means as bailing, briquetting, compacting, composting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding and cleaning; 
B.  A mobile recycling unit as defined by Government Code Section 66787.6(b). 
(Ord. 777 § 1, 1993; Ord. 640 § 1 (part), 1987.)  
19.04.669 - Recycling facility—Small. 
"Recycling facility—Small" means: 
A.  A fixed (not including vehicles) collection facility not to exceed fifty square feet for the collection of newspapers, glass, plastic, aluminum and bimetal containers; 
B.  A mobile recycling unit as defined by Government Code Section 66787.6(b). 
(Ord. 640 § 1 (part), 1987.)  
19.04.670 - Reportable quantities. 
"Reportable quantities" are quantities of hazardous materials or hazardous waste which must be reported to any local, state, or federal agency in accordance with local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. 763 § 5 (part), 1992.)  
19.04.671 - Regular and substantial portion of the business. 
"Regular and substantial portion of the business" when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes when applied to a sexually oriented business, a sexually oriented business where one or more of the following conditions exist: 
A.  The area(s) devoted to the display of sexually oriented materials equals or exceeds twenty-five percent of the total display area of the commercial establishment; or 
B.  The commercial establishment presents any type of live entertainment which is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified anatomical parts, or performers, models or employees appearing in public nude or dressed only in lingerie on any four or more separate days within any thirty day period; or 
C.  At least twenty-five percent of the gross receipts of the commercial establishment are derived from the sale, trade, rental, display or presentation of services, materials, or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(Ord. 851 § 8, 1996: Ord. 763 § 6, 1992; Ord. 247 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(132).)  
19.04.673 - Restaurant in line. 
"Restaurant in line" means a restaurant in a building which contains four or more uses located in a commercial retail center where similar landscape, architectural features, common accessways and/or reciprocal parking are provided. 
(Ord. 833 § 1, 1995.)  
19.04.674 - Restaurants. 
The "restaurants" use category consists of establishments primarily engaged in the preparation and sale of food which accounts for fifty-one percent or more of the business sales and may include ancillary sale of alcoholic beverages (forty-nine percent or less of total sales). 
(Ord. 871 § 2, 1997.)  
19.04.675 - Rest homes. 
"Rest homes" means premises used for the housing of, and caring for, the ambulatory, aged or infirm, and which premises require license from the state or the county, provided there shall be only incidental convalescent care not including a physician residing on the premises, providing there is no surgery or other similar activity which is customarily provided in sanitariums or hospitals. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(133).)  
19.04.680 - Retail store. 
"Retail store" means a business selling goods, wares or merchandise directly to the ultimate customer. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(135).)  
19.04.685 - Retaining wall. 
"Retaining wall" means a wall provided for the purpose of restraining the movement of earth abutting the wall over eighteen inches in height. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(134).)  
19.04.690 - Room. 
"Room" means an unsubdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit, excluding bathrooms, kitchens, closets, hallways and service porches. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(136).)  
19.04.695 - Rooming unit. 
"Rooming unit" means any room, or group of rooms, forming a single habitable unit used for living and sleeping, but which does not contain cooking or eating facilities. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(137).)  
19.04.700 - Sanitarium. 
"Sanitarium" means the same as "hospital" 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(138).)  
19.04.703 - Satellite dish antenna. 
"Satellite dish antenna" means an antenna in the shape of a shallow dish, and appurtenant equipment, for reception of communications (television and otherwise) from orbiting satellites or ground transmitters. This definition includes satellite dish antennas of all sizes, including those satellite dish antennas less than one meter in diameter. 
(Ord. 858 § 1, 1996: Ord. 593 § 2, 1985: Ord. 590 § 2, 1985.)  
19.04.705 - Schools, public. 
"Public schools" means an institution of learning that offers instruction in several branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by the Educational Code of the state. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(139).)  
19.04.706 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1139, § 4, adopted April 26, 2017, repealed § 19.04.706, which pertained to second dwelling unit and derived from Ord. 963 § 3, 2003: Ord. 962 § 3, 2003; Ord. No. 1140, § 4, 4-12-2017.  
19.04.707 - Senior care. 
For a definition of "senior care," see "Rest homes," Section 19.04.675. 
(Ord. 881 § 3, 1997.)  
19.04.710 - Service station. 
"Service station" (sometimes referred to as "automobile service station") means and includes the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel and repairs for motor vehicles including indoor facilities for lubrication, battery and brake service, tire repair, minor adjustment and repair. Service station does not include painting, body work, steam cleaning and major repairs. Service station also does not include mini-marts and/or the retail sale of beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverage except as permitted under a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 712 § 2, 1990: Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(140).)  
19.04.715 - Setback line, front yard. 
"Front yard setback line" means a line which defines the depth of the required front yard parallel with the street line or the line established by the general plan or setback ordinance and is removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the front yard in the zone. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(141).)  
19.04.716 - Sexually oriented. 
A.  Sexually Oriented Arcade. "Sexually oriented arcade" when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes a commercial establishment, where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, CD ROMs, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
B.  Sexually Oriented Bookstore. "Sexually oriented bookstore" when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes a commercial establishment which has as a regular and substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, the sale, rental or viewing, for any form of consideration, of any sexually oriented material. 
C.  Sexually Oriented Businesses. "Sexually oriented businesses" when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes any commercial business establishment which as a regular and substantial portion of its business operates or is operated as a sexually oriented bookstore, sexually oriented video store, sexually oriented theater, sexually oriented motion picture theater, sexually oriented cabaret, sexually oriented arcade, or any other business or concern which as a regular and substantial portion of its business offers to its patrons materials, merchandise, services or entertainment, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Sexually oriented businesses also includes any commercial establishment which as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides or allows performers, models, or employees to appear in any public place nude or dressed only in lingerie. 
D.  Sexually Oriented Cabaret. "Sexually oriented cabaret" when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes a nightclub, restaurant or similar business establishment which as a regular and substantial portion of the business includes: 
1.  Live performances, which performances are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
2.  Presentation of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, CD ROMs or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
E.  Sexually Oriented Materials. "Sexually oriented materials" when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes any of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter; photographs, films, sculptures, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, CD ROM's or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Sexually oriented materials also includes sexual cremes, ointments or other stimulants; marital aids, dildos or vibrators having a shape similar to a penis. 
F.  Sexually Oriented Motion Picture Theater. "Sexually oriented motion picture theater" when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, CD ROM's, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which regularly a substantial portion of the business in terms of total presentation time, is devoted to the showing of such materials which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
G.  Sexually Oriented Theater. "Sexually oriented theater" when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, as a regular portion of the business provides live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
H.  Sexually Oriented Video Store. "Sexually oriented video store" when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes a commercial establishment which has as a regular and substantial portion of its business, the sale, rental or viewing, for any form of consideration, of any sexually oriented material. 
(Ord. 851 § 10, 1996.)  
19.04.720 - Setback line, rear yard or side yard. 
"Rear yard or side yard setback line" means the line which defines the width or depth of the required rear or side yard. Such setback line shall be parallel with the property line removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the yard in the zone. Where the side or rear yard abuts a street, the distance shall be measured as set forth in the setback line of the front yard. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(142).)  
19.04.723 - Single-room occupancy facility. 
"Single-room occupancy facility" means a facility with six or more dwelling units where each unit has a minimum floor area of 300 square feet and a maximum floor area of 450 square feet. These dwelling units must have kitchen and bathroom facilities, and must be offered on a monthly basis or longer. 
(Ord. No. 1111, § 3, 11-11-2015)  
19.04.725 - Site plan. 
"Site plan" means a plan prepared to scale and dimensioned, showing all of the uses proposed for a specific property; all applicable property development standards of this title; physical features of the site; and any additional information which may be necessary to clearly define the intended use or character of the property. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(143).)  
19.04.726 - Siting. 
"Siting" means the physical placement and suitability of a location proposed for a facility. 
(Ord. 763 § 5 (part), 1992.)  
19.04.727 - Specified anatomical areas. 
"Specified anatomical areas" when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes any of the following: 
A.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
B.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ord. 851 § 11, 1996.)  
19.04.728 - Specified sexual activities. 
"Specified sexual activities" when used in conjunction with a sexually oriented business, means and includes any of the following: 
A.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or a female breast; 
B.  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
C.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
D.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subsections A through C of this section. 
E.  Striptease, or the removal of clothing, or the wearing of transparent or diaphanous clothing, including models who are nude or who are dressed only in lingerie to the point where specified anatomical areas are exposed. 
(Ord. 851 § 12, 1996.)  
19.04.730 - Stable, commercial or public. 
"Commercial or public stable" means a stable for horses, mules or ponies, which are let, hired, used or boarded on a commercial basis and for compensation. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(144).)  
19.04.735 - Stable, private. 
"Private stable" means a detached accessory building for the keeping of horses, mules or ponies owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(145).)  
19.04.737 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Urgency Ord. No. 1108, § 3B, adopted March 11, 2015 and Ord. No. 1109, § 3B, adopted March 25, 2015, repealed § 19.04.737, which pertained to stealth mounting and derived from Ord. 911 § 1, 1999.  
19.04.740 - Story. 
"Story" means a space in a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, then the space between such floor and the ceiling or roof above. Story includes all such space with less than fifty percent below grade. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(146).)  
19.04.745 - Street. 
"Street" means a public thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded or condemned for use as such or approved private thoroughfare or right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, including avenues, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road or any other thoroughfare, except as excluded in this title. "Street" includes all major and secondary highways, traffic collector streets and local streets. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(147).)  
19.04.750 - Street centerline. 
"Street centerline" means the centerline of a street or right-of-way as established by official surveys. If two or more centerlines appear on an official survey, or in the absence of an official survey, the centerline shall be determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(151).)  
19.04.755 - Street line. 
"Street" line" means the boundary line between the street right-of-way and the abutting property. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(150).)  
19.04.760 - Street, local. 
"Local street" means any street dedicated as such, serving as the principal means of access to property, which street is not shown as a freeway, major or secondary highway or traffic collector on the general plan of the city. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(148).)  
19.04.765 - Street, side. 
"Side street" means that street bounding a corner or reverse corner lot and which extends in the same general direction as the line determining the depth of the lot. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(149).)  
19.04.770 - Structural alterations. 
"Structural alterations" mean any change in the supporting members of a building or structure such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, floor or roof joists, girders or rafters, or changes in the exterior dimensions of the building. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(153).)  
19.04.775 - Structure. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected on the ground, or requires location on the ground, or is attached to something having a location on or in the ground, but not including fences or walls used as fences six feet or less in height. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(152).)  
19.04.780 - Structure, temporary. 
"Temporary structure" means a structure which is readily movable and used, or intended to be used, for a limited period. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(154).)  
19.04.781 - Supportive housing. 
"Supportive housing" has the meaning set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 50675.14. Supportive housing will be permitted, conditionally permitted or prohibited in the same manner as other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone under this code and applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 1077, § 2A., 6-12-2013)  
19.04.782 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Urgency Ord. No. 1108, § 3C, adopted March 11, 2015 and Ord. No. 1109, § 3C, adopted March 25, 2015, repealed § 19.04.782, which pertained to wireless telecommunications and derived from Ord. 911 § 2, 1999.  
19.04.783 - Tasting area. 
"Tasting area" means a use, indoors or outdoors, ancillary to a brewery, winery, or distillery at which only the alcoholic beverages produced on-site are offered for consumption or sale. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 3(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
19.04.785 - Trailer. 
"Trailer" means a vehicle without motive power, designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to be used for human habitation or for carrying persons and property, and includes a trailer coach. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(155).)  
19.04.790 - Trailer park. 
"Trailer park" means the same as "mobilehome park." 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(156).)  
19.04.795 - Trailer sales. 
"Trailer sales" mean any area set aside for the sale, leasing or rental and display of trailers and mobilehomes. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(157).)  
19.04.796 - Transitional housing. 
"Transitional housing" has the meaning set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 50675.2. Transitional housing will be permitted, conditionally permitted or prohibited in the same manner as other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone under this code and applicable state law. 
(Ord. 977 § 3, 2005.) 
(Ord. No. 1077, § 2B., 6-12-2013)  
19.04.798 - Treatment. 
"Treatment" means any method, technique, or process which changes or is designed to change the physical, chemical, or biological character or composition of any hazardous material or hazardous waste or any material contained therein, or which removes or reduces its harmful properties or characteristics. 
(Ord. 763 § 5 (part), 1992.)  
19.04.800 - Trucking yard and terminal. 
A "trucking yard and terminal" includes motor freight transportation facilities and consists of firms, the primary function of which includes storage of vehicles or the assemblage and distribution of materials in truck load lots in connection with over-the-road hauls and may include incidental or accessory warehousing, repair and service facilities. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(158).)  
19.04.805 - Use. 
"Use" means the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or building is, or may be, occupied or maintained. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(159).)  
19.04.810 - Veterinarian establishment. 
"Veterinarian establishment" means an establishment in which veterinarian services, clippings, bathing and other services are rendered to dogs, cats and other small animals and domestic pets, excluding boarding of animals. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(160).)  
19.04.815 - Warehouse. 
"Warehouse" means a building where goods or wares are held in storage before distribution to retailers. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(161).)  
19.04.817 - Waste. 
"Waste" means any discarded material as defined in Health and Safety Code, Section 25124, as the same may be amended or reenacted from time to time. 
(Ord. 763 § 5 (part), 1992.)  
19.04.819 - Wild bird. 
"Wild bird" means hawks, falcons, emus, and other birds which typically live in a wild, not a domesticated, environment regardless of whether such animals may have been subjected to taming or training intended to enable them to live in a domestic, agricultural, or ranching environment. "Wild bird" does not include domestic or livestock animals. 
(Ord. 767 § 1 (part), 1992.)  
19.04.820 - Yard. 
"Yard" means an open space other than a court or a lot or parcel of land, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward; provided, however, that fences, walls, low terraces, decks and other customary yard accessories and furniture may be permitted, subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(162).)  
19.04.822 - Yard, front area. 
"Front yard area" means the space between the front lot line or future street line to the front of the structure extending to the side property lines. 
(Ord. 784 § 1, 1993.)  
19.04.825 - Yard, front. 
"Front yard" means a space between the front yard setback line and the front lot line or the future street line and extending the full width of the lot. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(163).)  
19.04.830 - Yard, rear. 
"Rear yard" means a space between the rear yard setback line and the rear lot line extending the full width of the lot. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(164).)  
19.04.835 - Yard, side. 
"Side yard" means a space extending from the front yard, or from the front lot line where no front yard is required by this title, to the rear lot line between the side lot line and the side yard setback line. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(165).)  
19.04.837 - Youth animal project. 
"Youth animal project" means the raising of no larger than a medium size farm animal such as a goat or sheep for a limited time as part of a recognized youth organization. No pigs, calves, or ponies are permitted as youth animal projects. 
(Ord. 767 § 1 (part), 1992.)  
19.04.840 - Zone. 
"Zone" means an area of land shown on the official zoning map or described in the ordinance within which uniform regulations for the uses and development of land as set forth in this title shall apply. "Zone," "district," and "zone district," means the same. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(166).)  
19.04.845 - Zone, change of. 
"Change of zone" means the legislative act of removing one or more parcels from one zone and placing them in another zone on the official zoning map of the city. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(167).)  
19.04.850 - Zone map. 
"Zone map" means the official zoning map of the city which is a part of the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(168).)  
19.04.855 - Zoning ordinance or ordinances. 
"Zoning ordinance or ordinances" means the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 347 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9300.5(169).)  
Chapter 19.06 - ZONES AND SUBZONES—ZONING MAPS—BOUNDARIES 
 
19.06.010 - Establishment and designation of use zones and subzones. 
In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of lands and buildings; to regulate and restrict the height and size of buildings; to regulated the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings; and to regulate the density of population, the following classes of use zones and subzones are established: 
A.  Use zones. 
A-E 	Agricultural Exclusive Zone 
R-E 	Rural Exclusive Zone 
R-1 	One-Family Residential Zone 
RPD 	Residential Planned Development Zone 
MHPD 	Mobile Home Park Development Zone 
R-C 	Recreation Commercial Zone 
P-O 	Professional Office Zone 
C-N 	Commercial Neighborhood Zone 
CPD 	Commercial Planned Development Zone 
L-M 	Limited Manufacturing Zone 
M-1 	Light Manufacturing Zone 
M-2 	Heavy Manufacturing Zone 
O-S 	Open Space Zone 
 
B.  Subzones of R Zones. Subzones of each of the R zones may be established. The requirements for the parent R zone shall apply to the respective subzones except as to the minimum lot area required per family and as to the minimum lot width. The minimum lot area per family and lot width in each subzone shall be fixed by the use of suffix numbers on the zoning map applicable to the area. The required lot width in any zone shall be determined in accordance with the required lot area for the zone and the applicable width herein specified. In order to increase or decrease the minimum lot size for any zoned land, the zoning symbol or designation of the subzone shall be the same as for the parent zone except that a suffix shall be added indicating the required minimum lot area per family in square feet and the minimum lot width. For purposes of establishing subzones, an acre contains 43,560 square feet. The suffixes for subzones and their meanings are as follows: 
Suffix 	Minimum Lot Area 
Required (in square feet) 	Minimum 
Lot Width 
Required 
(in feet) 
6 	6,000 	60 
8 	8,000 	75 
9 	9,000 	75 
10 	10,000 	80 
13 	13,000 	90 
20 	20,000 	100 
30 	30,000 	125 
1 acre 	43,560 	150 
2 acre 	87,120 	150 
3 acres or more 	Area equivalent to the number of acres and fraction thereof multiplied by 43,560 	150 
 
The following are some examples of a subzone: 
1.  The subzone of the R-1 zone which requires a minimum lot area per family of eight thousand square feet and a minimum lot width of seventy-five feet shall be R-1-8. 
2.  The subzone of the R-E zone which requires a minimum lot area per family of five acres and a minimum lot width of one hundred fifty feet shall be R-A-5 Ac. 
C.  Additional subzones. Additional subzones may be established for the R-1-8, R-1-9, R-1-10, R-E, R-1-13, R-E-13, R-1-20, R-1-30, R-E-30, R-1-1-Ac., R-E-1 Ac., R-1-2 Ac., R-E-2 Ac., by adding the suffix "Av." to any of said zones. Land classified in any of the Av. subzones may contain lots of a minimum lot area as prescribed in the following table, provided that the average lot area of all the lots so zoned shall not be less than the square footage required by that subzone and provided further that in computing the average, lots which exceed one and one-half times the square feet of the subzone shall be considered for the proposed averaging by the planning commission or city council only if the following findings are made with regard to each such lot: 
1.  That the lot contains land area which is usable in that it does not contain excessive grade and would complement the overall project; 
2.  That the lot can be adequately served by public facilities; 
3.  That the lot can be maintained to prevent flooding and erosion and to insure the welfare of the adjoining property. 
The minimum and average lot areas allowed for each subzone classification shall be as follows: 
Subzone 
Classification 	Minimum Lot Area Allowed 
(in square feet) 	Average Lot Area (in square feet) 
8,000 Av. 	7,000 	8,000 
9,000 Av. 	7,000 	9,000 
10,000 Av. 	7,000 	10,000 
13,000 Av. 	8,000 	13,000 
20,000 Av. 	13,000 	20,000 
30,000 Av. 	20,000 	30,000 
1-acre Av. 	30,000 	1 acre 
2-acre Av. 	1 acre 	2 acre 
 
The minimum lot width for any lot within an average subzone established under this provision shall be as provided in this section. 
Lot Area Square Feet 	Minimum Width 
7,000 to 7,999 	70' 
8,000 to 8,999 	75' 
9,000 to 9,999 	75' 
10,000 to 12,999 	80' 
13,000 to 19,999 	90' 
20,000 to 29,999 	100' 
30,000 to 43,559 	125' 
43,560 and over 	150' 
 
The planning commission or city council, when design requirements or topographical conditions make it desirable, may modify the minimum lot widths as follows: 
1.  The minimum lot frontage on a cul-de-sac or knuckle lot may be reduced to not less than forty feet. 
2.  The minimum lot frontage for a lot which fronts on a curved street of not more than five hundred-foot radius may be reduced by not more than ten percent. 
3.  The minimum lot frontage providing access to not more than one flag lot may be reduced to not less than twenty feet. Consideration shall be given to the length of the access in proportion to the width. 
4.  The minimum lot frontage provided for in this section for lots in excess of 43,559 square feet may be increased so that the frontage of the lot shall bear reasonable relationship to the depth of the lot and provide adequate exposure and access. 
D.  Subzones for the RPD Zone. Subzones for the RPD zone may be established. The requirements for the RPD zone shall apply to the respective RPD subzones except that the suffix for the RPD designation shall be the maximum number of dwelling units per acre followed by the letter "U." The subzones for the RPD zone may be any number between RPD-1U and RPD-30U. RPD without a suffix subzone number shall allow a maximum of thirty dwelling units per acre. 
The following are some examples of a subzone: 
1.  The subzone of the R-E-20 which requires a minimum average lot area of twenty thousand square feet shall be R-E-20 Av.; 
2.  The RPD residential planned development zone which permits a maximum of twenty dwelling units per acre shall be RPD-20U; 
3.  The RPD residential planned development zone which permits a maximum of eight dwelling units per acre shall be RPD-8U. 
(Ord. 425 § 1, 1979: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9300.)  
19.06.020 - Establishment of zones. 
A.  The provisions of this title shall apply to and govern the use or maintenance or keeping of any land or other property in the city. 
B.  The city may be divided by the city council into parts, and each such part may be subdivided into units, for purposes of imposing or establishing zones and subzones on land and property. Such parts or units may be zoned and rezoned whenever the city council finds that public convenience, the general welfare or good zoning practice justifies such action. The geographical boundaries of each part or unit shall be shown on a map, hereafter referred to as a zoning map. A zoning map shall set forth the zone and subzone classifications applicable to the land and property contained in the zoning map. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9301.)  
19.06.030 - Elimination and reclassification of zones. 
The following zone classifications existing prior to the effective date of this title are eliminated and repealed, and on said date any land or property subject to such zone classifications is reclassified to the zone classification: 
Existing 	New Classification 
1. R-A Rural Agricultural Zone 	1. R-E Rural Exclusive Zone 
2. R-B Residential Beach Zone 	2. Deleted 
3. R-O Single-Family Estate Zone 	3. Deleted 
4. R-2 Two-Family Residential Zone 	4. RPD Residential Planned Development Zone 
5. R-3 Multiple-Family Residential Zone 	5. RPD Residential Planned Development Zone 
6. C-H Commercial Highway Zone 	6. CPD Commercial Planned Development Zone 
7. C-1 Neighborhood Commercial Zone 	7. CPD Commercial Planned Development Zone 
8. C-2 General Commercial Zone 	8. CPD Commercial Planned Development Zone 
9. MPD Manufacturing Planned Development Zone 	9. M-1 Light Manufacturing Zone 
10. HPD Harbor Planned Development Zone 	10. Deleted 
 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9301.1.)  
19.06.040 - Adoption of zoning maps and zone boundaries—Zoning map. 
The location boundaries of the various zones are established and adopted and are shown delineated and designated on the official zoning map of the city of Camarillo, Ventura County, State of California. Said map, together with all notions, references, boundaries and other information thereon, is attached hereto and made a part hereof and is hereby adopted. The official zoning map shall be kept in the office of the planning department and should be kept current. The revised updated official zoning map, or a replica thereof, shall be presented to the city clerk. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9301.2(A).)  
19.06.050 - Adoption of zoning maps and zone boundaries—Zone boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone as shown on the zoning map, the following shall apply: 
A.  Where indicated, zone boundaries are approximately street, alley or lot lines, such lines are determined to be the boundaries of the zone. 
Otherwise, the boundaries shall be determined by the dimensions shown on the official zoning map. In the absence of the dimension, the boundaries shall be determined by use of the scale shown on the map based on the judgment of the planning director which may be appealed or referred to the planning commission. 
B.  In the event that a vacated street, alley, right-of-way or easement was the boundary between two zones, the new zone boundary shall be at the new property line and the vacated portion of the street, alley, right-of-way or easement shall take the zone of the property abutting same and the new zone boundary shall be at the new property line. 
C.  A street, alley, railroad right-of-way, water course, drainage channel or body of water included on the zoning map shall, unless otherwise indicated, be included within the zone of the adjoining property on either side thereof. Where such street, alley, railroad or railroad right-of-way, water course, drainage channel or body of water serves as a boundary between two or more different zones, a line midway between such street, alley, railroad right-of-way, water course, drainage channel or body of water extending in the general direction of the long dimension thereof, shall be considered the boundary between zones. 
D.  If after the adoption of the above rules, uncertainty exists as to any zone boundary, the commission shall upon letter of request interpret the map and determine the boundary, and said determination shall be final and made a permanent public record. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9301.2(B).)  
19.06.060 - Prezoning of unincorporated territory. 
Unincorporated territory may be prezoned by the city for the purpose of determining the zoning that will apply to such property in the event of subsequent annexation to the city. Such prezoning shall be accomplished by the same method as provided for by this title for zoning within the city. Such zoning shall become effective at the same time that the annexation becomes effective. In lieu of prezoning procedures, an interim ordinance may be adopted by the city council as prescribed by law for the purpose of classifying such territory so annexed, after which the planning commission shall recommend to the city council the adoption of the zoning classification for such territory in the manner prescribed in this title. 
(Ord. 4023 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9301.3.)  
19.06.070 - Zoning determination upon annexation. 
In the event the city council does not determine or adopt a zoning classification for the territory to be annexed, a zoning classification for the territory shall be classified in the R-E-1 acre zone. Such classification shall be temporary and the planning commission shall recommend to the city council a final zoning plan for the annexed territory. Within one year of the annexation, if no hearing is held, the zoning shall become permanent. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9301.4.)  
Chapter 19.08 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
19.08.010 - Zoning application of provisions. 
A.  No building, or structure, or lot hereafter shall be used or occupied, and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the zone in which it is located, and then only after securing all permits and licenses required by law and ordinance. 
B.  No building or structure hereafter shall be erected or altered to exceed the height; to accommodate or house a greater number of families or persons; to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, or side yards than is specified herein for the zone in which such building or structure is located, except as provided. 
C.  No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9301.5.)  
19.08.020 - Building under construction. 
Any building for which a permit has been issued under provisions of earlier ordinances of the city which are in conflict with this title, and by which substantial construction has been performed by integration of materials on the site before the effective date of Ordinance 403, may nevertheless be continued and completed in accordance with plans and specifications upon which the permit was issued. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9301.6.)  
19.08.030 - Lawful existing lots and buildings. 
A.  Where a lot has a width, depth or area less than that required under the property development standards of this title for the zone of which it is a part and was held under separate ownership or was legally of record at the time Ordinance 403 became effective, such lot may be occupied by the uses permitted in the zone subject to the lot area per dwelling unit and yard requirements and such other regulations as apply uniformly to all lots in such zone. 
B.  Uses and building. The existing use or uses of all buildings improved or premises not in conformity with the standards or requirements of the zone in which they are located, and which uses are lawfully existing, may continue as nonconforming uses as hereinafter defined and subject to Chapter 19.66 regulating such nonconforming uses. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9301.7.)  
19.08.040 - Previous violations. 
A.  Any use or uses of buildings, improvements or premises existing in violation of any ordinance or law of the city upon the effective date of this title shall not be deemed to have acquired the status of a nonconforming use by reason of the adoption of this chapter or any of the provisions hereof to the extent that such use or uses of buildings, improvements or premises were a violation of any ordinance or law of the city, the same shall be deemed to be a continued violation thereof. 
B.  Any variance or permit of any kind and any nonconforming use existing pursuant to any repealed zone classification may continue under the applicable new zone classification but shall not in any manner be extended or enlarged in time or rights. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9301.8.)  
19.08.050 - Application to city. 
The regulations contained in this title shall not apply to owned or leased property when actually in use by the city. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9301.9.)  
19.08.060 - Amusement machines. 
A.  Amusement machines as defined in Section 19.04.062 shall be permitted as an accessory use in the R-C, C-N, CPD, L-M, M-1 and M-2 zones subject to the following regulations: 
1.  If any wall of the premises where an amusement machine is located is in common with a commercial, office or residential use, such wall shall have a sound transmission class rating of 54 unless the planning and community development department makes a specific finding that the use adjoining the wall would not be adversely affected by noise from the arcade. 
2.  At least one responsible adult shall be in attendance at all times that the premises where an amusement device is located is open and shall provide adequate management and control over the activities at the premises. 
B.  No owner, operator, manager or employee of the premises where an amusement machine is located shall violate or cause to be violated any of the provisions set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 537 § 8, 1982.)  
II. - ZONES  
Chapter 19.10 - A-E AGRICULTURAL EXCLUSIVE ZONE 
 
19.10.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The A-E agricultural exclusive zone is intended for the promotion and preservation of agricultural activities on lands capable of procuring and supporting such activities and excluding those activities which, by their development and association, would have detrimental effects upon the use of such areas designated for agricultural purposes. 
(Ord. 260 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9401.)  
19.10.020 - Uses permitted. 
The permitted uses are farming in all of its branches and including the cultivation and tillage of soil, production, growing and harvesting of any agricultural or horticultural commodity; and any practice, performance by a farmer or on a farm as an incident to or in conjunction with such farming operation; including preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market, or to carrier for transportation to market. No building, structure or land may be used and no building or structure may hereinafter be used except in accordance with the following provisions, set forth in this chapter. The following uses are illustrative of the types of permitted uses and are not exclusive: 
A.  Trees for fruit, nuts or fiber; 
B.  Bushes or vines for berries or grapes; 
C.  Field vegetable or truck or row crops; 
D.  Orchards, vineyards and bushes for fruits or nuts; 
E.  Forest land and timber; 
F.  Drying of crops: hay, straw and seed; 
G.  Storage and wholesaling of crops; 
H.  Animal breeding, pasturing and ranching; 
I.  The growing and harvesting of flowers, ornamentals and turf; 
J.  Apiary; for the purpose of this title, apiary includes one or more hives or boxes occupied by bees (hives or boxes include colonies) and may not be interpreted to include honey houses, extraction houses; 
K.  Poultry raising of up to five hundred birds; 
L.  Any operation, performance in a permanently fixed structure or establishment on the farm or on a moving packing plant on the farm for the purpose of preparing agricultural, horticultural, egg, poultry, meat, or rabbit or dairy products for market which such operations are done on the premises owned or operated by the same person who produced the products referred to herein and includes all operations incidental thereto; 
M.  Park, playground or community center (owned or operated by a governmental agency or a nonprofit farm community organization, or a farm owner for the use of the owner's employees); 
N.  Private nonvehicular daytime recreational activities for hiking, riding, fishing and hunting, which do not require structures or improvements such as, but not limited to, fireplaces, paving or swimming pools; 
O.  A mobile home used as a temporary dwelling during construction or alteration of the existing residence on the property where inhabitants would be permitted; in which case, such temporary construction may not exceed a time period of six months with the director's approval; 
P.  Residence of the owner or owners, or lessees or lessor, of the land upon which the use is conducted; 
Q.  Day care, small and large family. Large family day cares must also comply with Section 19.44.050(8) and the following: 
1.  There must be a minimum separation of three hundred feet between properties upon which a large day care use is located; provided, that this regulation only applies to a large family day care use that is commenced on or after March 22, 1993; 
2.  Vehicles picking up and dropping off children may not block existing drives nor block circulation in the public street; 
3.  Outdoor activities must be controlled to maintain the noise level for a residential zone and must be primarily limited to an area in the rear yard or rear and side yards; 
4.  Parking must be provided in accordance with Section 19.44.050(8). 
R.  Farmworker housing; 
S.  Cottage food operations as set forth in Chapter 19.74. 
(Ord. 773 § 3, 1993; Ord. 512 § 1, 1982; Ord. 260 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9401.1.) 
(Ord. No. 1069, § 5, 1-11-2012; Ord. No. 1079, § 4(Exh. B), 9-25-2013)  
19.10.030 - Uses permitted by conditional use permit. 
The following additional uses may be permitted subject to the approval of a conditional use permit as provided for in Section 8163.3 of the zoning ordinance: 
1.  Nurseries, plants, retail; 
2.  Feed lots; 
3.  Dairies; 
4.  Production of eggs, and hatcheries involving more than five hundred laying birds; 
5.  Fur farms; 
6.  Electrical distribution substations; 
7.  Natural resources, development of, including necessary structures and appurtenances. Development of water resources shall be limited to the following. 
a.  The drilling and operation of water wells on lots which are principally used for agriculture and are forty acres or larger. The water produced shall be used only for the lot on which the well is located, 
b.  The drilling and operation of water wells and distribution of water therefrom by any mutual water company to the persons and properties which it serves; 
8.  Soil amendment activities to incorporate certain oil field waste into the soil; 
9.  Residence in excess of those permitted in Section 19.10.010; 
10.  [Reserved.] 
11.  Private nonvehicular daytime recreational activities for hiking, riding, fishing, and hunting which such uses require structures or improvements such as, but not limited to, fireplaces, paving or swimming pools; 
12.  Automated radio, television transmitter relay signal distribution facilities and associated equipment; 
13.  Temporary agricultural stands in accordance with Chapter 19.62; 
14.  Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas greater than one meter and roof-mounted satellite dish antennas which project above the ridgeline of the roof and ground-mounted satellite dish antennas greater than one meter in size located in the required side yard or at heights greater than fifteen feet. 
(Ord. 858 § 2, 1996; Ord. 773 § 4, 1993; Ord. 593 § 3, 1985; Ord. 590 § 3, 1985; Ord. 512 § 10 (part), 1982; Ord. 444 § 1 1979; Ord. 260 § 1 (part), 1974; prior code § 9401.2.) 
(Ord. No. 1069, § 6, 1-11-2012)  
19.10.040 - Development standards. 
The development standards set forth in Sections 19.10.050 through 19.10.100 shall apply to all developments within the A-E agricultural exclusive zone and no building or structure hereinafter shall be erected which does not provide these standards. 
(Ord. 260- § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9401.3 (part).)  
19.10.045 - Agricultural performance standards. 
All uses within the A-E zone shall operate in accordance with the provisions of the performance standards contained in Chapter 19.54 as it pertains to the management of hazardous materials and hazardous waste. 
(Ord. 763 § 7, 1992.)  
19.10.050 - Lot area. 
The minimum acreage for any A-E zone shall be ten acres. A parcel cannot be divided into parcels of less than ten acres. In the event that a greater required lot area is designated for a particular area in the A-E zone, it shall be indicated by the number expressing the required acres for the lot following the zone symbol, such as A-E (40 acres) and such property shall be hereafter so classified. The planning commission and/or city council can implement this change in accordance with the procedures in Chapter 19.70 of the Camarillo Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 260 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9401.3(a).)  
19.10.060 - Lot dimensions. 
All lots hereinafter created shall comply with the minimum standards set forth in Sections 19.10.070 through 19.10.100 and lots not held under separate ownership or of record shall not be reduced below the ten-acre minimum lot area and the standards set forth in Sections 19.10.070 through 19.10.100. 
(Ord. 260 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9401.3(b).)  
19.10.070 - Setbacks. 
A.  Front Yard. The setback for any building used for human habitation shall be fifty feet from the front property line or the ultimate right-of-way line from the adjoining street, whichever is greater. 
B.  Side Yard. Each dwelling or structure or accessory structure used for human habitation shall be required to provide a side yard of not less than fifty feet of usable area which shall be maintained in accordance with provisions set forth in this title. 
C.  Rear Yard. Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than fifty feet of usable area which shall be maintained in accordance with provisions set forth in this title. 
(Ord. 260 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9401.3(c).)  
19.10.080 - Placement of buildings and structures. 
A.  A building or structure shall not occupy any portion of the required yard except as specifically set forth in this title. 
B.  The minimum distance between buildings used for human habitation and agricultural purposes shall not be less than fifty feet. 
C.  Structures for the keeping of animals shall comply with all provisions of the law. All hives, pens, coops, corrals or other structures for the housing of beast, fowl or animal shall be located not less than one hundred fifty feet or more from the front property line: or ultimate right-of-way, watercourse or not less than one hundred feet from any interior property line. 
D.  No portion of any building or accessory building or structure shall project into the front yard area except for architectural features and other items listed in Sections 19.36.050 through 19.36.150. 
E.  A ground-mounted satellite dish antenna may extend into a rear yard; provided, that such antenna is not more than fifteen feet in height, and not less than three feet from any side or rear property line. A satellite dish antenna may also be mounted on a pole attached to the eave to the rear of the residence and shall not exceed fifteen feet in height. A satellite dish antenna less than one meter may also be eave mounted to the rear or side of a residence provided no part of such antenna may project above the ridgeline of the roof or be closer than three feet to any property line. In addition, a satellite dish antenna less than one meter in size may be roof-mounted, provided that no part of the dish may project above the ridgeline of the roof nor shall any portion of the dish be less than three feet to any property line boundary. Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas which project above the ridgeline and ground-mounted satellite dish antennas located in a side yard, or at heights greater than fifteen feet, may be permitted upon the granting of a conditional use permit. All satellite dish antennas shall incorporate a flat black, grey, earth-tone, or background color which blends with adjacent structures and land features, in addition to being of a corrosive resistant material. The antenna shall be erected in a secure, wind resistant manner, and shall conform to applicable city building code regulations. 
(Ord. 858 § 3, 1996; Ord. 593 § 4, 1985: Ord. 590 § 4, 1985; Ord. 260 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9401.3(d).)  
19.10.090 - Off-street parking. 
A.  There shall be a minimum of two covered parking spaces provided in a garage for each dwelling used for human habitation. Covered spaces shall be a minimum of twenty feet by twenty feet of interior parking area. The parking for any temporary housing approved under the conditional use permit shall be determined upon review by the planning commission. 
B.  Minimum width for access drives shall be twenty feet. 
C.  Covered parking spaces shall be paved with a portland cement concrete or other approved noncombustible, nonabsorbent surface. 
D.  Additional uses permitted under a conditional use permit shall be subject to the parking standards contained in Section 19.44.010. 
(Ord. 260 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9401.3(e).)  
19.10.100 - Walls and fences. 
A.  No wall or fence shall exceed a height of forty-two inches in the front yard area immediately adjacent to the residential structure, nor exceed a height of six feet in any other given yard or create a visual obstruction that would involve health, safety or general welfare. 
B.  No screening, hedge or fence shall be permitted in the front yard in excess of forty-two inches nor at an intersection which would create a visual obstruction that would create a public hazard and establish an unsafe condition. 
(Ord. 260 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9401.3(f).)  
19.10.110 - Farmworker housing. 
A.  Permitted Size. Farmworker housing may consist of no more than thirty-six beds in a group quarters, or twelve units or spaces designed for use by a single family or household. 
B.  Off-street Parking. Two off-street parking spaces must be provided for each single family unit and one parking space must be provided for each three beds in the group quarters such as the barracks and bunkhouses. The parking must be have approved access and paving in accordance with Chapter 19.44. 
C.  HCD Permit. The owner must obtain a permit with the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD), pursuant to the Employee Housing Act and the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, division 1, Chapter 1, sections 800 through 900 to operate the farmworker housing. 
D.  Occupancy Review. The property owner must complete and submit to the director of community development a farmworker housing verification form no later than thirty days after receiving a permit to operate from HCD, and annually thereafter, to ensure compliance with state and local regulations on farmworker housing. The verification form must include information regarding the housing type, number of dwelling units or beds, number of occupants, occupants' employment information, and proof that a permit to operate from HCD has been obtained and maintained. 
E.  Farmworker Occupancy. The property must be occupied by farmworkers and their families. A declaration of this restriction in a form approved by the city will be recorded by the city and be binding on all future owners. Beginning one year after the issuance of the building permit and annually thereafter, the owner must file an annual report to the department listing the occupants of the farmworker housing and their place of work in order to ensure compliance with this requirement. For the purposes of this section "farmworker" means that the majority of the family income comes from farm work. 
(Ord. No. 1069, § 7, 1-11-2012)  
Chapter 19.12 - R-E RURAL EXCLUSIVE ZONE 
 
19.12.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The R-E (rural exclusive) zone is intended to promote and preserve large lot subdivisions which are capable of producing and supporting certain ancillary agricultural uses and the keeping of certain domestic animals for personal purposes. The development standards are intended to ensure orderly development and compatibility between the uses permitted in this zone. 
(Ord. 736 § 2, 1990: Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.)  
19.12.020 - Uses permitted. 
In the R-E zone, the following uses only are permitted: 
A.  Agricultural uses. Land within the R-E zone may be used for the growing of agricultural crops and uses ancillary thereto but no poultry or animals may be raised or kept on the lot or parcel except as otherwise permitted by this title and in accordance with the standards set forth herein; 
B.  One-family dwelling of a permanent character placed in a permanent location; 
C.  [Reserved]; 
D.  Day care, small family and large family. Large family day cares must also comply with Section 19.44.050(8) and the following: 
1.  There must be a minimum separation of three hundred feet between properties upon which a large day care use is located; provided, that this regulation only applies to a large family day care use that is commenced after March 22, 1993; 
2.  Vehicles picking up and dropping off children may not block existing drives nor block circulation in the public street; 
3.  Outdoor activities must be controlled to maintain the noise level for a residential zone and must be primarily limited to a fenced area in the rear yard or rear and side yards; 
4.  Parking must be provided in accordance with Section 19.44.050(8). 
E.  Elementary, junior high and high schools offering a full curriculum as required by state law but excluding boarding schools with private colleges being permitted under a conditional use permit; 
F.  Farm animals and fowl subject to the limitations of conditions set forth in Section 19.12.170; 
G.  Boarding and care of horses including accommodations and living quarters for groom and caretakers located within the same building when the parcel of land comprises ten acres or more; 
H.  Fire stations, public buildings and other facilities of federal, state, county and city agencies, excluding detention facilities; 
I.  Horticultural and floricultural of all types including nurseries, hothouses, greenhouses, orchards, flower and vegetable gardens, and accessory structures necessary for such use (excluding retail sales); 
J.  Movie sets or locations which may contain structures of a temporary nature to be used for photographic purposes in connection with the production of motion pictures and television programs; provided, however, such sets or locations may not be used as a permanent studio or for other similar types of uses; 
K.  Petroleum products storage required for agricultural uses on the premises; storage not to exceed one thousand gallons of petroleum products to be stored in a manner approved by the fire department and the community development department; 
L.  Pigeons and small birds provided that: 
1.  Such birds consist of pigeons, ornamental or song birds, three months of age or older but not including birds kept for commercial purposes or poultry; 
2.  The total number of pigeons may not exceed five pigeons for each one thousand square feet of lot area or ten ornamental or song birds for each one thousand square feet of area; 
3.  Accessory buildings or structures incidental to such permitted uses may not be located closer than ten feet from any property line nor twenty-five feet from any residential dwelling used for human habitation other than the residence on the same lot; 
4.  Such pigeons and birds must be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and may not cause or tend to cause detrimental or injurious conditions to the public health, safety, or general welfare of any human being or animals; 
M.  Public parks, playgrounds and athletic fields; 
N.  Temporary subdivision office; temporary subdivision office for the limited purpose of conducting sale of lots in the subdivision tract. Such use will be subject to approval by the director and any conditions deemed necessary to insure compatibility with the area in which it is proposed to be placed; 
O.  Temporary storage in any building project during construction and sixty days thereafter property in such project may be used for storage of materials, excluding batch plants, used in the construction of the individual buildings in the project and for the contractor's temporary office; 
P.  Accessory buildings and structures auxiliary to the principal permitted uses; 
Q.  Special events as set forth in Chapter 19.63; 
R.  Home occupations as set forth in Chapter 19.65; 
S.  Second dwelling units in accordance with Section 19.12.145; 
T.  Cottage food operations as set forth in Chapter 19.74. 
(Ord. 963 §§ 2, 4, 2003; Ord. 962 §§ 2, 4, 2003; Ord. 773 § 5, 1993; Ord. 713 § 2, 1990; Ord. 628 § 2, 1987; Ord. 512 § 2, 1982; Ord. 459 § 1, 1980; Ord. 444 § 2, 1979; Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.1.) 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 6, 10-8-2008; Ord. No. 1069, § 8, 1-11-2012; Ord. No. 1079, § 4(Exh. B), 9-25-2013)  
19.12.030 - Uses requiring conditional use permits. 
The following uses may be permitted in the R-E zone if a conditional use permit is obtained in the manner provided in this section and such use conforms to every term and condition of the permit. A permit for any of these uses may be granted by the planning commission if the applicant produces sufficient evidence that the use will not be injurious nor detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or to the property in the vicinity of the property on which the use will be situated or that said effects can be modified to insure compatibility through conditions of approval: 
A.  Animals, fowl not otherwise permitted in this zone excluding livestock feeding pens; 
B.  Boardinghouses and rest homes; 
C.  Cemeteries, crematoriums and mausoleums; 
D.  Churches; 
E.  Commercial stables and riding academies; 
F.  Community and publicly owned recreational centers, clubhouses and similarly used buildings and structures open to the public; 
G.  Day care facilities for more children than allowed; 
H.  [Reserved.] 
I.  Animals allowed by this chapter in excess of the number authorized by this chapter; and/or reduction of minimum setback and area requirements for animals authorized by this chapter. However, nothing herein shall authorize the keeping of animals for commercial purposes; 
J.  Golf courses, tennis clubs, swim clubs, including clubhouse and accessory restaurant, pro shop, either publicly or privately owned but not including miniature golf courses; 
K.  Public utility buildings and structures; 
L.  Schools, colleges and boarding schools and similar establishments for education and training facilities and housing for the accommodating of faculty, students, trainees and other persons associated with such establishments when located on the same parcel or continuous parcels of land upon which a school or establishment is located; 
M.  Natural resources, development of, including necessary structures and appurtenances. Development of water resources shall be limited to the following: 
1.  The drilling and operation of water wells on lots which are principally used for agriculture and are forty acres or larger. The water produced shall be used only for the lot on which the well is located. 
2.  The drilling and operation of water wells and distribution of water therefrom by any mutual water company to the persons and properties which it serves; 
N.  Mobilehome parks and mobilehome subdivisions, in accordance with Chapter 19.18 and state law; 
O.  Temporary agricultural stands in accordance with Chapter 19.62; 
P.  Parking lots, as accessory uses, within one hundred fifty feet of the building, lot, parcel or site they are intended to serve. Publicly owned parking lots shall be excluded from the conditional use requirement; 
R.  Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas greater than one meter and roof-mounted satellite dish antennas which project above the ridgeline of the roof and ground-mounted satellite dish antennas greater than one meter in size located in the required side yard or at heights greater than fifteen feet; 
S.  Buildings containing a height greater than thirty-five feet with a maximum height of seventy-five feet. This provision shall not apply to single-family residences; 
T.  Guest bungalows in conjunction with a private golf course for the use of guests of members of the country club; 
U.  Restaurant within a publicly owned building. 
V.  Agricultural plant nurseries, retail in the RE-40 AC Zone, in accordance with the criteria in Chapter 19.62. 
W.  Agricultural wineries in the RE-40 AC Zone, in accordance with the criteria in Chapter 19.62. 
X.  Bed and breakfast inns in the RE-40 AC Zone, in accordance with the criteria in Chapter 19.62. 
(Ord. 1012 § 3, 2007; Ord. 996 § 1, 2006; Ord. 963 § 2, 2003; Ord. 962 § 2, 2003; Ord. 858 § 4, 1996; Ord. 773 § 6, 1993; Ord. 767 § 3, 1992; Ord. 634 § 2, 1987; Ord. 621 § 1, 1986; Ord. 596 § 2, 1985; Ord. 593 § 5, 1985; Ord. 590 § 5, 1985; Ord. 560 § 2 (part), 1984; Ord. 512 § 10 (part), 1982; Ord. 482 § 1, 1980; Ord. 474 § 3, 1980; Ord. 444 § 3, 1979; Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.2.) 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 7, 10-8-2008; Ord. No. 1069, § 9, 1-11-2012)  
19.12.035 - Plan review. 
A.  No building permit or other entitlement shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure, or the commencement of any new use, or the reconstruction or modification of any building, structure or use on any lot in the RE zone, unless and until a plan therefor has been reviewed and approved as provided in this chapter in order to ensure conformance with the provisions and purpose of this chapter. 
B.  Approvals of plans shall be by the director. 
(Ord. 736 § 3, 1990.)  
19.12.040 - Property development and performance standards. 
The development standards set forth in Sections 19.12.050 through 19.12.160 shall apply to all developments within the R-E rural exclusive zone and no building or structure hereinafter shall be erected which does not provide these standards. 
(Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.3 (part).)  
19.12.050 - Lot area and parcel dimensions. 
A.  The minimum lot area for the R-E zone shall be ten thousand square feet unless a greater area is designated by the subzone suffix. 
B.  The subzone suffix for the R-E zone may designate any lot area between ten thousand square feet and any larger area. The subzone indicates the minimum lot area required and would be indicated by the number following the R-E zone symbol. Any R-E designation without a subzone suffix indicates the minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet. 
C.  Change of Designation of Subzone. 
The change of designation of subzones may only be altered or modified in accordance with the procedures set forth for zone changes. 
(Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.3(A).)  
19.12.060 - Lot dimensions. 
Each lot in the R-E zone shall contain a minimum lot area and lot dimension based upon the following table: 

Zone standards
District Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Frontage 
R-E-10 	10,000 	80 
R-E-13 	13,000 	90 
R-E-20 	20,000 	100 
R-E-30 	30,000 	125 
R-E-1 Acre 	43,500 	150 
R-E-2 Acres 	87,120 	150 
R-E-3 Acres area equivalent to the number of areas and fraction thereof multiplied by 43.560. 
 
On a cul-de-sac or knuckle, the minimum frontage shall be forty feet. 
(Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.3(B).)  
19.12.070 - Depth of lot. 
Minimum depth of lots shall be one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.3(C).)  
19.12.080 - Minimum yard requirements. 
A.  Front yard shall be not less than twenty feet from the existing or proposed right-of-way line, whichever is greater, and such yard shall be landscaped and maintained. 
B.  Side Yards. 
1.  A one-story dwelling shall provide a side yard equal to or exceeding the sum of: 
a.  Fifteen percent of the width of the lot if the lot is wider than seventy feet; or 
b.  Ten feet when the width of the lot is seventy feet or less. 
2.  Two-story dwellings shall provide a side yard equal to or greater than: 
a.  Ten feet on each side for dwellings up to twenty-five feet in height; or 
b.  Ten feet on each side plus one additional foot on each side for each foot over twenty-five feet in building height as measured to the highest building line. 
3.  Corner lots shall have a minimum side yard of fifteen feet on the street side. 
C.  Rear yards shall be not less than twenty feet in depth with a grade not to exceed three percent. 
(Ord. 621 § 2, 1986; Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.3(D).)  
19.12.090 - Off-street parking. 
Parking shall be provided as set forth in the parking regulations. Chapter 19.44. All garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet from a property line where vehicle access is provided. 
(Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.3(E).)  
19.12.100 - Fences and walls. 
A.  A fence, wall or hedge, not to exceed six feet in height, may be located or maintained along the side or rear lot lines provided such fence, wall or hedge does not extend into a required front yard or into a side yard along the street side of a reverse corner lot where access to a key lot is adjacent to the rear property line of a reverse corner lot in which case such fence or wall shall be limited to three feet in height. 
B.  No fence, wall or hedge shall exceed three feet in height in any corner cutback area described in this section. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the director of planning and community development may approve an increase in the height of a wall or fence of up to eight feet on that side of any parcel in this zone adjoining a primary arterial or eight feet on that side of any parcel in this zone adjoining a secondary arterial; provided, that the director finds that the wall and the landscaping surrounding the wall will be: 
1.  Compatible with surrounding land uses; 
2.  Consistent with the city's general plan; 
3.  In compliance with all city ordinances and policies; and 
4.  Consistent with and not detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
The director may impose conditions on approval of the increased height in order to meet these criteria, or as otherwise necessary to assure compliance with the intent and purpose of this title. 
(Ord. 594 § 2, 1985: Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.3(F).)  
19.12.110 - Building height. 
Buildings shall not exceed thirty-five feet in height with the exception of antennas or where permitted by conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 621 § 3, 1986: Ord. 596 § 3, 1985: Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.3(G).)  
19.12.120 - Utilities. 
All utilities shall be placed underground in accordance with provisions of the Camarillo Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.3(H).)  
19.12.130 - Signs. 
Signs may be erected in the R-E zone in accordance with the sign ordinance codified in Title 17. 
(Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.3(I).)  
19.12.140 - Accessory buildings. 
May project into required yards to the extent and under the conditions and limitations set forth herein and elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance. 
A.  Detached accessory buildings, including garages, shall not occupy more than forty percent of the required rear yard provided that such building or buildings are not more than fifteen feet in height. Accessory buildings placed on the rear one-third of the lot, shall not be used for human habitation, (e.g. unconditioned space). Such buildings may be built to within three feet of the interior lot line and the rear lot line and to within six feet from the main building, but on a corner lot the accessory building shall comply with the side yard setback required on the street side. 
B.  Covered Patios, Side Yard. A covered, unenclosed patio may project out from a house wall to within thirty inches of the interior side property line with the supporting poles also to within thirty inches of the side property line. 
C.  Covered Patios, Rear Yard. A covered patio, attached or unattached, which is enclosed on not more than three sides may extend into the required rear yard provided the distance between the rear property line and the nearest point of the patio is not less than ten feet. 
D.  A satellite dish antenna may extend into a rear yard; provided, that such antenna is not more than fifteen feet in height, and not less than three feet from the side or rear property line. A satellite dish antenna may also be eave-mounted on a pole attached to the eave to the rear of the residence and shall not exceed fifteen feet in height. A satellite dish antenna less than one meter may also be eave mounted to the rear or side of a residence provided no part of such antenna may project above the ridgeline of the roof or be closer than three feet to any property line. In addition, a satellite dish antenna less than one meter in size may be roof-mounted, provided that no part of the dish may project above the ridgeline of the roof nor shall any portion of the dish be less than three feet to any property line boundary. Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas which project above the ridgeline and groundmounted satellite dish antennas located in a side yard, or at heights greater than fifteen feet, may be permitted upon the granting of a conditional use permit. All satellite dish antennas shall incorporate a flat black, grey, earth-tone or background color which blends with adjacent structures and land features, in addition to being of a corrosive resistant material. The antenna shall be erected in a secure, wind resistant manner, and shall conform to applicable city building code regulations. 
E.  Antennas are subject to the following: 
1.  An antenna system, either free-standing or attached, shall be erected only in the rear yard or outside the required setback of the interior side yards. No portion of an antenna system shall extend into any area in front portion of the lot as defined by all area in front of the residence and all area which would be in front of the residence if the front of the residence were extended to each side lot line. No portion of any antenna system shall extend over any property line. Guy wires may not be anchored within the area in front of the residence, extending the full width of the lot. Guy wires may be attached to a building on the property or fence on the side or rear property line. 
2.  A setback of at least twenty percent of the height of the antenna support structure, when fully extended if retractable, is required between the property lines and any portion of the support structure for ground mounted antennas. 
3.  Antennas shall not exceed an overall height of seventy-five feet above grade when fully extended. 
4.  A ground-mounted antenna system shall be surrounded by a secured barrier contiguous to the support structure or a fence around the yard area sufficient to prevent unauthorized persons from entering the yard area where the antenna support structure is located. 
(Ord. 963 § 6, 2003; Ord. 962 § 6, 2003; Ord. 858 § 5, 1996; Ord. 730 § 2, 1990; Ord. 634 § 3, 1987; Ord. 593 § 6, 1985; Ord. 590 § 6, 1985; Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.3(J).)  
19.12.145 - Accessory dwelling units. 
Accessory dwelling units are permitted subject to the procedures and regulations in Chapter 19.56 (Accessory Dwelling Units). 
(Ord. 963 § 7, 2003: Ord. 962 § 7, 2003.) 
(Ord. No. 1119, § 3, 1-27-2016; Ord. No. 1140, § 4, 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 4, 4-26-2017)  
19.12.150 - Swimming pools. 
A.  Swimming pool equipment pits shall not be located closer than two feet to any property line nor within any public utility easement without the expressed consent of that utility company. In no case shall any access opening to the pit be closer than five feet to any property line. 
B.  Private swimming pools shall have its water perimeter not closer than five feet to any property or building line. 
(Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.3(K).)  
19.12.160 - Mechanical equipment. 
No mechanical equipment consisting of ventilation, air conditioning equipment or servicing equipment for a swimming pool shall be placed in the side yard area or front yard area of a single-family residential zone. 
(Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.3(L).)  
19.12.170 - Animals. 
The keeping of animals as permitted by this section shall conform to the following conditions and limitations: 
A.  Household pets and domestic animals for personal purpose subject to the following: 
1.  Not more than four dogs and four cats over the age of four months. Nothing herein shall authorize the breeding of dogs and cats for commercial purposes. For purposes of this section, more than one litter per year per household shall constitute commercial purposes; 
2.  Pigeons and small birds: provided that the total number of pigeons shall not exceed five for each one thousand five hundred square feet of lot area, or ten small birds for each one thousand five hundred square feet of lot area; 
3.  Medium birds: provided that the total number shall not exceed five for each one thousand five hundred square feet of lot area with a maximum of twenty per parcel; 
4.  Large birds shall not exceed four for each parcel. No peafowl are permitted; 
5.  That the number of birds authorized in Section 19.12.170 (A)(2), (3) and (4) combined shall not exceed the number authorized in Section 19.12.170(A)(2). 
B.  Farm animals are permitted according to the following minimum animal unit area standards: 
1.  Small farm animals such as chickens, ducks, or rabbits, are permitted on lots ten thousand square feet or greater in size. Up to twenty four small animals are permitted per ten thousand square feet of lot area; 
2.  Medium farm animals such as miniature potbellied pigs, goats, ponies, or sheep are permitted on lots twenty thousand square feet or greater in size. One medium farm animal is permitted per ten thousand square feet of lot area; 
3.  Large farm animals such as horses, mules, llamas, bovine, swine or donkeys are permitted on lots twenty thousand square feet or greater in size. One large farm animal is permitted per twenty thousand square feet of lot area; 
4.  Lots of twenty thousand square feet or more and less than two acres are permitted a combination of two animal units (small, medium, or large farm animals) for every twenty thousand square feet of lot area; 
5.  Lot of two acres or more are permitted farm animals (small, medium and large farm animals) based on the area standards in subsection B1 through 3 of this section. 
C.  Minimum Setback Standards. Farm animals shall not be housed, stabled, lodged, kept, maintained, pastured or confined within one hundred feet of any window or door of any dwelling or other structure used for human habitation on neighboring properties. 
D.  Youth Animal Project. A youth animal project may be allowed when a special event permit is obtained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19.63. In addition to the requirements contained in Chapter 19.63, the director of planning and community development must find as a condition of approval that the adjoining property owner(s) and the leader(s) of the recognized youth organization (e.g. 4-H, Future Farmers of America) do not object to the project and that it will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. Duration of the youth animal project shall not exceed six months and not more than one youth animal project per year per parcel. The director may impose conditions on the special event permit to assure compliance with the intent and purpose of Title 19 of the Camarillo Municipal Code. 
E.  Maintenance Standards. All areas used for the keeping of animals shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and shall not cause detrimental or injurious conditions to the public health, safety or general welfare of any human being or animal. No farm animals shall be kept within the required front yard of any lot. 
F.  Keeping of Wild Birds. Wild birds may be allowed when a special event permit is obtained in accordance with the provision of Chapter 19.63. In addition to the requirements contained in Chapter 19.63, the director of planning and community development must find that all other local, state, and federal requirements have been met and that adjoining property owner(s) do not object to keeping the wild bird(s) and that it will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare. The director may impose conditions on the special event permit to assure compliance with the intent and purpose of Title 19 of the Camarillo Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 781 § 3, 1993; Ord. 767 § 4, 1992: Ord. 320 (part), 1976: prior code § 9402.4.)  
19.12.180 - Plan review process. 
A.  The review process is necessary to ensure that development standards are complied with and that proposed buildings, structures and uses maintain the integrity of the zone and are compatible with other buildings and structures in the zone. 
B.  A plan shall be filed with the department on a form supplied by the department and contain the following information: 
1.  The use to which the property will be put; 
2.  An accurately dimensioned plot plan showing existing and proposed topography, all existing and proposed buildings and structures, off-street parking, landscaping areas, walls and fences, and all existing or proposed streets adjacent to the property; 
3.  The dimension of all yards, setbacks, parking areas, driveways, walls and fences, and square footage of all building or other structures; and 
4.  The floor plans, sections and elevations of all buildings and structures proposed with a notation of the type of material to be used, the color, and a material sample. 
C.  The applicant shall pay a filing and processing fee, in an amount set by city council resolution, when filing an application for plan approval. 
D.  The director will provide the applicant with a written decision regarding the application. The decision of the director is final unless an appeal is filed in accordance with Section 19.12.200. 
(Ord. 963 § 8, 2003: Ord. 962 § 8, 2003: Ord. 736 § 4 (part), 1990.)  
19.12.190 - Considerations. 
A.  In reviewing a plan, the director shall approve or conditionally approve the plan if he finds that the proposed plan complies or can be conditioned to comply with each of the following development standards: 
1.  That the uses proposed are in conformance with the provisions of this code; and 
2.  That the proposed colors, textures, materials and architectural design of each proposed building or structure are internally compatible, and are compatible with uses surrounding and adjacent to the subject property; and 
3.  That the plan is in conformance with conditions of any applicable specific plan and/or tract map; and 
4.  That the plan complies with point assignments established under the residential development control system provisions set out in Title 20 of this code. 
B.  The director shall deny a plan if compliance cannot be obtained with the above standards. 
C.  The decision of the director shall be final upon failure to appeal in accordance with Section 19.12.200. 
(Ord. 736 § 4 (part), 1990.)  
19.12.200 - Appeal to planning commission. 
A.  The applicant and any interested person shall have the right to appeal the decision of the director on a plan to the planning commission. An appeal shall be deemed timely and complete if it complies with all of the following: 
1.  The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the director within ten days after the giving of notice by the director of his decision; and 
2.  The appeal shall state the specific ground(s) for such appeal; and 
3.  The appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council to defray the cost of processing the appeal; and 
4.  The appeal shall be accompanied by a three-hundred-foot radius map and a listing of all properties and property owners taken from the last equalized rolls. 
B.  The director shall schedule the hearing on the appeal for the first available planning commission meeting which in no event shall be more than thirty days from the date of the appeal unless the scheduled hearing date is extended in writing by the appellant. 
C.  The director will cause mailed notice of the hearing on the appeal to be provided in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
D.  Based upon the evidence submitted, the planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, confirm the action of the director, or deny the appeal based upon the considerations set forth in Section 19.12.190. A written copy of the planning commission's decision shall be mailed by U.S. Postal Service within five working days after the adoption thereof. 
E.  The decision of the planning commission shall be final, in the absence of an appeal timely filed, appealing a decision of the planning commission to the city council. 
(Ord. 736 § 4 (part), 1990.) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(C), 5-25-2018)  
19.12.210 - Appeal to city council. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission approving, denying or conditionally approving an application for a plan shall be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed or a city council review is ordered as provided in this section. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a plan shall not be valid or effective for any purpose unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Each such appeal shall be in writing on a form provided by the director of planning and community development of the city ("director"), and shall identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates; and 
2.  Each such appeal shall be filed with the director prior to the planning commission decision to which the appeal relates becoming final, as provided in subsection A of this section; and 
3.  Each such appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by the city council; and 
4.  Each such appeal is field by or on behalf of any of the following: 
a.  The owner of any real property located within the city, or 
b.  A person who lawfully occupies or is entitled to lawfully occupy any real property which is located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are the subject of the plan, or 
c.  Any interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal shall be deemed complete nor effective for any purpose unless it complies with all of the provisions of this section. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before a planning commission decision becomes final pursuant to subsection A of this section, may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission decision relating to a plan ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings, The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review shall stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates, pending the city council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council shall conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons shall be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show the existence of the facts which warrant the granting of the plan. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk shall give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination shall be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 836 § 1, 1996: Ord. 736 § 4 (part), 1990.) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(D), 5-25-2018)  
Chapter 19.14 - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
19.14.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The single-family residential zone is intended to provide single-family homes with not more than one dwelling and customary accessory buildings upon one lot. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, any and every new building and premises or land in an R-1 zone shall be used for or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained within such R-1 zone exclusively and only in accordance with the regulations set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.)  
19.14.020 - Uses permitted. 
The following uses are permitted in single-family residential zones, subject to site-plan review: 
A.  Agricultural uses permitted subject to conditions and limitations; land within the R-1 zone may be used for growing agricultural crops and accessory structures, but no poultry or animals may be raised or kept on said lot or parcel except as are otherwise permitted by this chapter; 
B.  One-family dwelling of a permanent character placed on a permanent foundation; 
C.  Mobilehomes certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, installed on an approved foundation; 
D.  Accessory buildings and structures auxiliary to the principal permitted uses; 
E.  The keeping of household pets and domestic animals for personal purpose, subject to the following: 
1.  Not more than four dogs and four cats over the age of four months. Nothing herein authorizes the breeding of dogs and cats for commercial purposes. For purposes of this section, more than one litter per year per household constitutes "commercial purposes," 
2.  Pigeons and small birds: provided that the total number of pigeons may not exceed five for each fifteen hundred square feet of lot area, or ten small birds for each fifteen hundred square feet of lot area, 
3.  Medium birds: provided that the total number may not exceed five for each fifteen hundred square feet of lot area with a maximum of twenty per parcel, 
4.  Large birds: provided that the total number may not exceed four for each parcel; no peafowl are permitted, 
5.  That the number of birds authorized in Section 19.14.020(E)(2), (3) and (4) combined may not exceed the number authorized in Section 19.14.020(E)(2); 
F.  The keeping of the following farm animals only for personal purposes: not more than five poultry and four adult rabbits over the age of four months on any lot. Nothing herein authorizes the keeping of animals for commercial purposes. No roosters, geese, or ducks may be housed, kept, or maintained in the R-1 zone; 
G.  Youth Animal Project. A youth animal project may be allowed when a special event permit is obtained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19.63. In addition to the requirements contained in Chapter 19.63, the director must find as a condition of approval that the adjoining property owner(s) and the leader(s) of the recognized youth organization (e.g., 4-H, Future Farmers of America) do not object to the project and that it will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. Duration of the youth animal project may not exceed six months and not more than one youth animal project per year per parcel. The director may impose conditions on the special event permit to assure compliance with the intent and purpose of Title 19 of this code; 
H.  Keeping of Wild Birds. Wild birds may be allowed when a special event permit is obtained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19.63. In addition to the requirements contained in Chapter 19.63, the director must find that all other local, state, and federal requirements have been met and that adjoining property owner(s) do not object to keeping the wild bird(s) and that it will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare. The director may impose conditions on the special event permit to assure compliance with the intent and purpose of Title 19 of this code; 
I.  Day care, small family and large family. Large family day cares must also comply with Section 19.44.050(8) and the following: 
1.  There must be a minimum separation of three hundred feet between properties upon which a large day care use is located; provided, that this regulation only applies to a large family day care use that is commenced after March 22, 1993, 
2.  Vehicles picking up and dropping off children may not block existing drives nor block circulation in the public street, 
3.  Outdoor activities must be controlled to maintain the noise level for a residential zone and must be primarily limited to an area in the rear yard or rear and side yards, 
4.  Parking must be provided in accordance with Section 19.44.050(8); 
J.  Home occupations as set forth in Chapter 19.65; 
K.  Lath or greenhouses, private, and horticultural collections for noncommercial purposes; 
L.  Public parks, playgrounds and community centers owned by any governmental agency; 
M.  Uses customarily accessory or incidental to any of the permitted uses including hobby activities of a noncommercial nature; 
N.  Rented rooms in any one-family dwelling for occupancy of not more than two persons in addition to members of the family occupying such dwellings; 
O.  Temporary subdivision office; a temporary real estate sales office for the limited purpose of conducting sale of lots in the subdivision tract; such use will be subject to approval by the director and any conditions deemed necessary to insure compatibility with the area in which it is proposed to be placed; 
P.  In any building project, during construction and sixty days thereafter, property in the project may be used for the storage of materials used in the construction of the individual buildings in the project and for the contractor's temporary office; 
Q.  Special events as set forth in Chapter 19.63; 
R.  Second dwelling units in accordance with Section 19.14.135; 
S.  Cottage food operations as set forth in Chapter 19.74. 
(Ord. 963 § 5, 2003; Ord. 962 § 5, 2003; Ord. 781 § 4, 1993; Ord. 773 § 7, 1993; Ord. 767 § 5, 1992; Ord. 713 § 3, 1990; Ord. 628 § 3, 1987: Ord. 512 § 3, 1982; Ord. 492 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 444 § 4, 1979; Ord. 316 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.1.) 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 4(Exh. B), 9-25-2013)  
19.14.030 - Uses requiring conditional use permits. 
The following uses may be permitted in the R-1 zone if a conditional use permit is obtained in the manner provided in this chapter and such use conforms to every term and condition of the permit. A permit for any of these uses may be granted by the planning commission if the applicant produces sufficient evidence that the use will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or to the property in the vicinity of the property on which the use will be situated or that the effects can be modified to insure compatibility through the conditions of approval: 
A.  Animals, birds, and poultry in excess of the number permitted elsewhere in the zone for commercial or private use; 
B.  Cemeteries, columbariums, crematories and mausoleums; 
C.  Churches; 
D.  Day care facilities for more children than allowed; 
E.  Elementary, junior high and high schools, boarding, including offering a full curricula as required by state law; 
F.  Tennis clubs and swim clubs, golf courses with driving range including pro shop and restaurants but excluding miniature courses and separate driving ranges; 
G.  Governmental facilities; 
H.  Libraries and museums; 
I.  Model experimental dwellings; 
J.  Philanthropic and charitable institutions; 
K.  Public utility buildings and structures; 
L.  Rest, convalescent or nursing homes; 
M.  Temporary residence; a mobile home may be used as a temporary residence for such time as the commission may permit during the period of construction of a permanent dwelling on the same lot when the dwelling is not inhabitable, but in no case longer than six months from the date of zone clearances issued for the mobile home; 
N.  Water supply, governed by the following: 
1.  The drilling and operation of water wells on lots which are principally used for agriculture and are forty acres or larger. The water produced shall be used only for the lot on which the well is located. 
2.  The drilling and operation of water wells and distribution of water therefrom by any mutual water company to the persons and properties which it serves; 
O.  Parking lots, as accessory uses, within one hundred fifty feet of the building, lot, parcel or site they are intended to serve. Publicly owned parking lots shall be excluded from the conditional use requirement; 
P.  Temporary agricultural stands in accordance with Chapter 19.62; 
R.  Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas greater than one meter and roof-mounted satellite dish antennas which project above the ridgeline of the roof and ground-mounted satellite dish antennas greater than one meter in size located in the required side yard or at heights greater than fifteen feet; 
S.  Buildings containing a height greater than twenty-five feet with maximum height of seventy-five feet. This provision shall not apply to single-family residences; 
T.  Animals not otherwise permitted in this zone. 
(Ord. 962 § 2, 2003; Ord. 858 § 6, 1996; Ord. 773 § 8, 1993; Ord. 767 § 6, 1992; Ord. 634 § 4, 1987; Ord. 596 § 4, 1985; Ord. 593 § 7, 1985; Ord. 590 § 7, 1985; Ord. 560 § 2 (part), 1984; Ord. 512 § 10 (part), 1982; Ord. 482 § 2, 1980; Ord. 444 § 5, 1979; Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.2.)  
19.14.040 - Property development and performance standards. 
The property development and performance standards set forth in Sections 19.14.050 through 19.14.150 shall apply to all lots and premises in the R-1 zone. Site plan review and approval shall be required for original installation and any modifications and shall include review and consideration of general siting, roofing materials, exterior siding, and roof overhang, to insure consistency and compatibility with existing units within the area and the unit or units proposed and assure compliance with applicable standards. The review of applications shall be handled administratively by the director of planning and community development or his designated representative, or may be referred to the planning commission for approval if a question of compatibility exists which cannot be resolved. 
(Ord. 492 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.3 (part).)  
19.14.050 - Lot area and lot width dimensions. 
Lot area, per dwelling unit, and lot width requirements in single-family residential zones shall be as follows depending on the subzone designations: 
Zone 	Minimum Lot Area Requirements (in square feet) 	Minimum Lot Width and Frontage Requirements (in feet) 
R-1 	7,000 	70 
R-1-8 	8,000 	75 
R-1-9 	9,000 	75 
R-1-10 	10,000 	80 
R-1-13 	13,000 	90 
R-1-20 	20,000 	100 
R-1-30 	30,000 	125 
R-1-1 Acre 	43,560 	150 
R-1-2 Acres 	87,120 	150 
R-1-3 Acres 	+ area equivalent to the number of acres and fraction thereof multiplied by 43.560 	+ area equivalent to the number of acres and fraction thereof multiplied by 43.560 
 
On a cul-de-sac or knuckle the minimum frontage shall be forty feet. All corner lots shall have a minimum width of seventy-five feet. 
(Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.3(A).)  
19.14.060 - Depth of lots. 
Minimum depth of lots shall be one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.3(B).)  
19.14.070 - Minimum yard requirements. 
A.  Front yard shall be not less than twenty feet from the existing or proposed right-of-way line if such street is not dedicated to its full width according to city standards. 
B.  Side yard. 
1.  One-story dwellings shall have a minimum of five feet or more side yard. 
2.  Two-story dwellings shall have a minimum side yard of ten feet. 
3.  Corner lots shall have a minimum side yard of ten feet on the street side measured from the existing or proposed right-of-way if such is not dedicated to its full width according to city standards. 
C.  Rear yards shall be not less than twenty feet in depth with a grade not to exceed three percent except as follows: 
1.  Where the total square footage of the rear yard with a grade not greater than three percent with a minimum dimension of ten feet equals or exceeds twenty times the lot width, in which case the building setback shall be measured from the property line. 
(Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.3(C).)  
19.14.080 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the parking provisions. Chapter 19.44. All garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet from any property line where vehicle access is provided. 
(Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.3(D).)  
19.14.090 - Fences and walls. 
A.  A fence, wall or hedge, not to exceed six feet in height, may be located or maintained along the side or rear lot lines provided such fence, wall or hedge does not extend into a required front yard or into a side yard along the street of a reverse corner lot where access to a residential key lot is adjacent to the rear property line of a reverse corner lot in which case such fence or wall shall be limited to three feet in height. 
B.  No fence, wall or hedge shall exceed three feet in height in any corner cutback area described in this chapter. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, director of planning and community development may approve an increase in the height of a wall or fence of up to eight feet on that side of any parcel in this zone adjoining a primary arterial or eight feet on that side of any parcel in this zone adjoining a secondary arterial; provided, that the director finds that the wall and the landscaping surrounding the wall will be: 
1.  Compatible with surrounding land uses; 
2.  Consistent with the city's general plan; 
3.  In compliance with all city ordinances and policies; and 
4.  Consistent with and not detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
The director may impose conditions on approval of the increased height in order to meet these criteria, or as otherwise necessary to assure compliance with the intent and purpose of this title. 
(Ord. 594 § 3, 1985: Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.3(E).)  
19.14.100 - Building height. 
Building height shall not exceed twenty-five feet in height with the exception of antennas or where permitted by conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 596 § 5, 1985: Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.3(F).)  
19.14.110 - Utilities. 
All utilities shall be placed underground in accordance with the provisions of the Camarillo Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.3(G).)  
19.14.120 - Signs. 
Signs may be erected in the R-1 zone in accordance with the sign regulations, Title 17. 
(Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.3(H).)  
19.14.130 - Accessory buildings. 
Accessory buildings may project into required yards to the extent and under the conditions and limitations set forth herein and elsewhere in the zoning title: 
A.  Detached accessory buildings, including garages, shall not occupy more than forty percent of the required rear yard provided that such building or buildings are not more than fifteen feet in height. Accessory buildings placed on the rear one-third of the lot which are not used for human habitation (e.g. unconditioned space), may be built to within three feet of the interior lot line and the rear lot line and to within six feet from the main building where no fire wall is provided, or to within four feet of the main building when a fire wall is provided on one wall surface parallel to one another with there being a minimum separation of one foot between the eaves of the main building and the accessory building; however, an accessory building for a corner lot shall observe the stated side yard setbacks required for the street side. 
B.  Covered Patios, Side Yard. A covered, unenclosed patio may project out from the wall to within thirty-six inches of the interior side property line with the supporting poles also to within thirty-six inches of the interior side property line. 
C.  Covered Patios, Rear Yard. A covered patio, attached or unattached, which is enclosed on not more than three sides may extend into the required rear yard provided the distance between the rear property line and the nearest point of the patio is not less than ten feet. 
D.  A ground-mounted satellite dish antenna may extend into a rear yard; provided, that such antenna is not more than fifteen feet in height, and not less than three feet from any side or rear property line. A satellite dish antenna may also be mounted on a pole attached to the eave to the rear of the residence and shall not exceed fifteen feet in height. A satellite dish antenna less than one meter may also be eave mounted to the rear or side of a residence provided no part of such antenna may project above the ridgeline of the roof or be closer than three feet to any property line. In addition, a satellite dish antenna less than one meter in size may be roof-mounted, provided that no part of the dish may project above the ridgeline of the roof nor shall any portion of the dish be less than three feet to any property line boundary. Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas which project above the ridgeline and ground-mounted satellite dish antennas located in a side yard, or at heights greater than fifteen feet, may be permitted upon the granting of a conditional use permit. All satellite dish antennas shall incorporate a flat black, grey, earth-tone, or background color which blends with adjacent structures and land features, in addition to being of a corrosive resistant material. The antenna shall be erected in a secure, wind resistant manner, and shall conform to applicable city building code regulations. 
E.  Antennas are subject to the following: 
1.  An antenna system, either free-standing or attached, shall be erected only in the rear yard or outside the required setback of the interior side yards. No portion of an antenna system shall extend into any area in front portion of the lot as defined by all area in front of the residence and all area which would be in front of the residence if the front of the residence were extended to each side lot line. No portion of any antenna system shall extend over any property line. Guy wires may not be anchored within the area in front of the residence, extending the full width of the lot. Guy wires may be attached to a building on the property or fence on the side or rear property line. 
2.  A setback of at least twenty percent of the height of the antenna support structure, when fully extended if retractable, is required between the property lines and any portion of the support structure for ground mounted antennas. 
3.  Antenna systems shall not exceed an overall height of seventy-five feet above grade when fully extended. 
4.  A ground-mounted antenna system shall be surrounded by a secured barrier contiguous to the support structure or a fence around the yard area sufficient to prevent unauthorized persons from entering the yard area where the antenna support structure is located. 
(Ord. 963 § 9, 2003; Ord. 962 § 9, 2003; Ord. 858 § 7, 1996; Ord. 821 § 1, 1994; Ord. 730 § 3, 1990; Ord. 634 § 5, 1987; Ord. 593 § 8, 1985; Ord. 490 § 8, 1985; Ord. 547 § 1, 1983: Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.3(I).)  
19.14.135 - Accessory dwelling units. 
Accessory dwelling units are permitted subject to the procedures and regulations in Chapter 19.56 (Accessory Dwelling Units). 
(Ord. 963 § 10, 2003: Ord. 962 § 10, 2003.) 
(Ord. No. 1119, § 4, 1-27-2016; Ord. No. 1140, § 4, 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 4, 4-26-2017)  
19.14.140 - Swimming pools. 
A.  Swimming pools may be located in the side or rear yard and shall have its water perimeter no closer than three feet to any property line or building line. 
B.  Swimming pool equipment shall be located a minimum of three feet from any side or rear property line and outside any public easement unless permission is granted by the appropriate utility. Pool equipment shall be enclosed with a solid wall or fence to reduce the sound level. 
(Ord. 375 (part), 1977: Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.3(J).)  
19.14.150 - Mechanical equipment. 
No ventilation nor air conditioning mechanical equipment shall be placed in the front or side yard area. 
(Ord. 375 (part), 1977: Ord. 317 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9403.3(K).)  
19.14.160 - Plan review process. 
A.  The review process relating to a plan provided in this section is necessary to ensure that the development standards set forth in this chapter are being complied with and that the proposed buildings, structures and uses maintain the integrity of the R-1 Zone and are compatible with other buildings and structures in the R-1 Zone. 
B.  A plan shall be filed with the department on a form supplied by the department and contain the following information: 
1.  The use to which the property will be put; 
2.  An accurately dimensioned plot plan showing existing and proposed topography, all existing and proposed buildings and structures, off-street parking, landscaping areas, walls and fences, and all existing or proposed streets adjacent to the property; 
3.  The dimension of all yards, setbacks, parking areas, driveways, walls and fences, and square footage of all building or other structures; and 
4.  The floor plans, sections and elevations of all buildings and structures proposed with a notation of the type of material to be used, the color, and a material sample. 
C.  A filing and processing fee, in an amount set by city council resolution, must be paid at the time of filing an application for plan approval. 
D.  The director will provide the applicant with a written decision regarding the application. The decision of the director is final unless an appeal is filed in accordance with Section 19.14.180. 
(Ord. 963 § 11, 2003: Ord. 962 § 11, 2003.)  
19.14.170 - Considerations. 
A.  In reviewing a plan, the director shall approve or conditionally approve the plan if the director finds that the proposed plan complies or can be conditioned to comply with each of the following development standards: 
1.  That the uses proposed conform with the provisions of this code; 
2.  That the proposed colors, textures, materials and architectural design of each proposed building or structure are internally compatible, and are compatible with uses surrounding and adjacent to the subject property; 
3.  That the plan conforms with conditions of any applicable specific plan and/or tract map; 
4.  That the plan complies with point assignments established under the residential development control system provisions set out in Title 20 of this code. 
B.  The director shall deny a plan if compliance cannot be obtained with the above standards. 
C.  The decision of the director is final unless the decision is appealed pursuant to Section 19.14.180. 
(Ord. 963 § 12, 2003: Ord. 962 § 12, 2003.)  
19.14.180 - Appeal to planning commission. 
A.  The applicant and any interested person have the right to appeal the decision of the director on a plan to the planning commission. An appeal is deemed timely and complete if it complies with all of the following: 
1.  The appeal shall be written and filed with the director within ten days after the director's decision; 
2.  The appeal shall state the specific ground(s) for appeal; and 
3.  The appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by city council resolution to defray the cost of processing the appeal. 
B.  Upon receiving a valid appeal, the director shall schedule an appeal hearing for the first available planning commission meeting which in no event shall be more than thirty days from the date of the appeal unless the scheduled hearing date is extended in writing by the appellant. 
C.  The director will cause mailed notice of the hearing on the appeal to be provided in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
D.  Based upon the evidence submitted, the planning commission shall uphold the director's decision, overturn the director's decision, or modify the director's decision based upon the considerations set forth in Section 19.16.350. The applicant shall be notified of the planning commission's decision within five working days after the adoption thereof. 
E.  The planning commission's decision is final absent an appeal filed with the city council. 
(Ord. 963 § 13, 2003: Ord. 962 § 13, 2003.) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(E), 5-25-2018)  
19.14.190 - City council appeal. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission approving, denying or conditionally approving an application for a plan are final and conclusive ten calendar days after the date of the planning commission's action on the application, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed or a city council review is ordered as provided below. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as otherwise provided, an appeal from a planning commission decision shall comply with the following in order to be complete and effective: 
1.  An appeal shall be written and identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates; 
2.  An appeal shall be filed with the director within ten days of the planning commission's action; 
3.  Each such appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount determined by city council resolution; and 
4.  Each such appeal is filed by or on behalf of any of the following: the owner of any real property located within the city; a person lawfully occupying, or entitled to lawfully occupy, any real property located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are the subject of the plan; any other interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal is complete of effective for any purpose unless it complies with all of the provisions of this section. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the city council may, upon a four-fifths vote any time before a planning commission decision becomes final, issue an order to review a planning commission decision relating to a plan ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review stays the planning commission's decision being appealed, pending the city council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the city council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council may conduct a hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons may present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk must give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination is final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 963 § 14, 2003: Ord. 962 § 14, 2003.) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(F), 5-25-2018)  
Chapter 19.16 - RPD RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE 
 
19.16.010 - Intent and purpose. 
In order to provide a method whereby land may be designed and developed as a unit for residential use by taking advantage of modern site planning techniques; and, in addition, in order to produce an environment of stable, desirable character which will be in harmony with the existing or potential development of the surrounding neighborhood; and, in order to produce developments which meet standards of open space, light, air, pedestrian and vehicular circulation; the planning commission may approve a permit for four units or less per acre in accordance with established conditions of the R-1 zone. A residential planned development permit may be approved by the planning commission after a public hearing and required findings (Section 19.16.300) have been made for greater densities or for departures from the general standards for a residential development which includes an innovative approach in residential design. The planning commission in considering any development may not exceed the density authorized by the general plan. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.)  
19.16.020 - Uses permitted. 
Uses permitted in the RPD zone are as follows: 
A.  Dwellings, one-family conventional detached structure; 
B.  Day care in accordance with the following limitations: 
1.  Day care, small family and large family in a single-family detached residence in the RPD-5U (residential planned development, five units per acre) or lesser zone subject to the following standards. Units in an attached project are subject to a home occupation permit in accordance with Chapter 19.65 and the following: 
a.  Large family day cares must also comply with Section 19.44.050(8) and the following: 
i.  There must be a minimum separation of three hundred feet between properties upon which a large day care use is located; provided, that this regulation only applies to a large family day care use that is commenced after March 22, [1993], 
ii.  Vehicles picking up and dropping off children may not block existing drives nor block circulation in the public street, 
iii.  Outdoor activities must be controlled to maintain the noise level for a residential zone and must be primarily limited to an area in the rear yard or rear and side yards, 
iv.  Parking must be provided in accordance with Section 19.44.050(8); 
C.  Lath and greenhouses, private and horticulture collections for noncommercial purposes; 
D.  Temporary subdivision office; a temporary real estate subdivision sales office for a limited purpose of conducting sales only of lots in the subdivision or residential tract subject to the approval by the director; 
E.  Temporary storage; any building project during construction or sixty days thereafter, the property and the project may be used for the storage of materials used in the construction of the individual buildings in the project and for the contractor's temporary office which may be placed on the adjoining property with the approval of the property owner; 
F.  Public schools; elementary, junior high; 
G.  Keeping of household pets, domestic animals for personal purposes on a single-family detached residential lot in the RPD-5 or lesser zone must be maintained in accordance with the standards established in the R-1 zone; 
H.  Attached residential units or single-family units in the RPD-6U or greater zone may keep household pets and domestic animals for personal purpose, subject to the following: 
1.  Not more than two dogs and two cats over the age of four months or combination thereof. Nothing herein authorizes the breeding of dogs and cats for commercial purposes. For the purposes of this section, more than one litter per year per household will constitute "commercial purposes." No farm animals, miniature pot-bellied pigs, or pigeons are permitted, 
2.  Small birds. Ten small birds on parcels fifteen hundred square feet or less in area. Lots greater than fifteen hundred square feet in area may have ten small birds for each additional fifteen hundred square feet of lot area. No pigeons are allowed, 
3.  Medium birds: provided that the total number may not exceed five for each fifteen hundred square feet of lot area, 
4.  Large birds: provided that the total number may not exceed four for each parcel. No peafowl are allowed, 
5.  That the number of birds authorized in Section 19.16.020(H)(2), (3) and (4) combined may not exceed the number authorized in Section 19.16.020(H)(2), 
6.  All areas used for the keeping of animals must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and may not cause detrimental or injurious conditions to the public health, safety, or general welfare of any human being; 
I.  Agricultural uses, temporary agricultural uses and stands, subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  Growing agricultural crops and accessory structures are permitted uses, but no poultry or animals may be raised or kept except as otherwise permitted by this chapter; 
J.  Rented rooms in any single-family detached residence (RPD-5 or lesser zone) for occupancy of not more than two persons in addition to members of the family occupying such dwellings; 
K.  Special events as set forth in Chapter 19.63; 
L.  Home occupations as set forth in Chapter 19.65; 
M.  Keeping of farm animals for personal purposes on a single-family detached residential lot in the RPD-5U or lesser zone must be maintained in accordance with the standards established in the R-1 Zone; 
N.  A youth animal project may be allowed in a detached single-family dwelling in the RPD-5U or lesser zone when a special event permit is obtained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19.63. In addition to the requirements contained in Chapter 19.63, the director must find as a condition of approval that the adjoining property owner(s) and the leader(s) of the recognized youth organization do not object to the project and that it will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. Duration of the youth animal project may not exceed six months and not more than one youth animal project per year per parcel. The director may impose conditions on the special event permit to assure compliance with the intent and purpose of Title 19 of this code; 
O.  Wild birds may be allowed in a detached single-family dwelling in the RPD-5U or lesser zone when a special event permit is obtained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19.63. In addition to the requirements contained in Chapter 19.63, the director must find that all other local, state, and federal requirements have been met and that adjoining property owner(s) do not object to keeping the wild bird(s) and that it will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare. The director may impose conditions on the special event permit to assure compliance with the intent and purpose of Title 19 of this code. 
P.  Second dwelling units in the RPD-5U, or below, zone in accordance with Section 19.16.175; 
Q.  Accessory buildings and structures auxiliary to the principal permitted uses; 
R.  Cottage food operations as set forth in Chapter 19.74. 
(Ord. 963 § 15, 2003; Ord. 962 § 15, 2003; Ord. 791 § 1, 1993; Ord. 781 § 5, 1993; Ord. 773 § 9, 1993; Ord. 767 §§ 7—9, 1992; Ord. 720 § 1, 1990; Ord. 713 § 4, 1990; Ord. 628 § 4, 1987; Ord. 610 § 1, 1986; Ord. 512 § 4, 1982; Ord. 493 § 1 (part), 1981; Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.1.) 
(Ord. No. 1059, § 2, 10-13-2010; Ord. No. 1077, § 3, 6-12-2013; Ord. No. 1079, § 4(Exh. B), 9-25-2013)  
19.16.025 - Uses subject to conditional use permit. 
The following uses may be permitted in the RPD zone if a conditional use permit is obtained in the manner provided by Chapter 19.62: 
A.  Water supply, governed by the following provisions: 
1.  The drilling and operation of water wells on lots which are principally used for agriculture and are forty acres or larger. The water produced shall be used only for the lot on which the well is located, 
2.  The drilling and operation of water wells and distributions of water therefrom by any mutual water company to the persons and properties which it serves; 
B.  Parking lots, as accessory uses, within one hundred fifty feet of the building, lot, parcel or site they are intended to serve. Publicly owned parking lot shall be excluded from the conditional use requirement; 
C.  Temporary agricultural stands in accordance with Chapter 19.62; 
E.  Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas, satellite dish antennas mounted in a side yard or at heights greater than fifteen feet in the RPD-5U or lesser zones with detached residential units. No conditional use permit may be issued for a roof-mounted satellite dish unless it meets the following criteria: 
1.  The applicant must demonstrate that ground-mounting of the satellite dish antenna would result in the obstruction of the satellite antenna's reception window, and that such obstruction involves factors beyond his/her control, 
2.  The height of the proposed satellite dish antenna shall not exceed the maximum height restriction imposed upon primary uses within the zone, 
3.  The proposed satellite dish antenna must be compatible with neighboring uses and improvements and should be located away from public view as much as possible, 
4.  The application shall include certification that the proposed installation is in conformance with applicable city building code regulations. Furthermore, the application must contain written documentation of such conformance, including load distributions within the building's support structure; 
F.  Day care facilities for more children than allowed. 
G.  Single-room occupancy (SRO) facilities subject to the following additional standards: 
1.  One SRO facility per lot. 
2.  Distance requirement of 500 feet between any other SRO facility. 
3.  Minimum unit size: 300 square feet. Maximum unit size: 450 square feet for single occupancy. 
4.  Maximum occupancy of two persons per unit (with minimum size of 350 square feet for two persons) and a maximum of 450 square feet. 
5.  Must include a kitchen and a bathroom in each unit. 
6.  Must include on-site laundry facility adequate for a number of residents. 
7.  Must comply with the Community Design Element. 
8.  All requirements of the underlying RPD-30U Zone apply, including parking. 
9.  An SRO facility must be part of a multi-family residential project; the units must be dispersed throughout the project, and the total number of SRO units may not exceed 50 percent of the total number of residential units in the project. 
(Ord. 963 § 2 (part), 2003; Ord. 773 § 10, 1993; Ord. 634 § 6, 1987; Ord. 593 § 9, 1985; Ord. 590 § 9, 1985; Ord. 560 § 2 (part), 1984; Ord. 512 § 10 (part), 1982; Ord. 482 § 3, 1980; Ord. 444 § 6, 1979.) 
(Ord. No. 1111, § 5, 11-11-2015)  
19.16.030 - Uses permitted by residential planned development permit. 
Residential planned development permits may be approved by the planning commission for the following uses and developers are encouraged to include innovative approaches in residential design which may include general departures from standard design principles, still provide adequate open space, separation of units, and allow for mix of unit types. In addition, projects which provide housing to senior citizens or to persons and families of very low or lower income may qualify for a density bonus or other incentive as provided for in Chapter 19.49: 
A.  Apartments projects; 
B.  Dwellings, two-family; 
C.  Dwellings, multifamily, including but not limited to cluster, townhouse, condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative projects (which includes zero side yard residential subdivisions); 
D.  Fire stations, public buildings, temporary detached facilities and other facilities of the federal, state, county and city agencies; 
E.  Buildings containing a height greater than twenty-five feet; 
F.  Churches; 
G.  Commercial recreation centers consisting of either/or a combination of tennis, golf, swim clubs and including restaurants, pro shops open to the public or private designed as either a part of or as a separate usage in a residential area; 
H.  Philanthropic or charitable institutions; 
I.  Public utility buildings and structures; 
J.  Rest, convalescent and nursing homes; 
K.  Homes for the aged. 
(Ord. 773 § 11, 1993; Ord. 770 § 2, 1992; Ord. 654 § 2, 1988; Ord. 491 § 2, 1981; Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.2.)  
19.16.035 - Modification of projects permitted by residential planned development permit. 
Any project for which a residential planned development permit is required by this chapter shall not be changed as to physical characteristics, designated uses or form of ownership without approval by the planning commission, even though no such permit was required to be issued at the time of development. As used in this section, "change in form of ownership" means conversion of all or a portion of an apartment project to condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperatives or similar forms of ownership. Approval of any of the above changes shall be pursuant to provisions applicable to issuance of a residential planned development permit. 
(Ord. 491 § 3, 1981.)  
19.16.040 - Property development and performance standards. 
The property development and performance standards set forth in Sections 19.16.050 through 19.16.240 shall apply to all lots and uses in the RPD zone, except where modified by the RPD permit, and all development of RPD-4 or less which shall be in accordance with the R-1 zone standards. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3 (part).)  
19.16.050 - Lot area and site area. 
For all development above RPD-4, the actual lot and site area shall be determined by the planning commission under the planned development permit. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(A).)  
19.16.060 - Lot dimensions. 
All developments involving greater than RPD-4 density shall be reviewed by the commission and approved under the RPD permit. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(B).)  
19.16.070 - Unit density. 
A.  The general density in the RPD zone shall be in accordance with the subzone suffix which shall indicate the maximum number of dwelling units per acre, followed by the letter "U." The subzones for the RPD zone may be any number between RPD-1U and RPD-30U. The RPD without a suffix subzone number may be approved under a planned development permit by the planning commission up to a maximum of thirty units per acre in accordance with the general plan designation. 
The planning commission may grant an increase in the maximum residential density otherwise allowable under the provisions of this title to projects which provide housing for senior residents or families of very low or lower income as provided for in Chapter 19.49. 
B.  Change of Designation of Subzone. The change of designation of subzone may only be altered or modified in accordance with the procedures set forth for zone changes. 
(Ord. 770 § 3, 1992; Ord. 654 § 3, 1988; Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(C).)  
19.16.080 - Minimum yard requirements. 
A.  Front Yard. When a unit fronts on a public right-of-way, the minimum setback shall be no less than twenty feet from the existing or proposed right-of-way line except if approved under an RPD permit for an alternate setback which shall provide adequate separation. 
B.  Side Yard. 
1.  A one-story dwelling shall have a minimum side yard from the street side of ten feet with the interior side yard being not less than five feet unless approved under an RPD permit for an alternate setback which shall be determined to provide adequate separation. 
2.  Two-story dwellings shall have a minimum side yard of ten feet, or if included under a cluster project an alternate setback may be approved which shall be determined to provide adequate separation between units. 
C.  Rear Yards. The rear yard shall not be less than twenty feet in depth with a grade not to exceed three percent except if included in a project where common open space is provided, the minimum building separation of subsection D of this section shall be met. 
D.  Distance between buildings shall be as follows except where modified by the RPD permit: 
1.  The minimum distance between adjoining buildings developed or proposed within a cluster project when arranged front-to-front, front-to-rear or rear-to-rear shall not be less than forty feet. 
2.  The minimum distance between buildings for side to front or side to rear shall be thirty feet. 
3.  Buildings placed side-to-side shall have a minimum separation of twenty feet. 
4.  The minimum distance between the accessory building and any other building shall be ten feet unless it is an integral part of the main building. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(D).)  
19.16.090 - Building height. 
A maximum of twenty-five feet unless a greater height is approved under an RPD permit. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(E).)  
19.16.100 - Building coverage. 
A maximum building coverage for a residential planned development permit for a RPD-4 or less shall be forty percent. All developments greater than RPD-4 shall not exceed fifty percent wherein recreation buildings may be excluded from coverage measurements. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(F).)  
19.16.110 - Common usable open space. 
A.  Common usable open space includes areas planned within residential development projects which are to be used for scenic landscaping or recreational purposes by all the residents of the project. 
B.  Common usable open space does not include land occupied by streets, driveways, parking areas, service areas, or required front or street side yards; provided, however, that land occupied by recreational structures and facilities may be counted as common usable open space and in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  The minimum common usable open space required for each dwelling unit shall be as follows: 
a.  One hundred and twenty-five square feet for each efficiency unit; 
b.  Two hundred fifty square feet per bedroom for each dwelling unit having two or less bedrooms; 
c.  Five hundred square feet for each bedroom for each dwelling unit having three or more bedrooms. 
2.  At least fifty percent of the required common usable open space shall be contained in one or not more than three common areas and a rectangle described within it shall be determined by the commission as reasonable and usable. The required common usable open space may be distributed throughout the project and need not be in one large area provided that required common usable open space shall have an area six hundred twenty-five square feet and a rectangle described within it shall have a minimum dimension of not less than twenty-five feet. 
3.  All required common usable open space shall be suitably improved for its intended purpose and all lawn and landscaping areas shall be provided with a permanent watering system adequate to maintain such areas. Natural features of the site worthy of preservation as described by the planning commission may be retained in their natural state and need not be formally improved but shall be maintained to the extent that certain improvement features such as irrigation lines and additional plant materials may be added to insure the lasting retention of the natural feature being preserved. 
4.  In recognition of the fact that greater densities authorized under the terms of this chapter can be approved for housing developments it is essential that the open space provided in lieu of individual setback yards and the like be in the form of flat usable land rather than in steep unusable slopes. Therefore, depending upon the nature and concept of the project, fifty percent to one hundred percent of the required common usable open space shall be situated on slopes not to exceed five percent. The planning commission may make the determination based upon the individual application and development program. 
5.  If individual dwelling units in the development are to be sold, open space may be required on each individual lot in accordance with the planned development permit. If common area is provided, the usable open space shall remain in common ownership and remain available for all units within the project. 
(Ord. 364 § 1, (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(G).)  
19.16.120 - Private usable open space. 
Development design of private usable open space to serve individual units where no common area is provided shall have open space for each unit having no dimension less than ten feet on ground level or eight feet above ground level. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(H).)  
19.16.130 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be as set forth in the parking provisions of this title (Chapter 19.44); however, in no case shall required parking be provided in the front yard setback area, and there shall be adequate space for the parking of recreational vehicles in the side yard area or within the project as approved by the commission. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(I).)  
19.16.140 - Fences and walls. 
A.  A fence or wall not to exceed six feet in height may be required to be located and maintained along the side or rear lot lines provided such fence or wall does not extend into the required front yard or into the side yard along the street side of a reverse corner lot, in which case such fence or wall shall be limited to three feet in height. 
B.  No fence or hedge shall exceed three feet in height in any required cutoff area described in this chapter. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the director of planning and community development may approve an increase in the height of a wall or fence of up to eight feet on that side of any parcel in this zone adjoining a primary arterial or eight feet on that side of any parcel in this zone adjoining a secondary arterial; provided, that the director finds that the wall and the landscaping surrounding the wall will be: 
1.  Compatible with surrounding land uses; 
2.  Consistent with the city's general plan; 
3.  In compliance with all city ordinances and policies; and 
4.  Consistent with and not detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
The director may impose conditions on approval of the increased height in order to meet these criteria, or as otherwise necessary to assure compliance with the intent and purpose of this title. 
(Ord. 594 § 4, 1985: Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(J).)  
19.16.150 - Utilities. 
All utilities shall be placed underground in accordance with the provisions of the Camarillo Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(K).)  
19.16.160 - Signs. 
A.  Subdivision Sale Sign. 
1.  Number. Each subdivision is permitted one subdivision sale sign. 
2.  Area. A subdivision sale sign may not exceed 32 square feet in area per face. 
3.  Height. A subdivision sale sign may not exceed 12 feet in height. 
4.  Lighting. A Subdivision sale sign may not be illuminated. 
5.  Time Limits. A subdivision sale sign must be removed after it has been erected for two years or when all of the subdivision residential lots have been sold, whichever occurs first. This time limit may be extended by the Director. 
6.  Location. The subdivision sale sign must be immediately adjacent to the residential lots offered for sale. The precise location of the sign must be approved by the Director. 
B.  Subdivision Identification Sign. 
1.  Number. A subdivision identification sign is permitted at any direct entrance (not to exceed two) from a limited access road that borders the development. The sign may be either a monument sign or a wall sign. 
2.  Area. Subdivision identification signs may not exceed 25 square feet in area per face. 
3.  Height. If a monument sign is used, the height may not exceed eight feet. 
4.  Lighting. Subdivision identification signs may not be illuminated, unless the maintenance is assumed by a property owners' association as part of the recorded conditions, covenant and restrictions for the project. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(L).) 
(Ord. No. 1122, § 4, 3-23-2016)  
19.16.170 - Accessory buildings and structures. 
A.  Accessory buildings and structures placed in the RPD or lesser zones shall comply with the R-1 zone standards. 
B.  Patio Covers for Cluster Residential Unit. A covered unenclosed patio may project to within two feet of the side property line with the supporting poles also to within two feet of the side property line unless a common open space is provided in which case a zero setback may be approved. 
C.  Covered Patio, Rear Yard. A covered patio attached or unattached which is enclosed on not more than three sides may extend into the required rear yard provided the distance between the rear property line and the nearest point of the patio is not less than ten feet unless a common open space is provided in which case a zero setback may be approved. 
D.  Satellite Dish Antenna. A satellite dish antenna placed in the RPD-5U or lesser zones with detached residential units shall be in accordance with the R-1 zone standards. Attached or detached units in the RPD-6 or greater RPD zones may be permitted either a central satellite dish antenna system with an RPD permit or other satellite dish system in accordance with an RPD permit and approval from any applicable homeowners association. 
E.  An antenna system placed in the RPD-4U or RPD-5U or lesser zones with detached residential units shall be in accordance with the R-1 zone standards. 
(Ord. 963 § 16, 2003; Ord. 962 § 16, 2003; Ord. 858 § 8, 1996; Ord. 730 § 4, 1990; Ord. 593 § 10, 1985; Ord. 590 § 10, 1985; Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(M).)  
19.16.175 - Accessory dwelling units. 
Accessory dwelling units are permitted subject to the procedures and regulations in Chapter 19.56 (Accessory Dwelling Units). 
(Ord. 963 § 17, 2003: Ord. 962 § 17, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 1119, § 5, 1-27-2016; Ord. No. 1140, § 4, 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 4, 4-26-2017)  
19.16.180 - Mechanical equipment. 
No mechanical equipment consisting of ventilation, air conditioning equipment and servicing equipment for swimming pools shall be placed in the side yard or front yard area. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(O).)  
19.16.190 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping and other ground space treatment shall be provided on all areas not used for buildings, parking, roadways, pathways or recreational facilities. Existing natural landscaping elements should be retained where possible and integrated into the landscape plan. The landscaping area shall be maintained in an orderly, healthy manner or replaced. Landscaping shall be considered actual planting areas of lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs, groundcover or other plant material. Such landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  The entire required setback area shall be landscaped with the exception of vehicle accessways and other areas designated for recreational purposes. 
B.  Landscaping shall consist of a combination of trees, shrubs, groundcover with careful consideration given to the eventual size and spread, susceptibility to disease and pests, durability and adaptability to disease and pests, durability and adaptability to existing soil and climatic conditions. Fountains, ponds, sculpture and decorative screen walls as an integral part of the landscaping scheme are permitted. 
C.  Landscape Plan. A plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals thirty feet shall be submitted and approved by the planning director. 
1.  The planning director or the applicant may request the planning commission to review any landscaping plan or fence plan as provided for under Section 19.16.300, even though not required by this section, and in such event the decision of the planning commission replaces that of the planning director. 
2.  The approval provided for herein may be conditioned so as to insure compliance with the purpose and provisions of this part with the plan including the following: 
a.  The dimension and square footage of each planting area; 
b.  The total square footage and percentage of the developed site devoted to landscaping; 
c.  The identification of each plant with common and botanical name at the planting area; the number of each and their container size; 
d.  Permanent watering system including pipe sizes and type and size of all sprinkler heads as well as water requirements for the system to determine meter size; 
e.  Specification sheet indicating soil preparation maintenance program for continual maintenance of the landscaping area and any type of guarantee associated with the installation of the landscaping. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(P).)  
19.16.200 - Refuse and recycling containment. 
Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be provided in accordance with the enclosure provisions of Chapter 19.50 and the following standards: 
A.  All outdoor refuse and recycling storage areas shall be easily accessible and enclosed on all sides by a minimum six-foot high decorative brick, concrete block or masonry wall. The opening of such storage area shall be screened by a solid gate of durable wood, metal, or comparable material. 
B.  The number and general placement of the enclosures shall be contained in the RPD permit and approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 791 § 2, 1993: Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(Q).)  
19.16.210 - Lighting. 
Lighting shall be focused, directed and so arranged as to prevent glare and direct illumination on streets or adjoining property. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(R).)  
19.16.220 - Mechanical equipment. 
All mechanical equipment or electrical equipment shall be completely screened behind a permanent structure and all rooftop mechanical equipment placed behind a permanent parapet wall or be completely restricted from all view at ground level. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(S).)  
19.16.230 - Private streets. 
Private streets and/or driveways provided within the project shall be subject to the approval of the planned development permit and in accordance with the following standards: 
For private streets, the minimum street width shall be as follows: 
A.  Twenty-six feet curb-to-curb (when parking is provided off street); 
B.  Thirty-two feet curb-to-curb (parallel parking on one side); 
C.  Thirty-six feet curb-to-curb in single-family developments (parallel parking on both sides); 
D.  Forty feet curb-to-curb in multiple residential developments (parallel parking on both sides). 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(T).)  
19.16.240 - Ramping and equipment for handicapped. 
Adequate ramps and equipment to be provided to accommodate the use of the facilities by the handicapped shall include but not be limited to access ramps, restrooms, drinking fountains, etc. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.3(U).)  
19.16.250 - Planned development permit—List of property owners required. 
The applicant shall submit to the planning commission an application for a residential planned development permit together with a list of all property owners taken from the last equalized rolls within a three hundred-foot radius of the property and other such information shown on the application form. Residential projects which do not require a public hearing need not provide the ownership list of property owners. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.4 (A).)  
19.16.260 - Planned development permit—Filing—Information required. 
Applications for an RPD permit shall be filed with the planning department in the form set forth showing all property lines, computations for open space, number of units in various categories, existing and proposed building locations, elevations, parking areas, vehicular access facilities, outdoor storage areas, recreation areas, open space areas, walls, landscaped areas and planting screens, all adequately dimensioned, must be submitted to the planning commission to determine compliance with the provisions of this zone. General elevations or perspective drawings of all proposed buildings, walls and structures, and samples of colors and materials shall be included. The plot plan shall show the topography of the lot, abutting streets, highways and freeways, topographic features located within one hundred feet of all lot lines and any additional data which may be required by the commission to determine compliance with the provisions of this zone. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.4(B).)  
19.16.270 - Planned development permit—Submittal of construction sequence. 
Each development permit shall include the submittal of a construction sequence for the land covered by the permit showing the order in which particular structures will be constructed and upon approval of the sequence, the applicant shall not deviate without written approval by the planning director. At no time shall there be more than an average of the allowable units per acre constructed or under construction on the portion of the land which has been developed or is under development. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.4(C).)  
19.16.280 - Planned development permit—Meeting with development advisory committee. 
Prior to consideration of the plot plan by the planning commission, a development advisory committee meeting will be held, with notice being given to the applicant wherein the staff recommendation will be reviewed. The applicant will also receive a notice of the planning commission meeting including staff recommendation. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.4(D).)  
19.16.290 - Planned development permit—Public hearing. 
A.  When a completed application for a RPD permit, together with required data, is accepted by the planning department, a public hearing before the planning commission will be set following the development advisory committee meeting and compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
B.  Notice of the public hearing will be provided in accordance with Chapter 19.84. 
C.  At the public hearing, the planning commission will consider all aspects of the RPD permit requested as provided for under this code. In addition, the planning commission will consider the necessary findings under Section 19.16.300. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.4(E).) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(G), 5-25-2018)  
19.16.300 - Planned development permit—Planning commission consideration. 
The planning commission and/or city council in considering a request for a residential planned development permit shall consider and determine that the following can be made or that the project may be conditioned to insure consistency with the required finding prior to approval of the request: 
A.  The project will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare; 
B.  The project has been designed to be compatible with the various uses and zones within the area it is proposed to be located; 
C.  The developer has demonstrated that his project includes various amenities to meet the general intent of the ordinance by taking advantage of modern site planning techniques; 
D.  The project is necessary to make reasonable use of the property; 
E.  The permit includes conditions which in the opinion of the commission and/or city council are imposed to insure compatibility and/or to mitigate any adverse conditions involved with the use or intensity of development, both public and private; 
F.  The project will provide an environment of stable, desirable character with adequate open space, light, air, pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.4(F).)  
19.16.310 - Planned development permit—Planning commission action. 
A.  The planning commission in considering an application for a residential planned development may approve, disapprove or conditionally approve an application therefor. The planning commission decision shall be effective as described in subdivision A of Section 19.16.320. 
B.  Upon obtaining approval, the applicant has twelve months in which to initiate the construction. During the period of construction, the project must be diligently pursued. If, for some reason, the applicant is unable to proceed with construction during the twelve months following the date of approval by the commission and if an extension is not requested, then the permit shall automatically expire. If there have been no changes in the proposed plot plan or adjacent areas, the planning director may grant additional twelve-month extensions to allow for the initiation of construction. The action by the planning director in approval or denial of a time extension may be appealed to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 856 § 2, 1996: Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.4 (G).)  
19.16.320 - Planning commission decisions—Appeals—Council review. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission approving, denying or conditionally approving an application for a residential planned development permit shall be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed or a city council review is ordered as provided in this section. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a planned development permit shall not be valid or effective for any purpose unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Each such appeal shall be in writing on a form provided by the director of planning and community development of the city ("director"), and shall identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates; and 
2.  Each such appeal shall be filed with the director prior to the planning commission decision to which the appeal relates becoming final, as provided in subsection A of this section; and 
3.  Each such appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by the city council; and 
4.  Each such appeal is filed by or on behalf of any of the following: 
a.  The owner of any real property located within the city, or 
b.  A person who lawfully occupies or is entitled to lawfully occupy any real property which is located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are the subject of the planned development permit, or 
c.  Any interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal shall be deemed complete nor effective for any purpose unless it complies with all of the provisions of this section. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section to the contrary, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before a planning commission decision becomes final pursuant to subsection A of this section, may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission decision relating to a planned development permit ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review shall stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates, pending the city council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council shall conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons shall be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show the existence of the facts which warrant the granting of the planned development permit. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk shall give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination shall be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 856 § 3, 1996: Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.4(H).) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(H), 5-25-2018)  
19.16.330 - Certificates of occupancy. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for any use of land or new buildings permitted in Section 19.16.020. 
B.  The building department may issue the certificate after planning commission approval and completion of the new buildings. 
C.  A change in the use in an existing building may be approved by the planning director. 
(Ord. 364 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9404.5.)  
19.16.340 - Plan review process. 
A.  The review process relating to a plan provided in this section is necessary to ensure compliance with the development standards set forth in this chapter and that the proposed buildings, structures and uses maintain the integrity of the RPD zone and are compatible with other buildings and structures in the RPD zone. 
B.  A plan shall be filed with the department on a form supplied by the department and contain the following information: 
1.  The use to which the property will be put; 
2.  An accurately dimensioned plot plan showing existing and proposed topography, all existing and proposed buildings and structures, off-street parking, landscaping areas, walls and fences, and all existing or proposed streets adjacent to the property; 
3.  The dimension of all yards, setbacks, parking areas, driveways, walls and fences, and square footage of all building or other structures; and 
4.  The floor plans, sections and elevations of all buildings and structures proposed with a notation of the type of material to be used, the color, and a material sample. 
C.  A filing and processing fee, in an amount set by city council resolution shall be paid at the time of filing an application for plan approval. 
D.  The director will provide the applicant with a written decision regarding the application. The decision of the director is final unless an appeal is filed in accordance with Section 19.16.360. 
(Ord. 963 § 18, 2003: Ord. 962 § 18, 2003.)  
19.16.350 - Considerations. 
A.  In reviewing a plan, the director shall approve or conditionally approve the plan if the director finds that the proposed plan complies or can be conditioned to comply with each of the following development standards: 
1.  That the uses proposed are in conformance with the provisions of this code; 
2.  That the proposed colors, textures, materials and architectural design of each proposed building or structure are internally compatible, and are compatible with uses surrounding and adjacent to the subject property; 
3.  That the plan is in conformance with conditions of any applicable specific plan and/or tract map; and 
4.  That the plan complies with point assignments established under the residential development control system provisions set out in Title 20 of this code. 
B.  The director shall deny a plan if compliance cannot be obtained with the above standards. 
C.  The decision of the director is final if not appealed in accordance with Section 19.16.360. 
(Ord. 963 § 19, 2003: Ord. 962 § 19, 2003.)  
19.16.360 - Appeal to planning commission. 
A.  The applicant and any interested person have the right to appeal the decision of the director on a plan to the planning commission. An appeal is deemed timely and complete if it complies with all of the following: 
1.  The appeal shall be written and filed with the director within ten days after the director's decision; 
2.  The appeal shall state the specific ground(s) for appeal; and 
3.  The appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by city council resolution to defray the cost of processing the appeal. 
B.  Upon receiving a valid appeal, the director shall schedule an appeal hearing for the first available planning commission meeting which in no event shall be more than thirty days from the date of the appeal unless the scheduled hearing date is extended in writing by the appellant. 
C.  The director shall notify the applicant and all property owners within three hundred feet of the property in writing by U.S. Postal Service or personal service as to the time, date, and place of the hearing on the appeal. Such notice shall be provided at least ten calendar days before the hearing. The date of mailing is the date of notice. Failure to receive notice will not affect or invalidate any action or procedures taken by the city. 
D.  Based upon the evidence submitted, the planning commission shall uphold the director's decision, overturn the director's decision, or modify the director's decision based upon the considerations set fort in Section 19.16.350. The applicant shall be notified of the planning commission's decision within five working days after the adoption thereof. 
E.  The planning commission's decision is final absent an appeal filed with the city council. 
(Ord. 963 § 20, 2003: Ord. 962 § 20, 2003.)  
Chapter 19.18 - MHPD MOBILEHOME PARK DEVELOPMENT ZONE 
 
19.18.010 - Intent and purpose. 
In order to assure a minimum of congestion of persons and property, good traffic flow, appropriate private and public open space and recreation areas, and protect the public safety, health and welfare, it is necessary to set forth specific development standards and conditions under which mobilehome parks and subdivisions may be permitted. 
The design of mobilehome parks is to be guided by the standards of this chapter and it is intended to create a variety of unit siting and interesting street patterns. Mobilehomes should be placed utilizing the latest in siting techniques including variable front setbacks, various parking arrangements and unique open space to take advantage of the natural terrain and setting while affording individual privacy. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980: Ord. 274 § 1 (part), 1974.)  
19.18.020 - Uses permitted. 
In the MHPD zone, the following uses are permitted in accordance with the property development and performance standards set forth in Chapter 19.14, R-1 Zone: 
A.  Agriculture and accessory uses, but no poultry or animals may be raised or kept except as are otherwise permitted by Chapter 19.14. A dwelling may be used only as a residence for agricultural workers employed on the farm where the dwelling is located; 
B.  Dwelling, one-family conventional detached unit per parcel subject to R-1 zone setbacks; 
C.  Temporary storage: while any building project is under construction or sixty days thereafter, the property and the project may be used for the storage of materials used in the construction of the individual buildings in the project and for the contractor's temporary office which may be placed on the adjoining property with the approval of the property owner; 
D.  Public schools; 
E.  Public parks, playgrounds and community centers owned by a public agency; 
F.  Governmental facilities, including fire stations, excluding detention facilities; 
G.  Cottage food operations as set forth in Chapter 19.74. 
(Ord. 512 § 5, 1982; Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980: Ord. 274 § 1 (part), 1974.) 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 4(Exh. B), 9-25-2013)  
19.18.030 - Uses requiring conditional use permits. 
The following uses may be permitted in MHPD zone if a conditional use permit is obtained in the manner provided in Chapter 19.62 and such use conforms to every term and condition of the permit. A permit for any of these uses may be granted if the applicant produces sufficient proof that the use will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or the property in the vicinity or zone in which the use will be situated, or that such effects will be prevented with the imposition of conditions, and that the requirements of Chapter 19.62 are satisfied: 
A.  Mobilehome parks with notice pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18300.1; 
B.  Mobilehome subdivisions; 
C.  Natural resources, development of, including necessary structures and appurtenances. Development of water resources shall be limited to the following: 
1.  The drilling and operation of water wells on lots which are principally used for agriculture and are forty acres or larger. The water produced shall be used only for the lot on which the well is located, 
2.  The drilling and operation of water wells and distribution of water therefrom by any mutual water company to the persons and properties which it serves; 
D.  Churches; 
E.  Public utility buildings and structures; 
F.  Golf courses (excluding miniature), tennis clubs, swim clubs, including clubhouses and accessory restaurants; 
G.  Temporary agricultural stands in accordance with Chapter 19.62. 
(Ord. 512 § 10 (part), 1982; Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980: Ord. 274 § 1 (part), 1974.)  
19.18.040 - Mobilehome park standards. 
This chapter contains the minimum standards for location and development of mobilehome parks. These standards apply to mobilehome subdivisions, except where a contrary intent is expressed; and, where applicable, to modular homes situated within mobilehome parks and mobilehome subdivisions. They are in addition to the requirements of state law which govern mobilehomes. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980: Ord. 274 § 1 (part), 1974.)  
19.18.050 - Mobilehome park location. 
A.  Consideration shall be given to whether the proposed location of a mobilehome park will be an asset to the city, will contribute to the well-being of the community in general, will lend itself to the overall design of the general area, will comply with applicable governmental regulations and will be consistent with the general plan. 
B.  Mobilehome parks may be located adjacent to a primary street but no part of any mobilehome park shall be closer than two hundred feet to any freeway frontage road or any freeway right-of-way line. 
C.  Consideration shall be given to proximity to parks, churches, shopping facilities and other residential support facilities. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.060 - Improvement standards. 
All improvements placed in the park whether on individual sites or in common areas shall be made and provided in accordance with applicable city standards, specifications, and conditions. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.070 - Mobilehome park area and parcel dimensions. 
A mobilehome park shall have a usable area of not less than ten acres and a length and width of not less than one hundred fifty feet. The length and width requirements may be increased or modified by the planning commission in keeping with good planning practices and the natural topography of the area, as deemed appropriate and desirable. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980).  
19.18.080 - Density. 
The maximum density for a mobilehome park shall be seven units per net acre. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.090 - Mobilehome lot size. 
The minimum lot size within a mobilehome park shall be four thousand square feet (excluding private streets, guest parking, recreational areas, etc.). The average lot size within a mobilehome park shall be four thousand three hundred square feet. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.100 - Mobilehome lot depth. 
Minimum lot depth shall be eighty feet or greater, as established by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.105 - Mobilehome lot design. 
A.  Mobilehome pads shall be prepared and mobilehomes sited in one of the following ways: 
1.  By excavating and lowering the mobilehome onto the pad so that the height of the mobilehome floor is no greater than one foot above the surrounding finished grade and subsequently skirting it entirely with masonry blocks or concrete; or 
2.  By grading the pad so that at least fifty percent of the perimeter of the mobilehome abuts an earthen berm or concrete slab no more than six inches below the finished grade of floor of the mobilehome when installed and the remainder of the perimeter is skirted with masonry block or concrete. 
B.  A concrete patio area two hundred square feet minimum or porch structure shall be provided on each individual mobilehome lot adjacent to the entrance to the mobilehome. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.106 - Mobilehome lot access. 
A.  Each mobilehome lot shall have access directly to a private or public street. 
B.  A concrete walkway extending from the private or public street to the mobilehome entrance shall be provided on each mobilehome lot. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.107 - Mobilehome lot width. 
Minimum lot width shall be fifty feet or greater, as established by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.110 - Minimum yard requirements, lot standards, and unit design standards. 
A.  There shall be no more than one mobilehome per lot. 
B.  No mobilehome shall be located closer than twenty feet to a mobilehome park property line adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
C.  No mobilehome shall be located closer than fifteen feet to a mobilehome park property line other than a property line adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
D.  No mobilehome shall be located closer than twenty feet to any recreation or community building, or closer than fifteen feet to any laundry, service, or other permanent building. 
E.  The maximum lot coverage for individual mobilehome lots shall be seventy-five percent. 
F.  No mobilehome, carport, awning or covered patio may be located closer than ten feet to any front or side street. A variable front setback shall be used in park design and shall be shown on the setback site plan to be approved by the planning commission. 
G.  No mobilehome, carport, garage, awning, covered patio, cabana or accessory building shall be closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line, nor within ten feet of any other mobilehome. 
H.  All exterior metal used on the carports and porches must blend harmoniously with coach. The design shall be consistent with park design standards, color and style. Carports and patios must be coordinated with the coach. Wrought iron railings, wood posts and wood beams are acceptable. 
I.  The exterior colors of all mobilehomes shall be in earth tones (browns, beiges, dark greens and grays) and exterior materials shall be wood, masonite, stucco, masonry or aluminum siding which simulates wood, stucco or masonry. Vertical metal skirting shall not be used. Mobilehome roofs and carport and patio roofs shall be wood shingle, composition shingle or sprayed monolithic material of a brown or spanish tile color. 
J.  All mobilehomes shall have ridged roofs. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.120 - Off-street parking. 
A.  On-site parking spaces for a minimum of two cars shall be provided on each mobilehome lot. Such spaces may be in tandem (ten feet by forty feet) or side by side (twenty feet by twenty feet). They shall be surfaced with concrete. There shall be no utility equipment, posts or trash containers within this area. The use of side by side parking within garages is encouraged (twenty feet by twenty feet interior dimensions). 
B.  Off-street parking for guests shall be on the basis of one parking space for each five mobilehome lots or greater number as determined necessary by the planning commission. Such spaces shall be distributed throughout the park. They may be surfaced with concrete or asphaltic concrete. 
C.  Off-street parking on the basis of one parking space for each three hundred square feet of gross floorspace in the recreational, all purpose, laundry, or community building shall be provided. Such spaces shall be located adjacent to the facility or within a one-hundred-foot radius of the facility. 
D.  Recreation vehicle parking shall be provided on the basis of one space for five lots or greater if a need exists, as determined by the planning commission. Such parking shall be within areas paved with asphaltic concrete enclosed with six-foot high masonry or block walls with solid view obscuring gates and appropriate landscaping or other screening approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.130 - Fences and walls. 
A.  The mobilehome park shall be surrounded with a six-foot high solid block wall, fence or screening approved by the planning commission. The wall requirement may be waived or modified by the planning commission with consideration given for natural topographical features, open space, golf courses or other factors which make the wall impractical. 
B.  There shall be no fence or wall over three feet in height and no other visual obstruction within corner cutback areas of all corner lots. 
C.  The wall, fence, or screening adjacent to any public street frontage shall be decorative in nature, of a design approved by the planning commission, and shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet from the right-of-way lane. The resulting fifteen foot area shall be landscaped. 
D.  A maximum three-foot-high fence may be permitted along side and rear lot lines. 
E.  No fence or wall shall be permitted within the front yard setback. 
F.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A and D of this section, director of planning and community development may approve an increase in the height of a wall or fence of up to eight feet on that side of any parcel in this zone adjoining a primary arterial or eight feet on that side of any parcel in this zone adjoining a secondary arterial; provided, that the director finds that the wall and the landscaping surrounding the wall will be: 
1.  Compatible with surrounding land uses; 
2.  Consistent with the city's general plan; 
3.  In compliance with all city ordinances and policies; and 
4.  Consistent with and not detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
The director may impose conditions on approval of the increased height in order to meet these criteria, or as otherwise necessary to assure compliance with the intent and purpose of this title. 
(Ord. 594 § 5, 1985: Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.140 - Building height. 
All buildings shall be limited to a height of twenty-five feet. Greater heights may be permitted as part of the granting of the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.150 - Utilities. 
A.  All utilities within the mobilehome park shall be placed underground in accordance with the Underground Utilities Ordinance, Chapter 13.08. 
B.  Water and sanitary sewer utilities and their appurtenances shall be installed in conformance with the current operations and design manuals of the city and the Camarillo sanitary district. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.160 - Signs. 
A.  Signs may be erected in accordance with Title 17. 
B.  A lighted directory sign and map within the park and visible from the park entrance identifying unit locations shall be installed. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.170 - Accessory buildings. 
A.  Recreation, laundry, equipment maintenance buildings shall be located in accordance with the plot plan approved by the planning commission. 
B.  There shall be no more than two storage cabinets per lot and they shall be of the same material and color as the mobilehome or of a consistent design theme approved by the planning director. The storage cabinets shall not exceed a total of one hundred square feet and shall not be habitable. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.180 - Carports and garages. 
A.  A carport shall be at least fifty percent open on at least two sides or on one side and one end. If a storage cabinet is located at one end of the carport, this counts as fifty percent of the enclosed area. A cabinet shall not be placed so that it will obstruct doors or windows. 
B.  Garages may be attached to mobilehomes subject to meeting building, fire and state codes. Garages shall meet all setback requirements. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.190 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping treatment shall be provided on all areas not used for buildings, parking, roadways, pathways or recreational facilities. Existing natural landscaping elements should be retained where possible and integrated into the landscape plan. The landscaping area shall be maintained in a orderly, healthy manner or replaced. Landscaping shall be considered actual planting areas of lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs, groundcover or other decorative material as approved by the planning director. Landscaping on individual lots may be done and be maintained by the tenant or property owner. Landscaping shall consist of a combination of trees, shrubs, groundcover with careful consideration given to the eventual size and spread, susceptibility to disease and pests, durability and adaptability to disease, pests, existing soil and climatic conditions. Fountains, ponds, sculpture and decorative screen walls as an integral part of the landscaping scheme are permitted. Landscaping requirements are as follows: 
A.  The fifteen-foot area between public right-of-way and the perimeter mobilehome park wall shall be landscaped. 
B.  A five-foot wide landscape area shall be provided for inside the six-foot high wall adjacent to all mobilehome park property lines. 
C.  Trees shall be planted in landscape areas adjacent to exterior mobilehome park property lines so as to provide a pleasant environment through the provision of color and texture and to prevent a bleak appearance of the visual horizon of the park exterior. 
D.  As a condition of the granting of a conditional use permit, the mobilehome park owner shall file written permission for the city to enter the premises for the purpose of abating any landscape conditions which the city considers to be blighted. Any costs incurred by the city in correcting such conditions shall be charged to the mobilehome park owner, and, if the city does not receive payment therefor within ten days from the billing date, shall become a lien upon the property, subject to collection on the tax roll. 
E.  All required landscape areas shall be equipped with subsurface automatically controlled sprinkler system to insure ease of maintenance. 
F.  There shall be at least one street tree planted for each lot. 
G.  Detailed landscaping plans shall be submitted in triplicate to the planning department to be approved prior to the issuance of permits of any type. The plans shall be prepared as follows: 
1.  The plans shall be at a minimum scale of one inch equals thirty feet; 
2.  The identification of each plant with common and botanical name at the planting area; the number of each and their container size; 
3.  Permanent watering system including pipe sizes and type and size of all sprinkler heads as well as water requirements for the system; 
4.  Specification sheet indicating soil preparation, maintenance program for continual maintenance of the landscaping area and any type of guarantee associated with the installation of the landscaping. 
H.  Common areas within the boundaries of the mobilehome park surrounding the recreation facility, and other common areas, shall be landscaped and shall be maintained by the mobilehome park owner or association. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.200 - Refuse and recycling containment. 
Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be provided in accordance with the enclosure provisions of Chapter 19.50 and the following standards: 
A.  When an outdoor refuse and recycling storage area is provided, it shall be easily accessible and enclosed on all sides by a minimum six-foot high decorative brick, concrete block or masonry wall. The opening of the storage area shall be screened by a solid gate of durable wood, metal, or comparable material. 
B.  The number and general placement of the enclosures shall be as set forth in the MHPD permit and approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 791 § 3, 1993: Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.205 - Pedestrian walkways. 
There shall be a connected pedestrian walkway system within the mobilehome park providing access to the units, recreation areas, and open space. The walks shall be a minimum of four feet in width and in concrete material. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.210 - Lighting. 
A.  All private streets and walkways within the mobilehome park shall be provided with lighting standards spaced at intervals to insure adequate lighting of the park, type of standards to be approved in conjunction with the conditional use permit. 
B.  The city street lighting policy shall apply. The developer shall annex to the proper districts. The developer shall furnish to the city engineer a metes and bounds legal description and an exhibit map of the development boundaries and annexation agreement. 
C.  Lighting shall be focused, directed and so arranged as to prevent glare and direct illumination on streets or adjoining property. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.220 - Mechanical equipment. 
No air conditioning or mechanical equipment shall be placed on roofs. Equipment shall be placed to minimize noise interference with adjoining lots and shall be screened with a solid fence equal to the height of the equipment. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.230 - Streets. 
A.  Private streets shall be improved according to specifications of the city engineer. Rolled concrete curbs may be used. Streets shall be graded and constructed to provide adequate drainage facilities. The layout or design of such streets shall provide ample area for movement and turnaround of vehicles, emergency vehicles and mobilehomes. Public streets must meet city standards. 
B.  Private streets and/or driveways provided within the project shall be in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Twenty-six feet curb-to-curb (when parking is provided off street); 
2.  Thirty-two feet curb-to-curb (parallel parking on both sides); 
3.  Forty feet curb-to-curb (parallel parking on both sides). 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.240 - Ramping and equipment for handicapped. 
Adequate ramps and equipment to be provided to accommodate the use of the facilities by the handicapped shall include but not be limited to access ramps, restrooms, and drinking fountains. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.250 - Recreation facilities. 
A minimum of two hundred fifty square feet of area per mobilehome lot shall be devoted to common recreational facilities. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.260 - Clothes drying yards. 
If clothes drying yards are to be provided, they shall be completely screened from view from the exterior of the mobilehome park in a manner approved by the planning director. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.270 - Radio and television antennas. 
A central radio and television antenna system shall be provided, with underground wiring to individual lots and service building. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.280 - Commercial uses. 
A.  Home occupations and commercial uses shall not be permitted in any mobile home park. 
B.  Coin-operated devices or appurtenances to provide services to those within the mobilehome park may be provided. 
C.  Model home displays and sales offices may be used on a temporary basis during initial sales of units or lots in the park subject to posting of appropriate bonds and agreements and zone clearance approval. 
D.  A park manager's or association office may be established within a community recreation building. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 part), 1980.)  
19.18.290 - Household pets and domestic animals. 
Keeping of household pets consisting of small, medium and large birds and small caged rodents for personal purposes is permitted. Not more than two dogs and two cats over the age of four months and ten small birds, four medium birds, and two large birds, with a maximum of ten birds may be kept on any lot. Nothing herein shall authorize the breeding of dogs and cats for commercial purposes. For purposes of this section, more than one litter per year per household shall constitute commercial purposes. No farm animals, peafowl, or pigeons are permitted. 
All areas used for the keeping of animals shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and shall not cause detrimental or injurious conditions to the public health, safety, or general welfare of any human being. 
(Ord. 791 § 4, 1993: Ord. 781 § 6, 1993: Ord. 767 § 10, 1992: Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.300 - Street names and lot numbering. 
All street names and lot numbering shall be submitted for approval to the planning department. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.310 - Permits required. 
Any structure including but not limited to mobilehomes, awning, carport, garage and cabana shall require a zone clearance issued by the planning department and shall comply with the ordinances and approved site plan of the mobilehome park as well as with applicable laws. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.320 - Site plan. 
A detailed site plan or plans shall be approved in conjunction with the conditional use permit, showing landscaping, streets, walkway, common buildings, common area, recreation vehicle storage area, and lot lines and setback lines for each lot. No structure shall be located in conflict with the setbacks. Construction phasing shall also be shown. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.325 - Additions. 
All room additions, carports, patios, porches or other additions shall be shown on the site plan or typical lot plans. The design and materials shall be standardized and be a part of the park or subdivision approval. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.330 - Modification of mobilehome park standards. 
If the applicant for a mobilehome park or subdivision conditional use permit submits evidence of good cause for modification of the standards for lot frontage, lot depth, lot width and walls which are set forth in this chapter, the planning commission may grant a conditional use permit which includes such modification, so long as the modification is consistent with the intent of the zone, including but not limited to consideration of such factors as aesthetics, design, topography and other natural features, and open space, and so long as the modification does not result in violation of the standards established by state law. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.335 - Transfer of ownership. 
Application shall be made to the city prior to transferring ownership of a mobilehome park requesting an approval by the planning commission of the transfer and city approval of a new operating permit. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.340 - Mobilehome subdivision. 
A.  All requirements for mobilehome parks shall apply to mobilehome subdivisions, in addition to the requirements listed in this section including but not limited to approval and recordation of a subdivision map. 
B.  Mobilehome subdivisions shall be developed in accordance with the standards for mobilehome parks which are set forth in this chapter and in state laws. 
C.  Improvements which are not dedicated to and accepted by the city, and all common areas and facilities, may be constructed only upon full and adequate provision for their preservation and future maintenance in a manner acceptable to the city. This requirement may be satisfied by the following documents, as approved by the city attorney: a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions for the subdivision; governing instruments for the owners' association, including, where applicable, articles of incorporation or association, bylaws, a management agreement and rules. Such documents shall establish, with respect to such improvements, common areas and facilities, by what persons or entity they are to be owned and maintained, and the method of financing the same. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
19.18.360 - Conversion of mobilehome park to mobilehome subdivision. 
A.  In order to convert a mobilehome park to a mobilehome subdivision, the subdivider must secure a conditional use permit for that purpose as provided in Chapter 19.62 and planning commission approval of a site plan, as well as complying with Section 19.18.340. 
B.  Current design and improvement standards shall be satisfied when warranted and practical. But, if the standards in effect at the time of the original mobilehome park approval are found to be presently satisfied and to be adequate for the proposed subdivision, then the same shall suffice for conversion. In instances when neither of the above is found to be applicable, the planning commission may establish requirements which are consistent with the intent of this chapter. 
C.  The following shall constitute minimal conditions of conditional use permit approval: The city shall examine utility services, and those which it determines to be unsatisfactory shall be repaired. Common areas for recreation, open space, landscaping and other purposes shall be placed in a condition satisfactory to the city. The subdivider shall provide community cable television to all mobilehome lots in accordance with Title 16 of this code. 
D.  No conditional use permit shall be approved until the subdivider submits evidence of compliance with the requirements of state law regarding such conversion, including but not limited to those set forth in Civil Code Sections 798 et seq. In addition, the following conditions shall be attached to any such permit and documentation of the same shall be submitted to the planning department in order for the permit to become effective: 
1.  Tenants in the park shall be given notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of their respective lots upon the same terms and conditions that such lots will be initially offered to the general public or terms more favorable to the tenant. The right shall run for a period of not less than sixty days from the date of issuance of a subdivision public report when one is required by the Business and Professions Code, or, where no subdivision public report is required, for a period of not less then sixty days from the date of approval of a tentative tract or tentative parcel map pursuant to the Government Code, unless the tenant gives prior written notice of an intention not to exercise the right. 
2.  No increase in rents may be made from the date of mailing to tenants of the notice of conversion, so long as the intended conversion is not terminated. 
3.  Relocation assistance in the amount of one thousand dollars for each mobilehome moved out of the mobilehome park as a consequence of conversion shall be provided by the subdivider to tenants so affected. 
(Ord. 474 § 4 (part), 1980.)  
Chapter 19.20 - R-C RECREATION COMMERCIAL ZONE 
 
19.20.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The recreation commercial zone is intended to provide for outdoor recreation and agricultural uses suitable for development without significant impact to the environment of the area. The recreation commercial zone also recognizes incidental and accessory uses such as residences, commercial and public service facilities subject to review, and in some cases conditions to protect natural scenic or recreational value. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.1.)  
19.20.020 - Uses permitted. 
In the recreation commercial zone, only the following uses will be permitted subject to development standards and approval of a development plan further specified in this zone: 
1.  Agriculture, floriculture and horticulture; land within the R-C zone may be used for growing agricultural crops and uses accessory thereto, but no farm animals or fowl shall be raised or kept on any lot or parcel except as otherwise permitted in the R-C zone; 
2.  Arboretums; 
3.  Archery ranges (interior or exterior); 
4.  Bicycle rentals; 
5.  Bowling alleys; 
6.  Building materials, storage of, used in the construction of a building permitted or building project permitted during the construction and thirty days thereafter, including the contractor's temporary office; provided, that any lots or parcel of land so used shall be a part of the building project or on property adjoining the construction site; 
7.  Churches, temples or other places used exclusively for religious worship including customary incidental educational and social activities in conjunction therewith; 
8.  Dance pavilions; 
9.  Elementary, junior high, high schools and colleges offering full curricula as required by state law; 
10.  Fire stations and facilities for federal, state and county law enforcement agencies but not including jails, prisons or other places of confinement; 
11.  Fishing and casting ponds; 
12.  Golf courses and driving ranges; 
13.  Gymnasiums, including meeting rooms and office space for conducting business in connection with the operation of the gymnasium and ancillary functions; 
14.  Miniature golf course; 
15.  Museums; 
16.  Publicly owned recreation areas including structures, playgrounds and athletic fields, public parks; 
17.  Public building and structures excluding prisons and other places of confinement; 
18.  Riding and hiking trails, excluding trails for motor vehicles; 
19.  Skating rinks, indoor and outdoor; 
21.  Swimming pools or clubs; 
22.  Temporary mobile home housing for caretaker or superintendent; upon application, the planning director may authorize the housing of the superintendent or caretaker in mobile homes for a thirty-day period. 
a.  At the expiration of the aforesaid thirty-day period, the planning director may authorize the extension of such housing for an additional sixty days provided the applicant has filed for a conditional use permit during the first thirty-day period. If the conditional use permit is denied by the planning commission, the extended authorization by the planning director is rescinded. 
b.  Not more than one such authorization per applicant shall be authorized by the planning director within any twelve-month period. 
c.  The applicant may, within twenty days after filing an application, appeal the decision of the planning director to the planning commission pursuant to procedure and provisions set forth for public hearing in the zoning ordinance; 
23.  Tennis, handball, volleyball, badminton, lawn bowling or similar courts or clubs. 
24.  Other uses which in the judgment of the commission are similar to, compatible with and no more objectionable than any of those enumerated therein. 
25.  The planning director may authorize a temporary carnival, fair, rodeo, gymkhana and any other similar temporary recreational and amusement type enterprise whenever the duration of the enterprise is for not more than seven days within any sixty-day period of time; at the time of authorization, the planning director may impose conditions regarding hours of operation, access parking, fencing and surface treatment to inhibit dust emanation and bonds to guarantee site maintenance; 
26.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to any permitted uses, provided such activities and facilities are located on the same premises on which are located the uses to which these are accessory. 
(Ord. 512 § 6, 1982; Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.2.)  
19.20.030 - Uses subject to conditional use permits. 
The following uses may be permitted in the R-C zone if a conditional use permit is obtained from the planning commission in the manner provided in Chapter 19.62. A permit for any of these uses may be granted by the planning commission if the applicant produces sufficient proof that the use will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or to the property in the vicinity or zone in which the use will be situated; that said effects can be prevented with the imposition of conditions; and that the permit is necessary for the owner of the property to make reasonable use of the property: 
1.  Buildings in excess of forty-five feet in height; 
2.  Campgrounds and travel trailer parks; 
3.  Commercial amusement center, amusement rides and devices; 
4.  Commercial stables and riding academies with the boarding of horses on a lot or parcel of land with an area of not less than two acres including a dwelling for a caretaker and family; 
5.  Fairgrounds; 
6.  Heliport landing areas; 
7.  Movie sets or locations which may contain structures of a temporary nature to be used for photographic and scenic purposes in connection with the production of motion pictures and television programs; such sets or locations shall not be used as a permanent service studio or for other similar type of use; 
8.  Outdoor festivals; 
9.  Racetracks; 
10.  Rifle, pistol, skeet or trap ranges; 
11.  Rodeos; 
12.  Stadium, sports arena; 
13.  Public utility structures and facilities which include electrical substations, power booster or conversion plants, telephone exchange buildings; 
14.  Temporary agricultural stands in accordance with Chapter 19.62; 
15.  Arcades. 
(Ord. 537 § 2, 1982: Ord. 512 § 10 (part), 1982; Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.3.)  
19.20.040 - Signs. 
Signs may be erected in a recreation commercial zone in accordance with the sign regulations, Title 17, for commercial uses. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.4.)  
19.20.050 - Property development and performance standards. 
The property development and performance standards set forth in Section 19.20.060 through 19.20.170 shall apply to all lots and premises in the R-C zone. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.5 (part).)  
19.20.055 - Commercial/industrial performance standards. 
All uses within the R-C recreation commercial zone shall operate in accordance with the performance standards contained in Chapter 19.54 of this code. 
(Ord. 763 § 8, 1992.)  
19.20.060 - Lot area and width. 
A.  Minimum lot area shall be one acre exclusive of any public right-of-way dedicated for road purposes or proposed road purposes. 
B.  Minimum width of lot shall be one hundred fifty feet, excepting corner lots which shall be one hundred seventy feet. 
C.  Minimum depth of lots measured at right angles to the front property line shall be one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.5(1).)  
19.20.070 - Building height limit. 
All buildings shall be limited to a height of forty-five feet. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.5(2).)  
19.20.080 - Minimum yard requirements. 
A.  Front Yard. All buildings or structures on property adjacent to a public road shall be set back not less than thirty feet from the property line or proposed right-of-way line if future public road dedication is required, which ever is greater. Pedestrian walks, vehicular access drives, meter pits, signs (authorized by the sign ordinance) and utility manholes shall be permitted in any front yard. The rear fifteen feet of the setback area may be used for parking purposes and other uses in accordance with the approved development plan excluding habitable structures. 
B.  Side Yards. Side yards on interior property lines shall be equal to the height of the building but in no case less than fifteen feet except that minimum side yards of fifty feet shall be required whenever a lot or parcel in the R-C zone abuts a lot or parcel of land in any R zone. The side yard adjacent to the public road shall meet the front yard setback requirements. A common building wall with a zero setback on common interior side yards may be established by development plan approval by the planning commission who shall require the exchange and recordation of necessary documents to insure adequate access, parking and easements to serve the development. 
C.  Rear Yards. A rear yard shall be not less than twenty feet, except that a minimum rear yard of fifty feet shall be required whenever a lot or parcel of land in the R-C zone abuts a lot or parcel in an R zone or abuts any street or alley which separates an R-C zone from any R zone. 
D.  General Yard Uses. All operations and uses, except parking, landscaping, recreational and loading uses, shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.5(3).)  
19.20.090 - Maximum coverage. 
The ground floor area of buildings and structures shall not exceed fifty percent of the total area of the premises. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.5(4).)  
19.20.100 - Required off-street parking. 
The parking provisions shall be as set forth in the parking regulations, Chapter 19.44. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.5(5).)  
19.20.110 - Fences and walls. 
A.  The placement and design of walls shall be submitted to, and approved by, the planning commission. 
B.  A six-foot solid decorative masonry wall shall be provided and maintained on the boundary of the R-C zone which abuts or lies across a public street or alley from a residential zone; except, on the front or side front portion of the property, the wall shall be placed in a location approved by the planning commission to provide the necessary screening from the public way. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.5(6).)  
19.20.120 - Lights. 
Lighting, including spotlights, floodlights, electrical reflectors, and other means of illumination for signs, and the like, shall be focused, directed and so arranged as to prevent glare or direct illumination on streets or adjoining property. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.5(7).)  
19.20.130 - Landscaping and environmental area. 
A.  The purpose of the landscaping requirements shall be to enhance, conserve and stabilize property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings. Landscaping also contributes to the relief of heat, noise and glare through the proper placement of plants and trees. The retention of natural and existing landscaping is encouraged. 
B.  Landscaping and all other ground space treatment shall be provided upon at least fifteen percent of the net developed site. All landscaping shall be provided with a permanent watering system and be surrounded by a six-inch concrete curb. Landscaping shall be considered actual planting areas of lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs, or other plants. Environmental areas shall be considered those spaces related to or integrated with landscaping which provide an interesting complementary design. Courtyards, water ponds, streams, walkways, decks, kiosks and similar items may be permitted at the discretion of the planning director or planning commission. Such landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Maintenance. Required landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly and healthy condition. This is meant to include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary, and the regular watering of all plantings. 
2.  Required landscaped areas shall be provided with a suitable, permanent method of watering or sprinkling of plants. This watering system shall consist of piped water lines terminating in an appropriate number of sprinklers to insure a sufficient amount of water for plants within the landscaped area. Sprinklers shall be so spaced as to assure a complete coverage of the required landscaped area. The use of hose bibs with portable water will not be accepted. 
3.  The entire front yard setback shall be landscaped with the exception of that area provided for vehicles or pedestrian access. 
4.  No planting area shall be considered as such unless it contains at least twenty-four square feet of area and is a minimum of four feet in width, except raised planting boxes within close proximity to the building. 
5.  One tree, fifteen-gallon minimum, of a species approved on the final landscaping plans shall be planted within a minimum thirty-six square foot area, at every ten rows of single row parking stalls, or every twenty rows of double row parking stalls. 
6.  Each unused space resulting from the design of parking spaces or accessory structures over twenty-four square feet in area shall be landscaped. 
7.  When the recreational-commercial development either rears on or sides on a residential zone, or where the R-C zone abuts an alley or developed property, it shall include a six-foot wide landscaped area to screen the area adjacent to that residential or developed property line. The design of the screening shall consist of a wall and/or evergreen trees or shrubs, closely spaced. 
8.  Landscaping Plan. A plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals thirty feet shall be submitted for approval by the planning director and shall contain the following: 
a.  The dimensions and square footage of each planting area; 
b.  The total square footage and percentage of the net developed site devoted to landscaping; 
c.  Identification of each plant, common and botanical name, at the planting area; the number of each and their container size; 
d.  The permanent watering system, including all pipe sizes, and type and size of all sprinkler heads; 
e.  Specification sheet indicating the soil preparation and maintenance program for continual maintenance of the landscaping area and any type of guarantee associated with the installation of the landscaping. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.5(8).)  
19.20.140 - Refuse and recycling containment. 
Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be provided in accordance with the enclosure provisions of Chapter 19.50 and the following standards: 
A.  Each recreational-commercial use established shall provide an outdoor refuse and recycling storage area which shall be easily accessible and enclosed on all sides by a minimum six-foot high brick, concrete block or masonry wall. The opening of the storage area shall be screened by a solid gate of durable wood, metal or comparable material. 
B.  In addition, no material or waste shall be deposited in such a form or manner that it may be transferred by natural causes or force, and waste which may cause fumes, dust, or which may constitute a fire hazard or be edible by or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures. 
C.  The number and general placement of the enclosures shall be contained in the planned development permit and approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 791 § 5, 1993: Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.5(9).)  
19.20.150 - Utilities. 
All utilities shall be placed underground in accordance with underground utilities ordinance codified in Chapter 13.08. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.5(10).)  
19.20.160 - Mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antenna. 
All mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antennas shall be screened by landscaping or fence or combination with the design approved by the director of planning and community development, and all rooftop equipment shall be placed behind a permanent parapet wall or equipment screen approved by the director of planning and community development or his designated representative and be completely screened from view at ground level. 
(Ord. 821 § 2, 1994: Ord. 593 § 11, 1985: Ord. 590 § 11, 1985: Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.5(11).)  
19.20.170 - Ramping and equipment for handicapped. 
Adequate ramps and equipment shall be provided to accommodate the use of the facility by the handicapped, which shall include but not be limited to access ramps, restrooms, drinking fountains, etc. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.5(12).)  
19.20.180 - Planning commission review for zoning clearance. 
No zone clearance shall be issued until the planning commission, at the first available regular meeting, reviews and by resolution approves or denies the issuance of a zone clearance by resolution. 
A.  Upon application for a zone clearance, the number of copies determined by the city of the plot plan of the lot to be used, showing all property lines, existing and proposed building locations, elevations, parking areas, vehicular access facilities, outdoor storage areas, signs, walls, landscaped areas and planting screens, all adequately dimensioned, must be submitted to the planning commission to determine compliance with the provisions of this zone. The plot plan shall show the topography of the lot, abutting streets, highways and freeways, topographic features located within one hundred feet of all lot lines and any additional data which may be required by the commission to determine compliance with the provisions of this zone. 
B.  The approval of the plot plan by the planning commission shall include a determination and consideration of the work and improvements necessary for the protection of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare. 
C.  Prior to consideration of the plot plan by the planning commission, an engineering advisory meeting will be held, with notice being given to the applicant wherein the staff recommendation will be reviewed. The applicant will also receive a notice of the planning commission meeting, including staff recommendation. 
D.  The planning commission shall consider evidence of the size, type, location and character of the proposed use and, based thereon, shall make a determination as to the required work and improvements, if necessary. To insure compatibility with adjoining uses and remove any future nuisance, each specific work and improvement requirement shall be based upon a finding by the planning commission that due to size, type, location and character of the use, the public peace, health, safety and general welfare require the work or improvement. 
(Ord. 856 § 4, 1996: Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.7.)  
19.20.185 - Planning commission decisions—Appeals—Council review. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission approving, denying or conditionally approving an application for a plan shall be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed or a city council review is ordered as provided in this section. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a plan shall not be valid or effective for any purpose unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Each such appeal shall be in writing on a form provided by the director of planning and community development of the city ("director"), and shall identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates; and 
2.  Each such appeal shall be filed with the director prior to the planning commission decision to which the appeal relates becoming final, as provided in subsection A of this section; and 
3.  Each such appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by the city council; and 
4.  Each such appeal is filed by or on behalf of any of the following: 
a.  The owner of any real property located within the city, or 
b.  A person who lawfully occupies or is entitled to lawfully occupy any real property which is located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are the subject of the zone clearance, or 
c.  Any interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal shall be deemed complete nor effective for any purpose unless it complies with all of the provisions of this section. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section to the contrary, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before a planning commission decision becomes final pursuant to subsection A of this section, may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission decision relating to a plan ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review shall stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates, pending the city council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council shall conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons shall be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show the existence of the facts which warrant the granting of the zone clearance. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk shall give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination shall be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 856 § 5, 1996.) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(I), 5-25-2018)  
19.20.190 - Certificate of occupancy. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for any use or expansion of land or buildings permitted in Section 19.28.040. The building department may issue the certificate after planning commission approval of new buildings and uses. A change in use in an existing building may be approved by the planning director. 
B.  An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be accompanied by: 
1.  A description of the proposed industrial operation in sufficient detail to fully describe the nature and extent of the proposed use; 
2.  Plans or reports describing proposed treatment of noise, glare, air pollution, and treatment of any other potentially obnoxious materials; 
3.  Plans or reports showing proposed treatment and disposal of sewage; 
4.  Additional data which may be required by the public works department to ascertain conformance with the requirements of this zone. 
C.  A change or changes in the use permitted by a certificate of occupancy shall occur only after the holder of such certificate has obtained an amendment thereto allowing such change or changes. 
D.  A certificate of occupancy for a use of the land in the R-C zone may be revoked by the city council after a public hearing if the city council finds that the holder of the certificate has failed to comply with the approved plans. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.8.)  
19.20.200 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
Uses expressly prohibited in the R-C zone shall be: 
A.  Single-family dwellings except as expressly permitted; 
B.  Multiple-family dwellings and motels; 
C.  Industrial uses. 
(Ord. 321 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 9405.9).  
Chapter 19.21 - CAMARILLO COMMONS MIXED-USE (CCM) ZONE 
 
19.21.010 - Purpose of zone. 
This zone establishes regulations for the general placement, design, and intensity of uses for the area identified as the Camarillo Commons Mixed-Use (CCM) Zone. These regulations are intended to identify development standards for the redevelopment of the area. The primary purpose of the CCM Zone is to provide for a combination of commercial, office, upper-story residential uses, and compatible related development to promote pedestrian use and enjoyment of the mixed-use area. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.020 - Uses authorized under a planned development permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the CCM Zone if a planned development permit is granted by the planning commission in accordance with this chapter. All uses must conform to the development standards of this chapter, and be conducted wholly within a building, except enterprises customarily conducted in the open (i.e., outside dining in conjunction with a restaurant): 
1.  Antique stores; 
2.  Apparel stores; 
3.  Appliance, sales and service; 
4.  Art studios, galleries; 
5.  Arts, crafts, music and photographic supply stores; 
6.  Auditoriums, exclusive of tents or temporary structures; 
7.  Bakery shops (including outside dining tables); 
8.  Banks, credit unions, trust companies and other similar financial institutions; 
9.  Barbershops; 
10.  Beauty shops and salons; 
11.  Bicycle shop; 
12.  Bookstores; 
13.  Bowling alleys; 
14.  Carpet, floor covering, and ceramic tile stores; 
15.  Chiropractic offices; 
16.  Churches; 
17.  Clubs and lodges, private; 
18.  Coffee shops (including outside dining tables); 
19.  Computer services and sales; 
20.  Confectionery stores; 
21.  Dance halls and dancing studios; 
22.  Day care nurseries, short-term, providing care for six children or less, subject to the standards of Section 19.62.165; 
23.  Day spa; 
24.  Delicatessens (including outside dining tables); 
25.  Dressmaking shops; 
26.  Draperies and window coverings, sales; 
27.  Drugstores and pharmacies; 
28.  Electronics, sales and repairs of televisions, VCR's, stereos, computers, and related equipment; 
29.  Fire stations, public buildings, and facilities for federal, state, county and city agencies, not including jails, prisons and other places of confinement; 
30.  Florist shops; 
31.  Furniture and appliance stores; 
32.  Garden supply stores; 
33.  Greeting card shops; 
34.  Grocery stores; 
35.  Gymnasiums; 
36.  Hardware stores; 
37.  Health clubs; 
38.  Ice cream and yogurt shops; 
39.  Interior decorating establishments; 
40.  Jewelry stores; 
41.  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments; 
42.  Library; 
43.  Live/work units; 
44.  Meat markets; 
45.  Medical laboratories, excluding research and development; 
46.  Movie, music and games, sales or rental; 
47.  Museums; 
48.  Music conservatories and studios; 
49.  Newspaper office (excludes newspaper printing); 
50.  Nurseries, plant; 
51.  Office, business and professional; 
52.  Office, medical and dental; 
53.  Office, veterinary, excluding routine overnight boarding; 
54.  Off-street parking; 
55.  Optician; 
56.  Paint stores; 
57.  Pet shops, pet grooming; 
58.  Pharmacy; 
59.  Photography store, sales and repair of photography equipment and photo processing; 
60.  Photography studios; 
61.  Plumbing shops; 
62.  Post Office; 
63.  Printing shops (i.e., blueprinting, photocopying, and offset); 
64.  Public parks, playgrounds and community centers; 
65.  Residential dwelling units above first floor of a mixed-use building, as part of a commercial usage; 
66.  Restaurants and cafes (including outside dining); 
67.  Retail stores or businesses not involving any kind of manufacturing, processing or treating of products other than that which is clearly incidental to the retail store or business conducted on the premises subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
a.  Not more than three persons may be employed in permitted processing or treating of products; 
b.  The operations and projects may not unreasonably emit noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other objectionable characteristics; 
68.  Shoe stores; 
69.  Stationery stores; 
70.  Studios—Art, dance, martial arts, music, etc; 
71.  Tailor shops; 
72.  Tennis clubs and swim clubs; 
73.  Theatre, live; 
74.  Theaters, movie; 
75.  Transportation terminal (i.e., bus, taxi, or train); 
76.  Travel agency, ticket office; 
77.  Trophy stores, including plaques and related merchandise; 
78.  Variety stores; 
79.  Video stores, sales and rentals of videos and recorders; 
80.  Uses and structures which are incidental or accessory to any of the uses permitted in this zone; 
81.  Other uses which in the judgment of the planning commission are similar to, compatible with, and no more objectionable than any of those enumerated in this section in accordance with Chapter 19.60. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.030 - Planned development permit required. 
Prior to the issuance of a zoning clearance, a planned development permit is required for the construction, exterior modification or enlargement of any new structure or the use of a lot or premises within the Camarillo Commons Mixed-Use (CCM) Zone in accordance with Section 19.21.200. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.040 - Uses requiring conditional use permits. 
The following uses may be permitted in the Camarillo Commons Mixed-Use (CCM) Zone if a conditional use permit is obtained in the manner provided in Chapter 19.62: 
A.  Automobile service stations; 
B.  Bed and breakfast inn; 
C.  Commercial recreation uses and sports; 
D.  Day care facilities, large family; 
E.  Hotels and motels; 
F.  Liquor stores; 
G.  Live/work units; 
H.  Residential, not in conjunction with commercial usage; 
I.  Schools; 
J.  Senior citizen housing including senior hotels; 
K.  Taverns, bars, nightclubs; 
L.  Alcoholic beverage establishments, off-sale. 
(Ord. 1029 § 11, 2008; Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.) 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 4, 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 4, 3-25-2015)  
19.21.050 - Signs. 
Signs may be erected in the Camarillo Commons Mixed-Use (CCM) Zone in accordance with Title 17 and any other guidelines adopted by the City relating to the design and placement of signs. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.060 - Property development and performance standards. 
The property development and performance standards set forth in Sections 19.26.065 through 19.26.180 will apply to all lots and premises in the Camarillo Commons Mixed-Use (CCM) Zone. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.065 - Commercial/industrial performance standards. 
All uses within the Camarillo Commons Mixed-Use (CCM) Zone must operate in accordance with the performance standards contained in Chapter 19.54. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.070 - Lot area and parcel dimensions. 
All lots hereafter created must meet the following minimum standards: 
A.  Minimum zone area is forty thousand square feet, which may consist of one or more lots or parcels, exclusive of public right-of-way dedicated for road purposes or proposed road purposes. If more than one parcel exists, however, the design of the development must be integrated and unified by the utilization of architectural and landscaping design to the satisfaction of the planning commission. 
B.  Minimum width of lots is one hundred fifty feet. 
C.  Minimum depth of lots measured at right angles to the front property line is two hundred feet. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.080 - Minimum yard requirements. 
The planning commission, in their review, must determine the yard requirements based on the height and bulk of the building and adjoining land uses and the intent of the zone, which requirements may not be below the following minimum standards: 
A.  Front Yard. Front yards may not be less than fifteen feet nor greater than twenty feet from the edge of the curb. Parking areas may not be located between the building and a public street. 
B.  Side Yard. No interior side yards are required. Side yards adjacent to a major street are only permitted to allow for plazas and pedestrian walkways. The side yard adjacent to a residential zone must be a minimum of twenty feet. 
C.  Rear Yard. No rear yards are required. The rear yard adjacent to a public street must meet the front yard requirements. Parking areas are not permitted in the rear yard setback between public streets and buildings. 
D.  General Yard Uses. Outside dining, parking of automobiles, and landscaping may be conducted on the site; whereas all other operations and display must be conducted in a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking must comply with the requirements of Chapter 19.44. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.095 - Off-street loading area. 
Off-street loading must comply with the requirements of Chapter 19.46. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.100 - Fences and walls. 
A.  Whenever the Camarillo Commons Mixed-Use (CCM) Zone abuts on a residential zone, a solid decorative masonry screen wall a minimum of six feet in height must be erected along the property line abutting the residential zone, unless the residential area has been integrated into the project design as considered and approved as part of the planned development permit. 
B.  Whenever the parking or circulation area abuts a public street, there must be a low wall or landscaped hedge, not greater than three feet in height (excluding architectural features such as pilasters, as approved as part of the planned development permit), along the property lines adjacent to the parking area adjacent to the street. 
C.  The placement and design of walls must be submitted to, and approved by, the director of community development or be part of the approved planned development permit approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.110 - Lights. 
Lighting, including spotlights, floodlights, electrical reflectors and other means of illumination for signs, structures, landscaping, parking areas, loading areas and the like, must be focused, directed and so arranged as to screen the source of light and direct the light down to prevent glare or direct illumination on streets or adjoining property. The lighting design will be subject to review and approval as part of the planned development permit and shall provide adequate lighting for parking areas, plazas and outdoor spaces. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.120 - Building coverage. 
Building coverage must be set forth under the planned development permit or conditional use permit and must comply with all other provisions of this code including the requirement to provide open space for parking, access, plazas and other onsite amenities. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.130 - Building height. 
All buildings must be a minimum of twenty-five feet in height or two stories as approved under the planned development permit. Buildings adjacent to a public street may not exceed forty feet in height, exclusive of architectural features. Buildings not adjacent to a public street are limited to a height of forty-five feet or four stories, exclusive of architectural features. No building may exceed four stories, excluding parking structures. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.135 - Residential uses. 
Residential units within a mixed-use building approved under a planned development permit and freestanding residential units approved under a conditional use permit in the Camarillo Commons Mixed-Use (CCM) Zone are subject to the following standards: 
A.  Location. Residential units in a mixed-use building must be located above the ground floor in order to maintain the commercial use of the building on the street level. Only garages and entrances may be located on the first floor access. Residential units must have a secure and separate entry and exit apart from the commercial units. 
B.  Parking. Residential parking must comply with the parking requirements of Chapter 19.44. 
C.  Lighting. All exterior lighting must be sufficient to establish a sense of well being to the pedestrian. A minimum of one-foot candle must be provided at the ground level for all exterior doorways and vehicular parking areas. 
D.  Refuse Storage and Location. An adequate refuse and recycling enclosure must be provided for all residential uses. In mixed-use buildings, a separate trash and recycling enclosure may be required apart from the commercial enclosure, depending upon the size of the development. 
E.  Private Usable Outdoor Area. Each unit must include a deck or balcony to provide an exterior area for the unit. The minimum dimension of a deck or balcony is six feet. Reasonable access from the unit must be provided. The minimum area of the exterior space is one hundred square feet exclusive of mechanical equipment. 
F.  Recreation Area. In addition to private useable outdoor space, each dwelling unit shall provide common useable open space as follows: 
1.  One hundred twenty-five square feet for each studio or efficiency unit; 
2.  Two hundred twenty-five square feet for each dwelling unit having two or more bedrooms. 
Common recreation areas must be conveniently located and readily accessible from all dwelling units located on the building site. The common recreational/leisure area may be composed of active or passive facilities and may be located either indoors or outdoors or may be a combination of both. Common useable open space may incorporate any required setback areas other than required front or street-side yard setback areas, but may not include or incorporate any driveways, trash pickup areas, storage or utility areas or parking areas other than the rooftop deck of a parking structure. All required common useable open space must be suitably improved for its intended purpose and all lawn and landscape areas must be provided with a permanent irrigation system. Recreation space must be provided for the residential units including recreation facilities for children as approved under the development plans. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.140 - Landscaping and environmental area. 
A.  The purpose of the landscaping requirements is to enhance, conserve and stabilize property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings. Pedestrian paths, paseos and landscaped parkways must be an integral part of the landscape design connecting with plazas and green spaces. Landscaping also contributes to the relief of heat, noise and glare through the proper placement of green plants and trees. 
B.  Landscaping and all other ground space treatment must be provided upon the net developed site. Landscaping includes the actual planting areas of lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs, or other plants. Landscaping must be surrounded by either a six-inch masonry curb, sidewalk or building. Courtyards, water ponds, streams, walkways, decks, kiosks, and similar items shall be provided. All landscaping must comply with the following standards: 
1.  Maintenance. Required landscaped areas must be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly and healthy condition. This includes proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary, and the regular watering of all plantings. 
2.  Required landscaped areas must be provided with a suitable, permanent method of watering of plants. This watering system must consist of piped water lines terminating in an appropriate number of sprinklers or emitters to ensure a sufficient amount of water for plants within the landscaped area. Sprinklers or emitters must be spaced so as to assure a complete coverage of the required landscaped area. 
3.  The parking area setback must be landscaped with the exception of the area provided for vehicles or pedestrian access. 
4.  No planting area will be considered a landscaped area unless it contains at least twenty-four square feet of area and is a minimum of four feet in width; except raised planting boxes within close proximity to the building. 
5.  One tree, twenty-four-inch box minimum, of a species approved on final landscaping plan must be planted within a minimum sixty-inch wide planter area at every ten rows of single-row parking stalls, or at every twenty rows of double-row parking stalls. 
6.  Above-grade and semi-subterranean parking structures must include potted or boxed trees and landscaping on all open-air parking decks that are above grade and visible from any public or private right-of-way so as to provide visual relief and shading, subject to the limitations posed by the engineering of the structure with respect to the weight loads generated by such landscaping. 
7.  Each unused space resulting from the design of parking spaces or over twenty-four square feet in area must be landscaped. 
8.  When the commercial development abuts a residential zone, or where the CCM zone abuts an alley or development property, adjacent to a residential zone, it must include a six-foot-wide landscaped area to screen the commercial development. The design of the screening must consist of trees and shrubs closely spaced. 
9.  Landscaping Plan. A landscaping plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals thirty feet must be submitted for approval by the director and must contain the following: 
a.  The dimensions and square footage of each planting area; 
b.  The total square footage of each planting area; 
c.  Identification of each plant, common and botanical names at the planting area, and the number of each and their container size; 
d.  The permanent watering system, including all pipe sizes, and type and size of all sprinkler heads or emitters; 
e.  Specification sheet indicating the soil preparation and maintenance program for continual maintenance of the landscaping area and any type of guarantee associated with the installation of the landscaping. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.150 - Refuse and recycling containment. 
Refuse and recycling enclosures must be provided in accordance with Chapter 19.50 and the following standards: 
A.  Each development established must provide an outdoor refuse and recycling storage area which is easily accessible and enclosed on all sides by a minimum six-foot-high brick, concrete block, or masonry wall in accordance with City approved standard design. The opening of the storage area must be screened by a solid gate of durable wood, metal, or comparable material. The enclosure must be covered by a solid roof. 
B.  In addition, no material or waste may be deposited in such a form or manner that allows it to be transferred by natural causes or force. Any waste which may cause fumes, dust, or constitute a fire hazard or be edible by or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects, must be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures. 
C.  The number and general placement of the enclosures will be set forth in the planned development permit. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.160 - Utilities. 
All utilities must be placed underground in accordance with Chapter 18.08. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.170 - Mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antennae. 
All mechanical and electrical equipment, and satellite dish antennas (except dishes less than one meter in diameter), must be screened by landscaping or fence screen wall or combination of design, and all rooftop equipment must be placed behind a permanent parapet wall or equipment screen approved by the director and be completely screened from view at ground level. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.180 - Ramping and equipment for the handicapped. 
Adequate ramps and equipment must be provided to accommodate the use of the facility by the handicapped and must include, but not be limited to, access ramps, restrooms, drinking fountains, etc. (Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.190 - Use of the planned development permit. 
No building or improvement or portion thereof may be erected, constructed, converted, established, or enlarged; nor may a lot or premises be used without first obtaining a planned development permit. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.195 - Planned development permit—Application. 
A.  An application for a planned development permit must be filed with the department on a form provided and must include the following: 
1.  An accurately-dimensioned plot plan showing existing and proposed topography, all proposed building, parking, landscaping areas, walls and all existing or proposed streets within a one hundred-foot radius of the property. 
2.  The dimension of all yards, setbacks, parking area, driveways and square footage of all building landscaping and building coverage. 
3.  The elevation of all buildings proposed with a notation of the type of material proposed in addition to a color and material sample. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.200 - Planned development permit—Notice of planning commission review. 
The department must provide notice of the date, time, and place of the planning commission's review of the application and the staffs proposed recommendation to the applicant. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.210 - Planned development permit—Consideration of proposal. 
In considering the approval, denial, or modification of an application for a planned development permit, the planning commission must consider the proposed recommendation of the staff and the following guidelines: 
A.  The degree of compatibility of property uses for which this chapter is intended to promote and preserve should be maintained with respect to the particular use on the particular site and consideration given to the existing and potential uses of property within the zone and the general area in which the use is proposed to be located. 
B.  Performance standards and conditions must be imposed upon uses which without such condition might become obnoxious, dangerous, offensive or injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare or a portion thereof by reason of the emission of noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odor or other harmful or annoying substances. 
C.  The integrity and character of the neighborhood in which the use will be located should be maintained including the utility and value of property in the neighborhood and in the adjacent zones. 
D.  The use must be compatible with public interest, health, safety, convenience and general welfare. 
E.  The development is in accordance with any adopted guidelines for the area for properties within a redevelopment area. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.220 - Planned development permit—Conditions to application. 
The planning commission may attach such conditions and make such modifications, changes or alterations in the proposed application as the Commission may determine necessary to carry out the purposes of this zone. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.230 - Planned development permit—Rejection or modification. 
If the proposed planned development would substantially depreciate property values in the vicinity, unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of property in the vicinity by occupants thereof, or would endanger the public peace, health, safety and general welfare, then such proposed planned development must be rejected, modified or conditioned to remove such objections or be denied. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.240 - Planned development permit—Time extensions. 
Unless the construction of the structure is commenced and being diligently pursued not later than twelve months after the date the permit is granted, the permit will automatically expire on that date. However, if there have been no changes in the proposed plot plans or adjacent areas, the planning commission or the director when authorized, may grant additional extensions of time for the commencement of the project. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.250 - Planned development permit—City council review. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission approving, denying or conditionally approving an application for a planned development permit will be final and conclusive on the 10th consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless timely and complete appeal is filed or a City Council review is ordered as provided in this section. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a permit will not be valid or effective for any purpose, unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  The appeal must be in writing on a form provided by the director and must identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates. 
2.  The appeal must be filed with the director prior to the date on which the planning commission decision, to which the appeal relates, becomes final. 
3.  The appeal must be accompanied by a processing fee in the amount set by the City Council. 
4.  The appeal must be filed by the applicant or any interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal will be deemed complete for any purpose, unless it complies with all of the provisions of this section. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, the City Council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before planning commission decision becomes final, may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission decision relating to a planned development permit ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the City Council of an order of review will stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates, pending the City Council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the City Council must conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons will be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the City Council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the City Council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant has the burden of proof to show the existence of facts, which warrant the granting of the planned development permit. 
H.  City Council Decision. The City Clerk must give written notice of the City Council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The City Council's determination will be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(J), 5-25-2018)  
19.21.260 - Planned development permit—Revocation. 
A.  Any permit granted may be revoked by the Planning Commission or City Council after appropriate proceedings, provided herein, for any of the following causes: 
1.  That any term or condition of the permit has not been complied with; 
2.  That the property subject to the permit, or any portion thereof, is used or maintained in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation in effect at time of approval or subsequently made applicable; 
3.  That the use for which the permit was granted has not been exercised for at least twelve consecutive months or has ceased to exist, or has been abandoned; 
4.  That the use for which the permit was granted has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or as to constitute a nuisance. 
B.  After revocation of a permit, the property affected thereby must be subject to the current regulations of the applicable zone classification. 
C.  The failure of the planning commission or City Council to revoke a permit whenever due cause exists or occurs does not constitute a waiver of such right with respect to any subsequent cause for revocation. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.270 - Certificate of occupancy. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy is required for any change in use within a planned development permit. A change in use in an existing building may be approved by the director. 
B.  An application for a certificate of occupancy must be accompanied by: 
1.  A description of the proposed commercial operation in sufficient detail to describe fully the nature and extent of the proposed use. 
C.  A certificate of occupancy for a use of the land in the Camarillo Commons Mixed-Use (CCM) Zone may be revoked by the City Council after a public hearing if the City Council finds that the holder of the certificate has failed to comply with the approved application. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
19.21.290 - Uses prohibited. 
The uses expressly prohibited in the Camarillo Commons Mixed-Use (CCM) Zone are manufacturing, and drive-thru restaurant uses. 
(Ord. 1013 § 2 (part), 2007.)  
Chapter 19.22 - P-O PROFESSIONAL OFFICE ZONE 
 
19.22.010 - Purpose of zone. 
In order to provide a method whereby land may be designed and developed as a unit for professional administrative offices, and in order to produce an environment of stable desirable character which will be in harmony with the existing or potential development of the surrounding neighborhoods and which may be located in or adjacent to residential areas, and in order to produce professional administrative office developments which meet modern standards of open space, concentration of buildings, common parking facilities, light, air, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, the professional office P-O zone is established to provide suitable locations for offices and services of a professional, clerical, or administrative nature. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.)  
19.22.020 - Uses authorized under a planned development permit. 
All uses of land in the P-O zone shall be made only in conformance with a planned development permit granted by the planning commission in accordance with Section 19.22.200. Such permit shall be obtained by filing an application in the planning department accompanied by a plot plan and elevation drawings of the structures in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. 
The planning commission, and/or the city council, shall not grant a permit for any use when it finds the use will be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or to the property in the vicinity or zone in which the use will be situated: and secondly, that the imposition of conditions upon the requested use will not prevent such effects. All uses herein authorized shall be conducted totally within a building; 
A.  Financial institutions of the following types: 
1.  Banks 
2.  Commercial loan offices 
3.  Credit union offices 
4.  Credit services 
5.  Mortgage services 
6.  Savings and loan associations; 
B.  General office, business, administrative service consulting or professional uses of the following types: 
1.  Accountants 
2.  Advertising agencies 
3.  Appraisers 
4.  Architect and artist studios 
5.  Attorneys 
6.  Bookkeepers 
7.  Chiropodists 
8.  Chiropractors 
9.  Collection agencies 
10.  Consulting services 
11.  Construction services (excluding storage of construction equipment and materials on the property) 
12.  Corporation or general offices 
13.  Counseling services 
14.  Doctors or other similar practitioners of the healing arts for human beings 
15.  Employment agencies 
16.  Engineers 
17.  Escrow services 
18.  Hospitals (excluding mental hospitals) and including accessory gift shops, and flower shops without outside signage indicating the presence of such accessory uses 
19.  Insurance services 
20.  Investment services 
21.  Laboratories (medical, dental, and biological) 
22.  Libraries 
23.  Medical and dental clinics 
24.  Mortuaries 
25.  Postal services 
26.  Real estate services 
27.  Stockbrokers 
28.  Surveying services 
29.  Telephone answering services; 
C.  Any other use determined by the planning commission to conform with the general purpose or intent of an administrative nature excluding general retail uses; 
D.  Agricultural uses, temporary agricultural uses and stands, subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  Growing agricultural crops and accessory structures are permitted uses, but no poultry or animals shall be raised or kept except as otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
(Ord. 512 § 7, 1982; Ord. 493 § 1 (part), 1981; Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.1.)  
19.22.030 - Accessory uses permitted in the P-O zone. 
Accessory uses of the following types may be permitted provided they are incidental to the permitted uses within the same building: 
A.  Off-street parking of private automobiles in connection with any P-O use as provided under the development standards of the zoning title, however, specifically excluding the storage and maintenance of trailers and mobile homes except temporary offices during the period of construction; 
B.  Coffee shop, newsstands, pharmacy where pharmacies are limited to the preparation, dispensing and retailing of drugs including the dispensing and retailing of orthopedic and medical appliances; however, specifically excluding retailing and dispensing nonrelated pharmaceutical commodities, products or articles; 
C.  There shall be no entrance directly from the street or outside of the development to the business and no signs or other evidence indicating the existence of such business shall be visible from the outside of the building. The building shall be of sufficient size and character so that the patronage of such business may be expected to be furnished substantially or solely by tenants of the office building. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.2.)  
19.22.040 - Uses subject to a conditional use permit. 
The following uses may be permitted in the P-O zone if a conditional use permit is obtained in the manner provided for in the Chapter 19.62, and such use conforms to every term and condition of the permit and the following: The conditional use permit may be granted if the applicant demonstrates that the use will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare; the application will be compatible with the uses, zone, and property within the area; the conditional use permit may include conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are imposed to insure compatibility and to mitigate any adverse condition involved with the use; the permit is necessary to make reasonable use of the property: 
1.  Churches; 
2.  Educational institutions: business, professional schools including dancing academies, art institutes but excluding manual arts, auto body, motor repair, carpentry and public schools; 
3.  Charitable and philanthropic institutions; 
4.  Publicly owned or operated buildings and uses including libraries, museums and community buildings; but excluding jails, prisons, and other places of confinement, dumps, and sanitary fills; 
5.  Sanitariums or convalescent homes; only the expansion of an existing facility or new facilities in close proximity to a hospital where a need can be shown; 
6.  Tennis and swim clubs, gymnasiums and handball facilities; 
7.  Public utility buildings or structures including radio and television broadcasting studios, but not including transmitters; 
8.  Colleges or universities which offer a program of professional preparatory instruction or any combination thereof offering full curricula as required by state law; 
9.  Buildings containing a height greater than twenty-five feet; 
10.  Temporary agricultural stands in accordance with Chapter 19.62; 
11.  Day care nurseries and day care nurseries, short-term, providing care for more than six children; 
12.  Indoor theaters; 
13.  Commercial recreation uses and sports complexes; 
14.  Hotels and motels with convention and/or recreational facilities. 
(Ord. 911 § 3, 1999; Ord. 891 § 1, 1998; Ord. 867 § 1, 1997; Ord. 790 § 1, 1993; Ord. 660 § 2, 1988; Ord. 512 § 10 (part), 1982: Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.3 (part).) 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 4, 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 4, 3-25-2015)  
19.22.050 - Property development and performance standards. 
The property development and performance standards set forth in Sections 19.22.060 through 19.22.170 shall apply to all lots and premises in the professional office P-O zone. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.3 (part).)  
19.22.055 - Commercial/industrial performance standards. 
All uses within the P-O professional office zone shall operate in accordance with the provisions of the performance standards contained in Chapter 19.54 of this code. 
(Ord. 763 § 9, 1992.)  
19.22.060 - Lot area and parcel dimensions. 
All lots hereafter created shall contain the following minimum standards: 
A.  Minimum lot area shall be ten thousand square feet which may consist of one or more lots or parcels excluding the public right-of-way dedicated for public purposes or proposed road purposes. If more than one parcel exists, however, the design of the development shall be integrated and unified by the utilization of common access driveways, parking areas under a conjunctional use agreement approved by the city. 
B.  Minimum width of lots shall be one hundred feet. 
C.  Minimum depth of lots measured at right angles to the front property line shall be one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.3(A).)  
19.22.070 - Minimum yard requirements. 
The planning commission in their review shall determine the yard requirements based upon the height and bulk of the building and adjoining land uses and the intent of the zone, but in no case shall a yard requirement be below the minimum standards set forth as follows: 
A.  Front yard building setback shall not be less than thirty-five feet from the existing or proposed right-of-way line with a minimum landscaping of ten feet. If no parking or vehicular drives are provided in the front yard area, then the front yard area may be reduced to not less than twenty feet. 
B.  Side Yards. No interior side yards shall be required except adjacent to a residential zone or abutting any public right-of-way, in which case the front yard setback shall apply. 
C.  Rear Yard. A rear yard of not less than ten feet shall be provided for each building hereinafter erected or extended; except, where adjacent to a residential zone, a twenty foot setback shall be provided. 
D.  Interior Yards. Interior yards between buildings shall have a width equal to the height of the taller of the two buildings but which yards need not exceed forty feet. 
E.  General Yard Uses. The utilization of yard areas shall be limited to landscaping, parking, loading, the placement of trash enclosures to serve the approved uses to be conducted on the premises. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.3(B).)  
19.22.080 - Off-street parking and loading area. 
Off-street parking and loading shall be in accordance with the parking and loading provisions and standards set forth under the parking and loading chapters of this title (Chapters 19.44 and 19.46). 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.3(C).)  
19.22.090 - Fences and walls. 
A.  Whenever the P-O zone sides on or rears on a residential zone, there shall be erected along the property line a decorative screen wall six feet in height. 
B.  Whenever the parking or circulation area abuts a public street, there shall be provided a screen berm, decorative wall or landscape hedge not greater than three feet in height along the property lines adjacent to the parking areas and adjacent to the street. 
C.  The placement and design of the wall screened berms shall be shown on the landscaping plan and submitted to the planning director for approval. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.3(D).)  
19.22.100 - Site illumination. 
Lighting, including spotlights, front lights, electrical reflectors and other means of illumination for the open space, structure, landscaping, parking areas, and loading areas shall be focused, directed and so arranged as to prevent glare from direct illumination on streets and adjoining properties; however, adequate coverage should be provided for each individual commercial site to allow for safe ingress and egress and utilization of the parking area. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.3(E).)  
19.22.110 - Building coverage. 
Buildings including accessory buildings may cover up to fifty percent of the planned development permit parcel area; except, if covered parking is provided under the principal building, building coverage may be increased by one hundred eighty square feet for every covered parking space, and further provided, that the minimum landscaping is also increased by one percent for every five covered parking spaces provided. However, in no event shall more than ninety percent of the permit area be used for building structures, parking, and vehicular circulation. In no event shall less than ten percent of the planned development permit area be devoted to landscaping. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.3(F).).  
19.22.120 - Building height. 
All buildings shall be limited to a height of twenty-five feet. Greater heights may be permitted subject to the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.3(G).)  
19.22.130 - Landscaping and environmental area. 
A.  The purpose of the landscaping requirements shall be to enhance, conserve and stabilize property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings. Landscaping also contributes to the relief of heat, noise, and glare through the proper placement of green plants and trees. 
B.  Landscaping and all other ground space treatment shall be provided upon at least ten percent of the net developed site. All landscaping shall be provided with a permanent irrigation system, and shall be surrounded by a six-inch concrete curb. Landscaping shall be considered actual planting areas of lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs, or other plants. Environmental areas shall be considered those spaces related to or integrated with landscaping which provide an interesting complementary design. Courtyards, water ponds, streams, walkways, decks, kiosks, and similar items may be permitted. Such landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Maintenance. Required landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly and healthy condition. This is meant to include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary, and the regular watering of all plantings. 
2.  Required landscaped areas shall be provided with a suitable, permanent method of irrigation of plants. This irrigation system shall consist of piped water lines terminating in an appropriate number of sprinklers to insure a sufficient amount of water to plants within the landscaped area. Sprinklers shall be so spaced as to assure a complete coverage of the required landscaped area. 
3.  The entire front yard setback shall be landscaped with the exception of that area provided for vehicles or pedestrian access and approved on the development plan. 
4.  No planting area shall be considered as such unless it contains at least twenty-four square feet of area and is a minimum of four feet in width except raised planting boxes within close proximity to the building. 
5.  One tree, fifteen-gallon minimum, of a species approved on final landscaping plan, shall be planted within a minimum thirty-six square-foot area, at every ten rows of single row parking stalls, or at every twenty rows of double row parking stalls. 
6.  Each unused space resulting from the design of parking spaces or over twenty-four square feet in area shall be landscaped. 
7.  When the commercial development either rears on or sides on a residential zone, or where the P-O zone abuts an alley or developed property adjacent to a residential zone, it shall include a six-foot wide landscaped area to screen the commercial development. The design of the screening shall consist of evergreen trees and shrubs closely spaced. 
8.  Landscaping Plan. A plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals thirty feet shall be submitted for approval by the planning director and shall contain the following: 
a.  The dimensions and square footage of each planting area; 
b.  Identification of each plant, common and botanical name, at the planting area; the number of each and their container size; 
c.  The permanent irrigation system, including all pipe sizes and type and size of all sprinkler heads; 
d.  Specification sheet indicating the soil preparation and maintenance program for continual maintenance of the landscaping area and any type of guarantee associated with the installation of the landscaping. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.3(H).)  
19.22.140 - Refuse and recycling containment. 
Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be provided in accordance with the enclosure provisions of Chapter 19.50 and the following standards: 
A.  When an outdoor refuse and recycling storage area is provided, it shall be easily accessible and enclosed on all sides by a minimum six-foot high brick, concrete block or masonry wall. The opening of the storage area shall be screened by a solid gate of durable wood, metal, or comparable material. 
B.  In addition, no material or waste shall be deposited in such a form or manner that it may be transferred by natural causes or force, and waste which may cause fumes, dust, or which may constitute a fire hazard or be edible by or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects, shall be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures. 
C.  The number and general placement of the enclosures shall be set forth in the CPD permit and approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 791 § 6, 1993: Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.3(I).)  
19.22.150 - Utilities. 
All utilities shall be placed underground in accordance with provisions of Chapter 13.08. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.3(J).)  
19.22.160 - Mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antenna. 
All mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antennas shall be screened by landscaping or fence or combination with the design approved by the director of planning and community development, and all rooftop equipment shall be placed behind a permanent parapet wall or equipment screen approved by the director of planning and community development or his designated representative and be completely screened from view at ground level. 
(Ord. 821 § 3, 1994: Ord. 593 § 12, 1985: Ord. 590 § 12, 1985: Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.3(K).)  
19.22.170 - Ramping and equipment for handicapped. 
Adequate ramps and equipment shall be provided to accommodate the use of the facility by the handicapped and shall include, but not be limited to, access ramps, rest rooms, drinking fountains, etc. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.3(L).)  
19.22.180 - Use of the planned development permit. 
No building or improvement or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established, altered or enlarged; nor shall a lot or premises be used without first obtaining a planned development permit, nor shall an existing building be used for a new use without a certificate of occupancy permit first being obtained. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.6.)  
19.22.190 - Application for planned development permit. 
The application and development plan shall be reviewed by the planning department in accordance with the administrative procedure. Upon review by the planning department, the application for a planned development permit shall be scheduled for planning commission review. 
(Ord. 856 § 6, 1996: Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.7.)  
19.22.200 - Planning commission review of planned development permit. 
A.  Notice of the time and place of the planning commission review of the application and the staff's proposed recommendation shall be given to the applicant. 
1.  In considering the approval, denial or modification of an application for a planned development permit, the planning commission shall consider the proposed recommendation of the staff and the following guidelines: 
a.  That the degree of compatibility of property uses for which this section is intended to promote and preserve shall be maintained with respect to the particular use on the particular site and consideration of existing and potential uses of property within the zone and the general area in which the use is proposed to be located; 
b.  That performance standards and conditions shall be imposed upon uses which without such condition might become obnoxious, dangerous, offensive or injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare, or a portion thereof by reason of the emission of noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odor or other harmful or annoying substances; 
c.  That there shall be maintained the integrity and character of the neighborhood in which the use will be located and the utility and value of property in the neighborhood and in the adjacent zones; 
d.  That the use shall be compatible with public interest, health, safety, convenience and general welfare. 
2.  The planning commission may attach such conditions and make such modifications, changes or alterations in the proposed application as the commission may determine necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this zone. 
3.  If the proposed planned development would substantially depreciate property values in the vicinity, unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of property in the vicinity by occupants thereof, or would endanger the public peace, health, safety and general welfare, then such proposed planned development shall be rejected, modified or conditioned to remove such objections. 
4.  Unless the use is inaugurated or the construction of the structure is commenced and being diligently pursued not later than twelve months after the date the permit is granted, the permit will automatically expire on that date. However, if there have been no changes in the proposed plot plans or adjacent areas, the planning commission may grant additional extensions of time for use inauguration. 
5.  Any permit previously or subsequently granted may be revoked by the planning commission or city council after appropriate proceedings, provided herein, for any of the following causes: 
a.  That any term or condition of the permit has not been complied with; 
b.  That the property subject to the permit, or any portion thereof, is used or maintained in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation in effect at time of approval; 
c.  That the use for which the permit was granted has not been exercised for at least twelve consecutive months, has ceased to exist, or has been abandoned; 
d.  That the use for which the permit was granted has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or constitutes a nuisance. 
B.  After revocation of a permit, the property affected thereby shall be subject to the regulations of the applicable zone classification. 
C.  The failure of the planning commission or city council to revoke a permit whenever due cause exists or occurs does not constitute a waiver of such tight with respect to any subsequent cause for revocation. 
(Ord. 856 § 7, 1996: Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.8.)  
19.22.205 - Planning commission decisions—Appeals—Council review. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission approving, denying or conditionally approving an application for a plan shall be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed or a city council review is ordered as provided in this section. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a plan shall not be valid or effective for any purpose unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Each such appeal shall be in writing on a form provided by the director of planning and community development of the city ("director"), and shall identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates; and 
2.  Each such appeal shall be filed with the director prior to the planning commission decision to which the appeal relates becoming final, as provided in subsection A of this section; and 
3.  Each such appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by the city council; and 
4.  Each such appeal is filed by or on behalf of any of the following: 
a.  The owner of any real property located within the city, or 
b.  A person who lawfully occupies or is entitled to lawfully occupy any real property which is located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are the subject of the planned development permit, or 
c.  Any interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal shall be deemed complete nor effective for any purpose unless it complies with all of the provisions of this section. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section to the contrary, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before a planning commission decision becomes final pursuant to subsection A of this section, may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission decision relating to a plan ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review shall stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates, pending the city council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council shall conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons shall be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show the existence of the facts which warrant the granting of the planned development permit. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk shall give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination shall be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 856 § 8, 1996.) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(K), 5-25-2018)  
19.22.210 - Certificate of occupancy. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any change in use within a planned development permit. A change in use in an existing building may be approved by the planning director. 
B.  An application for a certificate of occupancy may be obtained from the city and shall be accompanied by a description of the proposed usage in sufficient detail to describe fully the nature and extent of the proposed use. 
C.  A certificate of occupancy for a use of the land in the P-O zone may be revoked by the city council after a public hearing if the city council finds that the holder of the certificate has failed to comply with the approved plans or conditions attached to the planned development permit. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.9.)  
19.22.220 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
Uses expressly prohibited in the P-O zone are: 
A.  Industrial and manufacturing uses; 
B.  Residential uses; 
C.  Retail activities except those expressly permitted. 
(Ord. 360 § 1 (part), 1977: prior code § 9406.10.)  
Chapter 19.23 - CMU (VILLAGE COMMERCIAL MIXED-USE) ZONE 
 
19.23.010 - Purpose. 
This zone establishes and provides regulations for the general placement, design, and intensity of uses for the area identified as the village commercial mixed use (CMU) zone. These regulations are intended to protect and preserve the character of the existing uses and to identify the development standards for new uses and buildings within the city. The primary purpose of the CMU zone is to provide for a combination of commercial, office, upper-story residential uses or horizontal mixed-use on larger parcels and compatible related development to promote pedestrian use and enjoyment of the mixed-use area. At the same time, it provides for development programs to complement the area and the city. Additional design guidelines may be adopted to provide further assistance in implementing this zone. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.) 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 4, 6-24-2009)  
19.23.020 - Uses authorized under a planned development permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the CMU zone, if a planned development permit is granted by the planning commission in accordance with this chapter. All uses must conform to the development standards of this chapter, and be conducted wholly within a building, except enterprises customarily conducted in the open (i.e., automobile sales, plant nurseries, restaurants with outside dining): 
A.  Antique stores; 
B.  Apparel stores; 
C.  Appliance, sales and service; 
D.  Art studios, galleries; 
E.  Arts, crafts, music and photographic supply stores; 
F.  Auditoriums, exclusive of tents or temporary structures; 
G.  Auction business, when conducted within a building, but excluding livestock sales; 
H.  Bakery shops, including outside dining tables; 
I.  Banks, savings and loan, credit unions, trust companies; 
J.  Barber shops; 
K.  Beauty shops and salons; 
L.  Bicycle shop; 
M.  Blueprinting, photostating and photo finishing facilities; 
N.  Bookstores; 
O.  Carpet, floor covering and ceramic tile stores; 
P.  Chiropractic offices; 
Q.  Churches; 
R.  Clubs and lodges, private; 
S.  Coffee stores, including outside dining tables; 
T.  Computer services and sales; 
U.  Confectionery stores; 
V.  Day care nurseries and day care nurseries, short-term, providing care for more than six children, subject to the standards of Section 19.62.165 of this code; 
W.  Delicatessens, including outside dining tables; 
X.  Dressmaking shops; 
Y.  Draperies and window coverings, sales; 
Z.  Drugstores; 
AA.  Dry goods and notions stores; 
BB.  Electronics, sales and repairs of televisions, VCR's, stereos, computers and related equipment; 
CC.  Fire stations, public buildings, and facilities for federal, state, county and city agencies, not including jails, prisons and other places of confinement; 
DD.  Florist shops; 
EE.  Food stores; 
FF.  Fruit and vegetable stores; 
GG.  Furniture and appliance stores; 
HH.  Greeting card shops; 
II.  Gymnasiums; 
JJ.  Grocery stores (maximum size of fifteen thousand square feet); 
KK.  Hardware stores; 
LL.  Health clubs; 
MM.  Historical museums; 
NN.  Hotels and motels and senior hotels; 
OO.  Ice cream and yogurt shops; 
PP.  Interior decorating establishments; 
QQ.  Jewelry stores; 
RR.  Library; 
SS.  (Intentionally omitted); 
TT.  Meat markets; 
UU.  Medical laboratories; 
VV.  Music conservatories and studios; 
WW.  Newspaper office, excludes newspaper printing; 
XX.  Nurseries, plant; 
YY.  Offices, business and professional; 
ZZ.  Office, medical and dental; 
AAA. Off-street parking; 
BBB. Optician; 
CCC. Pet shops, pet grooming; 
DDD. Plumbing shops; 
EEE. Post office; 
FFF. Printing shops (i.e., blueprinting, photocopying and offset); 
GGG. Photography store, sales and repair of photography equipment and photo processing; 
HHH. Photography studios; 
III. Radio and television retail sales and repair stores; 
JJJ. Restaurants and cafes, including outside dining; 
KKK. Retail stores or businesses not involving any kind of manufacturing, processing or treating of products other than that which is clearly incidental to the retail store or business conducted on the premises subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  Not more than three persons may be employed in permitted manufacturing processing or treating of products, 
2.  The operations and projects may not unreasonably emit noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other objectionable causes; 
LLL. Schools; 
MMM. Shoe repair shops; 
NNN. Small recycling facilities, which do not occupy any required parking; 
OOO. Stationery stores; 
PPP. Tailor shops; 
QQQ. Telephone exchanges; 
RRR. Transportation terminal (i.e., bus, taxi, or train); 
SSS. Travel agency, ticket office; 
TTT. Trophy stores, including plaques and related merchandise; 
UUU. Variety stores; 
VVV. Wallpaper and paint stores; 
WWW. Uses and structures which are incidental or accessory to any of the uses permitted in this zone; 
XXX. Video stores, sales and rentals of videos and recorders; 
YYY. Other uses which in the judgment of the planning commission are similar to, compatible with, and no more objectionable than any of those enumerated in this chapter in accordance with Chapter 19.60 of this code. 
(Ord. 1029 § 4, 2008; Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.030 - Planned development permit required. 
Prior to the issuance of a zoning clearance, a planned development permit is required for the construction, exterior modification or enlargement of any new structure or the use of a lot or premises within the CMU zone in accordance with Section 19.23.200 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.040 - Uses requiring conditional use permits. 
The following uses may be permitted in the CMU zone, if a conditional use permit is obtained in the manner provided in Chapter 19.62 of this code: 
A.  Public utility buildings and structures; 
B.  Building heights greater than two stories or thirty-five feet; 
C.  Arcades; 
D.  Recycling facilities, intermediate, not to exceed five hundred square feet in accordance with Chapter 19.62 of this code, which do not occupy any required parking; 
E.  Drinking establishments, bars, cocktail lounges, brew pubs, taverns; 
F.  Residential dwelling units above the first floor of a mixed-use building, as part of a commercial usage; 
G.  Alcoholic beverage establishments, off-sale; 
H.  Live/work units; 
I.  Residential dwelling units as part of a horizontal mixed-use development, on a site consisting of ten acres or more in size. 
(Ord. 1029 § 5, 2008; Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.) 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 5, 6-24-2009)  
19.23.050 - Signs. 
Signs may be erected in the CMU zone in accordance with Title 17 of this code and any other guidelines adopted by the city relating to the design and placement of signs. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.060 - Property development and performance standards. 
The property development and performance standards set forth in Sections 19.26.065 through 19.26.180 of this code will apply to all lots and premises in the CMU zone. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.065 - Commercial/industrial performance standards. 
All uses within the CMU zone must operate in accordance with the performance standards contained in Chapter 19.54 of this code. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.070 - Lot area and parcel dimensions. 
All lots hereafter created must meet the following minimum standards: 
A.  Minimum zone area is ten thousand square feet, which may consist of one or more lots or parcels, exclusive of public right-of-way dedicated for road purposes or proposed road purposes. If more than one parcel exists, however, the design of the development must be integrated and unified by the utilization of architectural and landscaping design to the satisfaction of the planning commission. 
B.  Minimum width of lots is one hundred feet. 
C.  Minimum depth of lots measured at right angles to the front property line is one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.080 - Minimum yard requirements. 
The planning commission, in their review, must determine the yard requirements based on the height and bulk of the building and adjoining land uses and the intent of the zone, which requirements may not be below the following minimum standards: 
A.  Front Yard. Buildings may be constructed up to the front property line or right-of-way, whichever is greater. Parking areas must be set back a minimum of five feet. 
B.  Side Yard. No interior side yards are required. The side yard adjacent to a public road must meet the front yard setback requirements. 
C.  Rear Yard. Rear yard must be no less than ten feet with consideration given to providing adequate access for service vehicles. If the building height is in excess of twenty-five feet, the setback must be increased by ten feet for each ten feet of building height or portion thereof to a yard area not to exceed fifty feet. 
D.  General Yard Uses. Outside dining, parking of automobiles, and landscaping may be conducted on the site; whereas all other operations and display must be conducted in a completely enclosed building. 
E.  Architectural Features. Nonstructural architectural features may project into the public right-of-way, up to three feet when approved as part of the planned development permit and encroachment permit. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking must comply with the requirements of Chapter 19.44 of this code. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.095 - Off-street loading area. 
Off-street loading must comply with the requirements of Chapter 19.46 of this code. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.100 - Fences and walls. 
A.  Whenever the CMU zone abuts on a residential zone, a solid decorative masonry screen wall of six feet in height must be erected along the property line abutting the residential zone, unless the residential area has been integrated into the project design as considered and approved as part of the planned development permit. 
B.  Whenever the parking or circulation area abuts a public street, there must be a low wall and landscaped hedge, not greater than three feet in height (except architectural features such as pilasters, as approved as part of the planned development permit), along the property lines adjacent to the parking area adjacent to the street. 
C.  The placement and design of walls and screen berms must be submitted to and approved by the director of community development or be part of the approved planned development permit approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.110 - Lighting. 
Lighting, including spotlights, floodlights, electrical reflectors and other means of illumination for signs, structures, landscaping, parking areas, loading areas and the like, must be focused, directed and arranged as to screen the source of light and direct the light down to prevent glare or direct illumination on streets or adjoining property. The lighting design will be subject to review and approval as part of the planned development permit. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.120 - Building coverage. 
Buildings and other structures may not occupy more than fifty percent of the area for which the planned development permit is issued, where other sections of the code are met and with which all standards have been complied. The remaining area may be used for landscaping, automobile parking and circulation, and must be completely improved for these purposes. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.130 - Building height. 
All buildings are limited to two stories and may not exceed a height of thirty-five feet, exclusive of architectural features, as approved under the planned development permit. Greater building heights or number of stories may be permitted subject to the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.135 - Residential uses. 
Residential units approved under a conditional use permit in the CMU zone are subject to the following standards: 
A.  Location. Where residential units are provided they shall be located above the ground floor in order to maintain the commercial use of the building on the street level, unless where permitted for horizontal mixed-use development. Residential units must have a separate and secured entrance and exit from the commercial areas. 
B.  Parking. The base requirement for a mixed-use development shall comply with the residential and commercial parking standards set forth in Chapter 19.44 of this code. 
C.  Lighting. All exterior lighting must be sufficient to establish a sense of well being to the pedestrian. A minimum of one-foot candle must be provided at the ground level for all exterior doorways and vehicular parking areas. 
D.  Refuse Storage and Location. An adequate refuse storage area must be provided for the residential use. This may be required to be separated from the commercial area depending upon the size of the development. 
E.  Usable Outdoor Area. Each unit must include a deck or balcony to provide an exterior area for the unit. The minimum dimension of a deck or balcony is seven feet, six inches. Reasonable access from the unit must be provided. A minimum area of the exterior space is one hundred square feet. 
F.  Recreation Area. Recreation space, including recreational facilities for children, shall be provided for the residential units under a conditional use permit. 
G.  Pedestrian and Vehicular Connections. Buildings are to be connected by attractive and convenient pedestrian pathways and vehicular circulation systems. 
H.  Development shall be designed to promote compatibility between residential uses and surrounding uses to reduce possible conflicts due to noise, vibration, lighting, odor and other nuisances. 
I.  Live/work units shall provide an area devoted to the commercial use located on the ground floor of not less than 500 square feet. 
J.  Horizontal mixed-use developments. In addition to all other requirements set forth in this section, horizontal mixed-use developments shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Buildings shall be designed to a human scale and be connected by a uniform architectural theme to provide a sense of visual connection. 
2.  Shared access and parking areas shall be provided where feasible. 
3.  The residential portion of the site shall provide common usable open space in accordance with the RPD Zone requirements. 
4.  Landscape plans shall be designed to provide well connected spaces and unify different project elements to enhance the pedestrian environment. 
5.  The residential portion of the site shall have a density not to exceed 18 dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.) 
(Ord. No. 1038, §§ 6, 7, 6-24-2009)  
19.23.140 - Landscaping and environmental area. 
A.  The purpose of the landscaping requirements is to enhance, conserve and stabilize property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings. Landscaping also contributes to the relief of heat, noise and glare through the proper placement of green plants and trees. 
B.  Landscaping and all other ground space treatment must be provided upon the net developed site. Landscaping includes the actual planting areas of lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs, or other plants. Landscaping must be surrounded by six-inch masonry curb, walk or building. Courtyards, water ponds, streams, walkways, decks, kiosks and similar items may be permitted. All landscaping must comply with the following standards: 
1.  Maintenance. Required landscaped areas must be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly and healthy condition. This includes proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacing of plants when necessary and regular watering of all plantings. 
2.  Required landscaped areas must be provided with a suitable, permanent method of watering of plants. This watering system must consist of piped water lines terminating in an appropriate number of sprinklers or emitters to ensure a sufficient amount of water for plants within the landscaped area. Sprinklers or emitters must be spaced so as to assure a complete coverage of the required landscaped area. 
3.  The parking area setback must be landscaped with the exception of the area provided for vehicles or pedestrian access. 
4.  No planting area will be considered a landscaped area, unless it contains at least twenty-four square feet in area and is a minimum of four feet in width, except raised planting boxes within close proximity to the building. 
5.  One tree, fifteen gallons minimum, of a species approved on final landscaping plan must be planted within a minimum sixty-inch wide planter area at every ten rows of single-row parking stalls, or at every twenty rows of double-row parking stalls. 
6.  Each unused space resulting from the design of parking spaces or over twenty-four square feet in area must be landscaped. 
7.  When the commercial development abuts a residential zone, or where the CMU zone abuts an alley or development property, adjacent to a residential zone, it must include a six-foot wide landscaped area to screen the commercial development. The design of the screening must consist of trees and shrubs closely spaced. 
8.  Landscaping Plan. A landscaping plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals thirty feet must be submitted for approval by the director of community development and must contain the following: 
a.  The dimensions and square footage of each planting area; 
b.  The total square footage of each planting area; 
c.  Identification of each plant, common and botanical names at the planting area, and the number of each and their container size 
d.  The permanent watering system, including all pipe sizes, and type and size of all sprinkler heads or emitters; 
e.  Specification sheet indicating the soil preparation and maintenance program for continual maintenance of the landscaping area and any type of guarantee associated with the installation of the landscaping. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.150 - Refuse and recycling containment. 
Refuse and recycling enclosures must be provided in accordance with Chapter 19.50 of this code and the following standards: 
A.  Each commercial development established must provide an outdoor refuse and recycling storage area, which is easily accessible and enclosed on all sides by a minimum of six-foot high brick, concrete block, or masonry wall in accordance with city approved standard design. The opening of the storage area must be screened by a solid gate of durable wood, metal, or comparable material. The enclosure must be covered by a solid roof. 
B.  In addition, no material or waste may be deposited in such a form or manner that allows it to be transferred by natural causes or force. Any waste which may cause fumes, dust, or constitute a fire hazard or be edible by or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects, must be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures. 
C.  The number and general placement of the enclosures will be set forth in the planned development permit. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.160 - Utilities. 
All utilities must be placed underground in accordance with Chapter 18.08 of this code. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.170 - Mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antenna. 
All mechanical and electrical equipment, and satellite dish antenna (except dishes less than one meter in diameter), must be screened by landscaping or fence screen wall or combination of design, and all rooftop equipment must be placed behind a permanent parapet wall or equipment screen approved by the director and be completely screened from view at ground level. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.180 - Ramping and equipment for the handicapped. 
Adequate ramps and equipment must be provided to accommodate the use of the facility by the handicapped and must include, but not be limited to, access ramps, restrooms, drinking fountains etc. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.190 - Use of the planned development permit. 
No building or improvement or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established, or enlarged; nor shall a lot or premises be used without first obtaining a planned development permit. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.195 - Planned development permit—Application. 
A.  An application for a planned development permit must be filed with the department on a form provided and must include the following: 
1.  An accurately-dimensioned plot plan showing existing and proposed topography, all proposed building, parking, landscaping areas, walls and all existing or proposed streets within one hundred-foot radius of the property. 
2.  The dimension of all yards, setbacks, parking area, driveways and square footage of all building landscaping and building coverage. 
3.  The elevation of all buildings proposed with a notation of the type of material proposed in addition to a color and material sample. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.200 - Planned development permit—Notice of planning commission review. 
The department shall provide notice of the date, time and place of the planning commission's review of the application and the staff's proposed recommendation to the applicant. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.210 - Planned development permit—Consideration of proposal. 
In considering the approval, denial, or modification of an application for a planned development permit, the planning commission must consider the proposed recommendation of the staff and the following guidelines: 
A.  The degree of compatibility of property uses for which this chapter is intended to promote and preserve should be maintained with respect to the particular use on the particular site and consideration given to the existing and potential uses of property within the zone and the general area in which the use is proposed to be located. 
B.  Performance standards and conditions must be imposed upon uses which without such condition might become obnoxious, dangerous, offensive or injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare or a portion thereof by reason of the emission of noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odor or other harmful or annoying substances. 
C.  The integrity and character of the neighborhood in which the use will be located should be maintained, including the utility and value of property in the neighborhood and in the adjacent zones. 
D.  The use must be compatible with public interest, health, safety, convenience and general welfare. 
E.  The development is in accordance with any adopted guidelines for the area for properties within a redevelopment area. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.220 - Planned development permit—Conditions to application. 
The planning commission may attach such conditions and make such modifications, changes or alterations in the proposed application as the commission may determine necessary to carry out the purposes of this zone. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.230 - Planned development permit—Rejection or modification. 
If the proposed planned development would substantially depreciate property values in the vicinity, unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of property in the vicinity by occupants thereof, or would endanger the public peace, health, safety and general welfare, then such proposed planned development must be rejected, modified or conditioned to remove such objections or denied. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.240 - Planned development permit—Time extensions. 
Unless the construction of the structure is commenced and being diligently pursued not later than twelve months after the date the permit is granted, the permit will automatically expire on that date. However, if there have been no changes in the proposed plot plans or adjacent areas, the planning commission or the director when authorized, may grant additional extensions of time for the commencement of the project. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.250 - Planned development permit—City council review. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission's Decision. Decisions of the planning commission in approving, denying or conditionally approving an application for a planned development permit will be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed or a city council review is ordered as provided in this section. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a permit will not be valid or effective for any purpose, unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  The appeal must be in writing on a form provided by the director and must identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates. 
2.  The appeal must be filed with the director prior to the date on which the planning commission's decision, to which the appeal relates, becomes final. 
3.  The appeal must be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by the city council. 
4.  The appeal must be filed by the applicant or any interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal may be deemed complete nor effective for any purpose, unless it complies with all of the provisions of this section. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before planning commission's decision becomes final, may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission's decision relating to a planned development permit (order of review). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review will stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates, pending the city council's action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council must conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons will be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed; provided, that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant has the burden of proof to show the existence of facts, which warrant the granting of the planned development permit. 
H.  City Council's Decision. The city clerk must give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination must be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(L), 5-25-2018)  
19.23.260 - Planned development permit—Revocation. 
A.  Any permit granted may be revoked by the planning commission or city council after appropriate proceedings, provided in this chapter, for any of the following causes: 
1.  That any term or condition of the permit has not been complied with. 
2.  That the property subject to the permit, or any portion thereof, is used or maintained in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation in effect at time of approval or subsequently made applicable. 
3.  That the use for which the permit was granted has not been exercised for at least twelve consecutive months or has ceased to exist, or has been abandoned. 
4.  That the use for which the permit was granted has been exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or as to constitute a nuisance. 
B.  After revocation of a permit, the property affected thereby must be subject to the current regulations of the applicable zone classification. 
C.  The failure of the planning commission or city council to revoke a permit whenever due cause exists or occurs does not constitute a waiver of such right with respect to any subsequent cause for revocation. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.270 - Certificate of occupancy. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy is required for any change in use within a planned development permit. A change in use in an existing building may be approved by the director of community development. 
B.  An application for a certificate of occupancy must be accompanied by: 
1.  A description of the proposed commercial operation in sufficient detail to describe fully the nature and extent of the proposed use. 
C.  A certificate of occupancy for a use of the land in the CMU zone may be revoked by the city council after a public hearing, if the city council finds that the holder of the certificate has failed to comply with approved plans. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
19.23.290 - Uses prohibited. 
The uses expressly prohibited in the CMU zone are industrial, manufacturing, and drive-thru uses. 
(Ord. 980 § 2 (part), 2005.)  
Chapter 19.24 - C-N COMMERCIAL NEIGHBORHOOD ZONE 
 
19.24.010 - Intent and purpose. 
A.  The commercial neighborhood zone is to provide facilities supplying both daily convenience goods and services as well as to provide an environment of a stable, desirable character which will be in harmony with existing and potential development of surrounding neighborhoods and which may be located in or adjacent to residential areas. 
B.  In order to produce commercial neighborhood centers which meet modern environment and design standards, each center shall be approved only under a planned development permit. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.)  
19.24.020 - Uses authorized under a planned development permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-N zone, if a planned development permit is obtained from the planning commission in the manner provided for in this zone: 
A.  Barbershop; 
B.  Bank, savings and loan association, trust company; 
C.  Beauty parlor; 
D.  Church or other place of worship; 
E.  Drugstore; 
F.  Dry cleaning and laundry pickup station, self-service; 
G.  Food store, retail only, including bakery, delicatessen, grocery, meat, seafood, and vegetable; 
H.  Garden supply store, including nursery stock; 
I.  Library; 
J.  Nursery, children's day; 
K.  Office, architectural, engineering, legal, or other professional, real estate, insurance; 
L.  Office, medical, dental, osteopathic, optician, optometrist and clinics; 
M.  Off-street parking (serving permitted uses); 
N.  Optical goods, retail sales; 
O.  Park, playground, or playfield; 
P.  Post office; 
Q.  Reading room; 
R.  Restaurant (excluding drive-in); 
S.  Travel agencies; 
T.  Uses and structures which are incidental or accessory to any of the uses permitted in this zone; 
U.  Similar uses or related uses to the above may be approved under a planned development permit by the planning commission or city council upon a finding of similarity and compatibility with similar uses and the intent and purpose of the zone; 
V.  Agricultural uses, temporary agricultural uses and stands, subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  Growing agricultural crops and accessory structures are permitted uses, but no poultry or animals shall be raised or kept except as otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
(Ord. 512 § 8, 1982: Ord. 493 § 1 (part), 1981; Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.1.)  
19.24.025 - Uses subject to a conditional use permit. 
The following uses may be permitted in the C-N zone if a conditional use permit is obtained in the manner provided and in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 19.62 and such use conforms to every term and condition of the permit: 
A.  Temporary agricultural stands; 
B.  Intermediate recycling facilities which are incidental or accessory to any of the uses permitted in this zone; 
C.  Day care nurseries and day care nurseries, short-term, providing care for more than six children; 
D.  The concurrent use of an off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment with a grocery store or drug store. 
(Ord. 1029 § 6, 2008; Ord. 660 § 3, 1988; Ord. 640 § 2, 1987; Ord. 512 § 11 (part), 1982.)  
19.24.030 - Property development and performance standards. 
The property development and performance standards set forth in Sections 19.24.040 through 19.24.150 shall apply to all lots and premises in the C-N commercial neighborhood zone. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.2(part).)  
19.24.035 - Commercial/industrial performance standards. 
All uses within the C-N commercial neighborhood zone shall operate in accordance with the provisions of the performance standards contained in chapter 19.54 of this code. 
(Ord. 763 § 10, 1992.)  
19.24.040 - Lot area and parcel dimensions. 
All lots hereafter created shall contain the following minimum standards: 
A.  Minimum lot area shall be one acre, exclusive of any public right-of-way dedicated for road purposes. Maximum area shall be five acres. 
B.  Minimum width of lot shall be one hundred fifty feet, excepting corner lots shall be one hundred seventy feet. 
C.  Minimum depth of lots measured at right angles to the front property line shall be two hundred feet. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.2(A).)  
19.24.050 - Minimum yard requirements. 
The planning commission shall determine the yard requirements based on the height, bulk of building and adjoining land uses and the intent of the zone but in no case below the minimum standards set forth as follows: 
A.  Front yard shall be not less than fifteen feet from the existing or proposed right-of-way line whichever is greater. The front yard shall be landscaped. 
B.  Side yard shall be not less than ten feet with the side yard on a side street being landscaped. 
C.  Rear yard shall be not less than ten feet with consideration given to providing adequate access for service vehicles. 
D.  General Yard Uses. All operations and uses of yards except parking, landscaping, recreation and loading uses shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building. No outdoor storage shall be permitted except for waste contained in an approved enclosure. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.2(B).)  
19.24.060 - Off-street parking. 
A.  All parking areas shall be improved in accordance with the parking provisions, Chapter 19.44. 
B.  The planning commission may add or modify landscaping or other features to insure compatibility with the area in which the use is proposed to be placed. 
C.  All loading areas shall be clearly marked with proper access for ingress and egress. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.2(C).)  
19.24.065 - Off-street loading area. 
Off-street loading shall be in accordance with the loading provisions and standards set forth under the loading chapter of this title (Chapter 19.46). 
(Ord. 588 § 2, 1985.)  
19.24.070 - Fences and walls. 
A.  A six-foot solid decorative screen wall shall be provided and maintained on the side and rear yard boundary line of the C-N commercial neighborhood zone and any residential zone. 
B.  A low screen berm wall or landscape hedge, not greater than three feet, shall be provided between the parking area and existing or planned public right-of-way. The design and type of screening shall be approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.2(D).)  
19.24.080 - Lights. 
Lighting, including spotlights, floodlights, electrical reflectors and other means of illumination for signs, structures, landscaping, parking areas, loading areas and the like, shall be focused, directed and so arranged as to prevent glare or direct illumination on streets or adjoining property. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.2(E).)  
19.24.090 - Building coverage. 
Lot area coverage by building shall not exceed thirty percent of the site area and such coverage shall be measured from the exterior wall area of the building proposed. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.2(F).)  
19.24.100 - Building height. 
Buildings shall have a maximum height of twenty-five feet and no more than two stories. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.2(G).)  
19.24.110 - Landscaping and environmental area. 
The purpose of the landscaping requirements shall be to enhance, conserve and stabilize property values by encouraging pleasant attractive surroundings. Landscaping also contributes to the relief of heat, noise and glare through the proper placement of green plants and trees. Landscaping and all other ground space treatment shall be provided upon at least ten percent of the net developed site. All landscaping shall be provided with a permanent watering system, shall be surrounded by a six-inch concrete curb. Landscaping shall be considered actual planting areas of lawn, trees, shrubs, or other plants. Environmental areas shall be considered those spaces related to or integrated with landscaping which provides an interesting complementary design. Courtyards, water ponds, streams, walkways, decks, kiosks and similar items may be permitted. Such landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  Maintenance. Required landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly and healthy condition. This is meant to include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary, and the regular watering of all plantings. 
B.  Required landscaped areas shall be provided with a suitable, permanent method of watering of plants. This watering system shall consist of piped water lines terminating in an appropriate number of sprinklers to insure a complete coverage of the landscaped area. 
C.  The entire front yard setback shall be landscaped with the exception of that area provided for vehicles or pedestrian access. 
D.  No planting area shall be considered as such unless it contains at least twenty-four square feet of area and is a minimum of four feet in width, except raised planting boxes within close proximity to the building. 
E.  One tree fifteen-gallon minimum of a species approved on the final landscaping plan shall be planted within a minimum thirty-six square-foot area, at every ten rows of single row parking stalls, or at every twenty rows of double row parking stalls. 
F.  Each unused space resulting from the design of parking spaces or accessory structures over twenty-four square feet in area shall be landscaped. 
G.  When the commercial development either rears on or sides on a residential zone, or where the C-N zone abuts an alley or developed property, adjacent to a residential zone, it shall include a six-foot wide landscaped area to screen the commercial development. The design of the screening shall consist of evergreen trees or shrubs closely spaced. 
H.  Landscaping Plan. A plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals thirty feet shall be submitted for approval by the planning director and shall contain the following: 
1.  The dimensions and square footage of each planting area; 
2.  The total square footage and percentage of the net developed site devoted to landscaping; 
3.  Identification of each plant, common and botanical name, at the planting area; the number of each and their container size; 
4.  The permanent watering system, including all pipe sizes, and type and size of all sprinkler heads; 
5.  Specification sheet indicating the soil preparation and maintenance program for continual maintenance of the landscaping area and any type of guarantee associated with the installation of the landscaping. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.2(H).)  
19.24.120 - Refuse and recycling containment. 
Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be provided in accordance with the enclosure provisions of Chapter 19.50 and the following standards: 
A.  Each commercial development established shall provide an outdoor refuse and recycling storage area which shall be easily accessible and enclosed on all sides by a minimum six-foot high brick, concrete block or masonry wall. The opening of the storage area shall be screened by a solid gate of durable wood, metal, or comparable material. 
B.  In addition, no material or waste shall be deposited in such a form or manner that it may be transferred by natural causes or force, and waste which may cause fumes, dust, or which may constitute a fire hazard or be edible by or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects, shall be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures. 
C.  The number and general placement of the enclosures shall be set forth in the planned development permit and approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 791 § 7, 1993: Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.2(J).)  
19.24.130 - Utilities. 
All utilities shall be placed underground in accordance with provisions of Chapter 13.08. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.2(1).)  
19.24.140 - Mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antennae. 
All mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antennas shall be screened by landscaping or fence or combination with the design approved by the director of planning and community development, and all rooftop equipment shall be placed behind a permanent parapet wall or equipment screen approved by the director of planning and community development or his designated representative and be completely screened from view at ground level. 
(Ord. 821 § 5, 1994: Ord. 593 § 13, 1985: Ord. 590 § 13, 1985: Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.2(J).)  
19.24.150 - Ramping and equipment for handicapped. 
Adequate ramps and equipment shall be provided to accommodate the use of the facility by the handicapped and shall include, but not be limited to, access ramps, restrooms, drinking fountains, etc. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.2(K).)  
19.24.160 - Uses of the planned development permit. 
No building or improvement or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established, altered or enlarged, nor shall a lot or premises be used without first obtaining a planned development permit, nor shall an existing building be used for a new use without an occupancy permit first being obtained. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.3.)  
19.24.170 - Application for planned development permit. 
A.  An application for a planned development permit shall be filed with the planning department in the form set forth herein and shall include a development plan containing the following: 
1.  An accurately dimensioned plot plan showing existing and proposed topography, all proposed building, parking, landscaping areas, walls and all existing or proposed streets within a three hundred-foot radius of the property; 
2.  The dimension of all yards, setbacks, parking area, driveways and square footage of all building landscaping and building coverage; 
3.  The elevation of all buildings proposed with a notation of the type of material proposed in addition to a color board and material sample. 
B.  The application and development plan shall be reviewed by the planning department and its proposed recommendations shall be prepared and submitted to the planning commission along with the development plan for their consideration. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.4.)  
19.24.180 - Planned development permit—Planning commission review. 
Notice of the time and place of the planning commission review of the application and the staff's proposed recommendation shall be given to the applicant. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.5 (part).)  
19.24.190 - Planned development permit—Consideration of proposal. 
In considering the approval, denial or modification of an application for a planned development permit, the planning commission shall consider the proposed recommendation of the staff and the following guidelines: 
A.  The degree of compatibility of property uses which this chapter is intended to promote and preserve shall be maintained with respect to the particular use on the particular site and consideration of existing and potential uses of property within the zone and the general area in which the use is proposed to be located; 
B.  Performance standards and conditions shall be imposed upon uses which without such a condition might become obnoxious, dangerous, offensive or injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare or a portion thereof by reason of the emission of noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odor, or other harmful or annoying substances; 
C.  There shall be maintained the integrity and character of the neighborhood in which the use will be located and the utility and value of property in the neighborhood and in the adjacent zones; and 
D.  The use shall be compatible to the public interest, health, safety, convenience and general welfare. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.5(A).)  
19.24.200 - Planned development permit—Conditions on application. 
The planning commission may attach such conditions and make such modifications, changes or alterations in the proposed application as the commission may determine necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this zone. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.5(B).)  
19.24.210 - Planned development permit—Rejection or modification. 
If the proposed planned development would substantially depreciate property values in the vicinity or would unreasonably interfere with the use or enjoyment of property in the vicinity by the occupants thereof for lawful purposes, or would endanger the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, such proposed planned development shall be rejected or modified, or conditioned so as to remove such objections. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.5(C).)  
19.24.220 - Planned development permit—Expiration of permit. 
Unless the use is inaugurated, or the construction of the structure is commenced and being diligently pursued not later than twelve months after the date the permit is granted, the permit will automatically expire on that date; however, if there have been no changes in the proposed plot plans or adjacent areas, the planning commission may grant additional extensions of time for use inauguration. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.5(D).)  
19.24.230 - Planning commission decisions—Appeals—Council review. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission approving, denying or conditionally approving an application for a plan shall be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed or a city council review is ordered as provided in this section. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a planned development permit shall not be valid or effective for any purpose unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Each such appeal shall be in writing on a form provided by the director of planning and community development of the city ("director"), and shall identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates; and 
2.  Each such appeal shall be filed with the director prior to the planning commission decision tow which the appeal relates becoming final, as provided in subsection A of this section; and 
3.  Each such appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by the city council; and 
4.  Each such appeal is filed by or on behalf of any of the following: 
a.  The owner of any real property located within the city, or 
b.  A person who lawfully occupies or is entitled to lawfully occupy any real property which is located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are the subject of the planned development permit, or 
c.  Any interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal shall be deemed complete nor effective for any purpose unless it complies with all of the provisions of this section. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section to the contrary, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before a planning commission decision becomes final pursuant to subsection A of this section, may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission decision relating to a plan ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review shall stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates, pending the city council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council shall conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons shall be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show the existence of the facts which warrant the granting of the planned development permit. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk shall give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination shall be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 856 § 9, 1996: Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.5(E).) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(M), 5-25-2018)  
19.24.240 - Planned development permit—Revocation of permit. 
A.  Any permit heretofore or hereafter granted may be revoked by the planning commission or city council after appropriate proceedings as herein provided for any of the following causes: 
1.  That any term or condition of the permit has not been complied with; 
2.  That the property subject to the permit, or any portion thereof, is used or maintained in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation; 
3.  That the use for which the permit was granted has not been exercised for at least twelve consecutive months or has ceased to exist, or has been abandoned; 
4.  That the use for which the permit was granted has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or as to constitute a nuisance. 
B.  After revocation of a permit, the property affected thereby shall be subject to the regulations of the applicable zone classification. The failure of the planning commission or city council to revoke a permit whenever cause therefor exists or occurs does not constitute a waiver of such right with respect to any subsequent cause for revocation. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.5(F).)  
19.24.250 - Certificate of occupancy. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any change in use within a planned development permit. A change in use in an existing building may be approved by the planning director. 
B.  An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be accompanied by: 
1.  A description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to describe fully the nature and extent of the proposed use. 
C.  A certificate of occupancy for a use of the land in the C-N zone may be revoked by the city council after a public hearing if the city council finds that the holder of the certificate has failed to comply with the approved plans. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.6.)  
19.24.260 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
Uses expressly prohibited in the C-N zone are: 
A.  Single-family dwellings; 
B.  Multiple-family dwellings and motels; 
C.  Industrial uses and manufacturing. 
(Ord. 296 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9407.7.)  
Chapter 19.25 - COT (CAMARILLO OLD TOWN) ZONE 
 
19.25.010 - Intent and purpose of zone. 
The intent of this zone is to establish and provide regulations for the general placement, design, and intensity of uses for the area identified as the Camarillo Old Town. The establishment of these regulations are intended to protect and preserve the character of the existing uses and to identify the development standards for new uses and buildings within the old town area. The COT (Camarillo old town) Zone recognizes the distinction between this business area, and those established prior to the site planning principles used in later commercial areas. At the same time it provides for development programs to complement the area and the city. Other design guidelines may be adopted to provide further assistance in implementing this zone. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the COT zone when such use and location conform to every term and condition of the planned development permit issued for the development where the use is to be conducted. New developments are required to obtain a planned development permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All uses shall conform with the development standards of this chapter and be conducted wholly within a building, except enterprises customarily conducted in the open (i.e., automobile sales, plant nurseries, restaurants with outside dining): 
1.  Antique stores; 
2.  Apparel stores; 
3.  Appliance, sales and service; 
4.  Art studios, galleries; 
5.  Auditoriums, exclusive of tents or temporary structures; 
6.  Auction business, when conducted within a building, but excluding livestock sales; 
7.  Automobile service stations, including the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel and repairs for motor vehicles (including indoor facilities for lubrication, battery and brake service, tire sales, minor adjustments and repair, auto glass sales and repair, but excluding painting, body work, steam cleaning, major repairs), mini-marts and/or the retail sale of beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages, except as permitted under a conditional use permit; 
8.  Automobile sales, new and used, including trailer, truck, recreational vehicle, mobile homes and boat sales yards, and subject to the following conditions: No repair or reconditioning of automobiles, trailers or boats shall be permitted; 
9.  Bakery shops (including outside dining tables); 
10.  Banks, savings and loan, credit unions, trust companies; 
11.  Barber shops; 
12.  Beauty shops; 
13.  Billiard and pool halls; 
14.  Blueprinting, photostating and photo finishing facilities; 
15.  Bookstores; 
16.  Bowling alleys; 
17.  Car washes; 
18.  Carpet, floor covering, and ceramic tile stores; 
19.  Chiropractic offices; 
20.  Churches; 
21.  Clubs and lodges, private; 
22.  Coffee stores (including outside dining tables); 
23.  Confectionery stores; 
24.  Dance halls and dancing studios; 
25.  Day care nurseries and day care nurseries, short-term, providing care for more than six children, subject to the standards of Section 19.62.165; 
26.  Delicatessens (including outside dining tables); 
27.  Dressmaking shops; 
28.  Draperies and window coverings, sales; 
29.  Drugstores; 
30.  Dry goods and notions stores; 
31.  Electronics, sales and repairs of televisions, VCR's, stereos, and related equipment; 
32.  Fire stations, public buildings, and facilities for federal, state, county and city agencies, not including jails, prisons and other places of confinement; 
33.  Fish sales, display and sales of ornamental fish and related products; 
34.  Florist shops; 
35.  Food stores; 
36.  Fruit and vegetable stores; 
37.  Funeral parlors and mortuaries; 
38.  Furniture and appliance stores; 
39.  Furniture upholstery; 
40.  Garden supply stores; 
41.  Gymnasiums; 
42.  Grocery stores; 
43.  Hardware stores; 
44.  Health clubs; 
45.  Historical museums; 
46.  Hotels and motels and senior hotels; 
47.  Ice cream and yogurt shops; 
48.  Interior decorating establishments; 
49.  Jewelry stores; 
50.  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments; 
51.  Library; 
52.  [Intentionally omitted]; 
53.  Meat markets; 
54.  Medical laboratories; 
55.  Millinery shops; 
56.  Music conservatories and studios; 
57.  Newspaper office; 
58.  Nurseries, plant; 
59.  Offices, business and professional; 
60.  Office, medical and dental; 
61.  Offices, veterinary (provided that veterinary establishments shall be in a completely enclosed building); 
62.  Off-street parking; 
63.  Optician; 
64.  Pet shops, pet grooming; 
65.  Plumbing shops; 
66.  Post office; 
67.  Printing shops (i.e., blueprinting, photocopying, and offset); 
68.  Photography store, sales and repair of photography equipment and photo processing; 
69.  Photography studios; 
70.  Radio and television retail sales and repair stores; 
71.  Restaurants and cafes (including outside dining); 
72.  Retail stores or businesses not involving any kind of manufacturing, processing or treating of products other than that which is clearly incidental to the retail store or business conducted on the premises subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
a.  Not more than five persons shall be employed in permitted manufacturing processing or treating of products, 
b.  The operations and projects shall not unreasonably emit noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other objectionable causes; 
73.  Schools; 
74.  Shoe repair shops; 
75.  Small recycling facilities (which do not occupy any required parking); 
76.  Stationery stores; 
77.  Tailor shops; 
78.  Taxidermists; 
79.  Telephone exchanges; 
80.  Theaters, indoor; 
81.  Transportation terminal (i.e., bus, taxi, or train); 
82.  Travel agency, ticket office; 
83.  Trophy stores, including plaques and related merchandise; 
84.  Variety stores; 
85.  Wallpaper and paint stores; 
86.  Uses and structures which are incidental or accessory to any of the uses permitted in this zone; 
87.  Video stores, sales and rentals of videos and recorders; 
88.  Other uses which in the judgment of the planning commission are similar to, compatible with, and no more objectionable than any of those enumerated in this section in accordance with Chapter 19.60 of this code. 
(Ord. 1029 § 7, 2008; Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.030 - Planned development permit required. 
Prior to the issuance of a zoning clearance, a planned development permit is required for the construction, exterior modification or enlargement of any new structure or the use of a lot or premises within the COT zone in accordance with Section 19.25.200 of this chapter. Modifications to existing structures, including the renovation of the exterior facade, additions of not more than twenty percent to the floor area and/or alterations to the site may be approved by the director of planning and community development under an administrative approval when the modifications are in accordance with this chapter and any other adopted design guidelines applicable to the COT zone. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.040 - Uses requiring conditional use permits. 
The following uses may be permitted in the COT zone, if a conditional use permit is obtained in the manner provided in Chapter 19.62 of this code and such use conforms to every term and condition of the permit. A permit for any of these uses may be granted by the planning commission, if the applicant produces sufficient proof that the use will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or to the property in the vicinity or zone in which the use will be situated; that such effects can be prevented with the imposition of conditions, and that the permit is necessary for the owner of the property to make reasonable use of the property: 
A.  Automobile garages for the repair of motor vehicles; 
B.  Public utility buildings and structures; 
C.  Skating rinks, indoors; 
D.  Building heights greater than two stories or thirty-five feet; 
E.  Arcades; 
F.  Recycling facilities, intermediate, not to exceed five hundred square feet in accordance with Chapter 19.62 of this code (which do not occupy any required parking); 
G.  The concurrent retail sale of beer and/or wine with a service station; 
H.  The concurrent use of mini-marts with a service station; 
I.  Commercial recreation uses and sports complexes; 
J.  Drinking establishments, bars, cocktail lounges, brew pubs, taverns; 
K.  Residential dwelling units (as part of a commercial usage); 
L.  Drive-through facilities in conjunction with a permitted use; 
M.  Emergency shelters and transitional housing; 
N.  Alcoholic beverage establishments, off-sale. 
(Ord. 1029 § 8, 2008; Ord. 977 § 5, 2005; Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.050 - Signs. 
Signs may be erected in the COT zone in accordance with the sign ordinance codified in Title 17 and other guidelines adopted by the city relating to the design and placement of signs. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.060 - Property development and performance standards. 
The property development and performance standards set forth in Sections 19.26.065 through 19.26.180 shall apply to all lot and premises in the COT zone. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.065 - Commercial/industrial performance standards. 
All uses within the COT zone shall operate in accordance with the provisions of the performance standards contained in Chapter 19.54 of this code. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.070 - Lot area and parcel dimensions. 
All lots hereafter created shall contain the following minimum standards: 
A.  Minimum zone area shall be ten thousand square feet, which may consist of one or more lots or parcels, exclusive of public right-of-way dedicated for road purposes or proposed road purposes. If more than one parcel exists, however, the design of the development shall be integrated and unified by the utilization of architectural and landscaping design to the satisfaction of the planning commission. 
B.  Minimum width of lots shall be one hundred feet. 
C.  Minimum depth of lots measured at right angles to the front property line shall be one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.080 - Minimum yard requirements. 
The planning commission, in their review, shall determine the yard requirements based on the height and bulk of the building and adjoining land uses and the intent of the zone, but in no case below the minimum standards set forth as follows: 
A.  Front Yard. Buildings may be constructed up to the front property line or future right-of-way, whichever is greater. Parking areas shall be set back a minimum of ten feet. 
B.  Side Yard. No interior side yards shall be required. The side yard adjacent to the public road shall meet the front yard setback requirements. 
C.  Rear Yard. Rear yard shall be no less than ten feet with consideration given to providing adequate access for service vehicles. If the building height is in excess of twenty-five feet, the setback shall be increased by ten feet for each ten feet of building height or portion thereof to a yard area not to exceed fifty feet. 
D.  General Yard Uses. Outside dining, open storage and display of materials and equipment shall be permitted for the parking and display of automobiles, recreation vehicles, nursery, plant items or landscaping when such storage has been approved and shown on the plot plan; whereas all other operations and display shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building. 
E.  Architectural Features. Nonstructural architectural features may project into the public right-of-way, up to three feet with a minimum of seven feet, six inches of vertical clearance to eliminate elements which interfere with pedestrian circulation, when approved as part of the planned development permit and encroachment permit. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be in accordance with the parking provisions of Chapter 19.44 and with the standards set forth therein. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.095 - Off-street loading area. 
Off-street loading shall be in accordance with the loading provisions and standards set forth under the loading chapter of this title (Chapter 19.46). 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.100 - Fences and walls. 
A.  Whenever the COT zone sides on or rears on an R zone, there shall be erected along the property line, abutting the R zone, a solid decorative masonry screen wall, six feet in height. When the COT zone sides or rears on an alley which separates the property from any R zone, the wall requirement may be waived or the wall reduced in height. 
B.  Whenever the parking or circulation area abuts a public street, there shall be a low wall or landscaped hedge, not greater than three feet in height (except architectural features such as pilasters, as approved as part of the planned development permit), along the property lines adjacent to the parking area adjacent to the street. 
C.  The placement and design of walls and screen berms shall be submitted to, and approved by, the director of planning and community development or as part of a planned development permit approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.110 - Lights. 
Lighting, including spotlights, floodlights, electrical reflectors and other means of illumination for signs, structures, landscaping, parking areas, loading areas and the like, shall be focused, directed and so arranged as to screen the source of light and direct the light down to prevent glare or direct illumination on streets or adjoining property. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.120 - Building coverage. 
Buildings and other structures shall not occupy more than sixty-five percent of the area for which the planned development permit is issued where other sections of the code are met and all standards have been complied with. The remaining area shall be used for landscaping, automobile parking and circulation, and shall be completely improved, surfaced and marked for these purposes. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.130 - Building height. 
All buildings shall be limited to a height of two stories not to exceed thirty-five feet exclusive of architectural features as approved under the planned development permit. Greater building heights or number of stories may be permitted subject to the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.140 - Landscaping and environmental area. 
A.  The purpose of the landscaping requirements shall be to enhance, conserve and stabilize property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings. Landscaping also contributes to the relief of heat, noise and glare through the proper placement of green plants and trees. 
B.  Landscaping and all other ground space treatment shall be provided upon the net developed site. Landscaping shall be provided with a permanent watering system; and shall be surrounded by a six-inch masonry curb, walk or building. Landscaping shall be considered actual planting areas of lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs, or other plants. Environmental areas shall be considered those spaces related to or integrated with landscaping which provide an interesting complementary design. Courtyards, water ponds, streams, walkways, decks, kiosks, and similar items may be permitted. Such landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Maintenance. Required landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly and healthy condition. This is meant to include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary, and the regular watering of all plantings. 
2.  Required landscaped areas shall be provided with a suitable, permanent method of watering of plants. This watering system shall consist of piped water lines terminating in an appropriate number of sprinklers or emitters to ensure a sufficient amount of water for plants within the landscaped area. Sprinklers or emitters shall be so spaced as to assure a complete coverage of the required landscaped area. 
3.  The parking area setback shall be landscaped with the exception of that area provided for vehicles or pedestrian access and approved on the development plan. 
4.  No planting area shall be considered as such, unless it contains at least twenty-four square feet of area and is a minimum of four feet in width; except raised planting boxes within close proximity to the building. 
5.  One tree, fifteen gallon minimum, of a species approved on final landscaping plan shall be planted within a minimum thirty-six square foot area, at every ten (10) rows of single-row parking stalls, or at every twenty rows of double-row parking stalls. 
6.  Each unused space resulting from the design of parking spaces or over twenty-four square feet in area shall be landscaped. 
7.  When the commercial development either rears on or sides on a residential zone, or where the COT abuts an alley or development property, adjacent to the residential zone, it shall include a six-foot wide landscaped area to screen the commercial development. The design of the screening shall consist of evergreen trees and shrubs closely spaced. 
8.  Landscaping Plan. A plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals thirty feet shall be submitted for approval by the director of planning and community development and shall contain the following: 
a.  The dimensions and square footage of each planting area; 
b.  The total square footage of each planting area; 
c.  Identification of each plant, common and botanical names at the planting area, and the number of each and their container size(s); 
d.  The permanent watering system, including all pipe sizes, and type and size of all sprinkler heads or emitters; 
e.  Specification sheet indicating the soil preparation and maintenance program for continual maintenance of the landscaping area and any type of guarantee associated with the installation of the landscaping. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.150 - Refuse and recycling containment. 
Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be provided in accordance with the enclosure provisions of Chapter 19.50 and the following standards: 
A.  Each commercial development established shall provide an outdoor refuse and recycling storage area which shall be easily accessible and enclosed on all sides by a minimum six-foot high brick, concrete block or masonry wall in accordance with city approved standard design. The opening of the storage area shall be screened by a solid gate of durable wood, metal, or comparable material. 
B.  In addition, no material or waste shall be deposited in such a form or manner that it may be transferred by natural causes or force, and waste which may cause fumes, dust, or constitute a fire hazard or be edible by or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects, shall be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures. 
C.  The number and general placement of the enclosures shall be set forth in the planned development permit and approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.160 - Utilities. 
All utilities shall be placed underground in accordance with provisions of Chapter 18.08. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.170 - Mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antennae. 
All mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antennae (except dishes less than one meter in diameter) shall be screened by landscaping or fence screen wall or combination of design, and all rooftop equipment shall be placed behind a permanent parapet wall or equipment screen approved by the director of planning and community development or his designated representative and be completely screened from view at ground level. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.180 - Ramping and equipment for the handicapped. 
Adequate ramps and equipment shall be provided to accommodate the use of the facility by the handicapped and shall include, but not be limited to, access ramps, restrooms, drinking fountains, etc. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.190 - Use of the planned development permit. 
No building or improvement or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established, or enlarged; nor shall a lot or premises be used without first obtaining a planned development permit. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.195 - Planned development permit—Application. 
A.  An application for a planned development permit shall be filed with the planning and community development department on a form provided by the department and shall include the following: 
1.  An accurately-dimensioned plot plan showing existing and proposed topography, all proposed building, parking, landscaping areas, walls and all existing or proposed streets within one-hundred-foot radius of the property; 
2.  The dimension of all yards, setbacks, parking area, driveways and square footage of all building landscaping and building coverage; 
3.  The elevation of all buildings proposed with a notation of the type of material proposed in addition to a color and material sample. 
B.  The application and development plan shall be reviewed by the department of planning and community development and its proposed recommendations shall be prepared and submitted to the planning commission along with the development plan for their consideration. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.200 - Planned development permit—Planning commission review. 
Notice of the date, time and place of the planning commission review of the application and the staff's proposed recommendation shall be given to the applicant. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.210 - Planned development permit—Consideration of proposal. 
In considering the approval, denial or modification of an application for a planned development permit, the planning commission shall consider the proposed recommendation of the staff and the following guidelines: 
A.  The degree of compatibility of property uses for which this chapter is intended to promote and preserve shall be maintained with respect to the particular use on the particular site and consideration of existing and potential uses of property within the zone and the general area in which use is proposed to be located; 
B.  Performance standards and conditions shall be imposed upon uses which without such condition might become obnoxious, dangerous, offensive or injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare or a portion thereof by reason of the emission of noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odor or other harmful or annoying substances; 
C.  The integrity and character of the neighborhood in which the use will be located shall be maintained including the utility and value of property in the neighborhood and in the adjacent zones; 
D.  The use shall be compatible with public interest, health, safety, convenience and general welfare; 
E.  The development is in accordance with any adopted guidelines for the area for properties within a redevelopment area. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.220 - Planned development permit—Conditions to application. 
The planning commission may attach such conditions and make such modifications, changes or alterations in the proposed application as the commission may determine necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this zone. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.230 - Planned development permit—Rejection or modification. 
If the proposed planned development would substantially depreciate property values in the vicinity, unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of property in the vicinity by occupants thereof, or would endanger the public peace, health, safety and general welfare, then such proposed planned development shall be rejected, modified or conditioned to remove such objections or denied. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.240 - Planned development permit—Time extensions. 
Unless the use is inaugurated, or the construction of the structure is commenced and being diligently pursued not later than twelve months after the date the permit is granted, the permit shall automatically expire on that date. However, if there have been no changes in the proposed plot plans or adjacent areas, the planning commission or the director of planning and community development or his designated representative, when authorized, may grant additional extensions of time for use inauguration. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.250 - Planned development permit—City council review. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission approving, denying or conditionally approving an application for a plan shall be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed or a city council review is ordered as provided in this section. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a plan shall not be valid or effective for any purpose, unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Each such appeal shall be in writing on a form provided by the director of planning and community development of the city ("director"), and shall identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates; and 
2.  Each such appeal shall be filed with the director prior to the planning commission decision to which the appeal relates becoming final, as provided in subsection A of this section; and 
3.  Each such appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by the city council; and 
4.  Each such appeal is filed by or on behalf of any of the following: 
a.  The owner of any real property located within the city, or 
b.  A person who lawfully occupies or is entitled to lawfully occupy any real property which is located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are the subject of the planned development permit, or 
c.  Any interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal shall be deemed complete nor effective for any purpose, unless it complies with all of the provisions of this section. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before a planning commission decision becomes final pursuant to subsection A of this section, may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission decision relating to a planned development permit ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal of the timely adoption by the city council or an order of review shall stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates, pending the city council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council shall conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons shall be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show the existence of facts which warrant the granting of the planned development permit. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk shall give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination shall be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(N), 5-25-2018)  
19.25.260 - Planned development permit—Revocation. 
A.  Any permit hereintofore or hereafter granted may be revoked by the planning commission or city council after appropriate proceedings, provided herein, for any of the following causes: 
1.  That any term or condition of the permit has not been complied with; 
2.  That the property subject to the permit, or any portion thereof, is used or maintained in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation in effect at time of approval; 
3.  That the use for which the permit was granted has not been exercised for at least twelve consecutive months or has ceased to exist, or has been abandoned; 
4.  That the use for which the permit was granted has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or as to constitute a nuisance. 
B.  After revocation of a permit, the property affected thereby shall be subject to the regulations of the applicable zone classification. 
C.  The failure of the planning commission or city council to revoke a permit whenever due cause exists or occurs does not constitute a waiver of such right with respect to any subsequent cause for revocation. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.270 - Certificate of occupancy. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any change in use within a planned development permit. A change in use in an existing building may be approved by the director of planning and community development. 
B.  An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be accompanied by: 
1.  A description of the proposed commercial operation in sufficient detail to describe fully the nature and extent of the proposed use. 
C.  A certificate of occupancy for a use of the land in the COT zone may be revoked by the city council after a public hearing if the city council finds that the holder of the certificate has failed to comply with approved plans. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
19.25.290 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
Uses expressly prohibited in the COT zone are industrial and manufacturing uses. 
(Ord. 898 § 1 (part), 1998.)  
Chapter 19.26 - CPD COMMERCIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE 
 
19.26.010 - Intent and purpose of zone. 
The CPD zone is established to provide areas for the development of planned commercial uses. The general placement, design and intensity of uses in this zone should be planned to protect and preserve the character of adjoining properties while increasing efficiency and promoting harmonious relationships. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.)  
19.26.020 - Uses permitted. 
In the CPD zone the following uses only are permitted without any permit and are subject to the general provisions and zone provisions set forth in zone: 
A.  Agriculture and uses and accessory thereto, but no poultry or animals shall be raised or kept except as are otherwise permitted by this title; a dwelling may be used only as a residence for agricultural workers employed on the farm where the dwelling is located; 
B.  Community centers; 
C.  Floriculture and horticulture of all types; 
D.  Public parks and playgrounds; 
E.  Water supply; no new private wells shall be drilled, equipped or used except for agricultural purposes exclusively; 
F.  The planning director may authorize a temporary carnival, fair, rodeo, gymkhana, and any other similar temporary recreational and amusement type enterprise whenever the duration of the enterprise is for not more than seven consecutive days within any sixty-day period of time. At the time of authorization, the planning director may impose conditions regarding hours of operation, access, parking, fencing, and surface treatment to inhibit dust emanation and bonds to guarantee site maintenance; 
G.  Special events as set forth in Chapter 19.63. 
(Ord. 628 § 5, 1987; Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.1.)  
19.26.030 - Uses requiring planned development permits. 
The uses set forth below are permitted in the CPD zone only if a planned development permit is obtained, as stated in Section 19.26.200 and such use conforms to every term and condition of the permit. All uses shall be conducted wholly within a building, except enterprises customarily conducted in the open such as automobile sales, plant nurseries, restaurants and recycling centers: 
1.  Antique stores; 
2.  Art studios; 
3.  Auditoriums, exclusive of tents or temporary structures; 
4.  Auction business, when conducted within a building, but excluding livestock sales; 
5.  Automobile service stations including the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel and repairs for motor vehicles including indoor facilities for lubrication, battery and brake service, tire repair, minor adjustments and repair, but excluding painting, body work, steam cleaning, major repairs, mini-marts and/or the retail sale of beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages except as permitted under a conditional use permit; 
6.  Automobile sales, new and used, including trailer, truck, recreational vehicle, mobilehomes and boat sales yards, and subject to the following condition: No repair or reconditioning of automobiles, trailers or boats shall be permitted unless such work is done entirely within an enclosed building; 
7.  Automobile diagnostic center; 
8.  Appliance, sales and service; 
9.  Banks, savings and loan, trust companies; 
10.  Barbershops; 
11.  Baths, turkish and similar types; 
12.  Beauty shops; 
13.  Billiard and pool halls; 
14.  Blueprinting, photostating and photofinishing facilities; 
15.  Bookstores; 
16.  Bowling alleys; 
17.  Car washes; 
18.  Churches; 
19.  Clubs and lodges, private; 
20.  (Deleted); 
21.  Confectionery stores; 
22.  Dancehalls and dancing studios; 
23.  Day care nurseries and day care nurseries, short-term, providing care for more than six children subject to the standards of Section 19.62.165; 
24.  Delicatessens; 
25.  Dressmaking shops; 
26.  Drugstores; 
27.  Drygoods and notions stores; 
28.  Fire stations, public buildings, and facilities for federal, state, county and city agencies, not including jails, prisons and other places of confinement; 
29.  Floricultural and horticultural structures, for all types of related uses; 
30.  Florist shops; 
31.  Fruit and vegetable stores; 
32.  Funeral parlors and mortuaries; 
33.  Furniture and appliance stores; 
34.  Garages for the storage and repair of motor vehicles; 
35.  Gymnasiums; 
36.  Grocery stores; 
37.  Hardware stores; 
38.  Health studios, reducing salons; 
39.  Hospitals and sanitariums, excluding mental; 
40.  Hotels and motels and senior hotels; 
41.  Ice storage houses of not more than five-ton capacity; 
42.  Interior decorating establishments; 
43.  Jewelry stores; 
44.  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments; 
45.  (Intentionally omitted); 
46.  Meat markets; 
47.  Medical laboratories; 
48.  Millinery shops; 
49.  Music conservatories and studios; 
50.  Newspaper offices and plants; 
51.  Nurseries, plant; 
52.  Offices, business and professional; 
53.  Offices, veterinary (provided that veterinary establishments shall be in a completely enclosed building); 
54.  Plumbing shops; 
55.  Printing shops (i.e., blueprinting and photocopying and offset); 
56.  Photo shops, with drive-up windows; 
57.  Radio and television retail sales and repair stores; 
58.  Restaurants and cafes, including drive-up types; 
59.  Retail stores or businesses not involving any kind of manufacturing, processing or treating of products other than that which is clearly incidental to the retail store or business conducted on the premises subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
a.  Not more than five persons shall be employed in permitted manufacturing processing or treating of products, 
b.  The operations and products shall not unreasonably emit noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other objectionable causes; 
60.  Schools; 
61.  Shoe repair shops; 
62.  Small recycling facilities (which do not occupy any required parking); 
63.  Stationery stores; 
64.  Tailor shops; 
65.  Taxidermists; 
66.  Telephone exchange; 
67.  Theaters, indoor; 
68.  Transportation terminal (i.e., bus, taxi, or train); 
69.  Travel agency, ticket office; 
70.  Variety stores; 
71.  Wallpaper and paint stores; 
72.  Wearing apparel store; 
73.  Uses and structures which are incidental or accessory to any of the uses permitted in this zone; 
74.  Other uses which in the judgment of the commission are similar to, compatible with and no more objectionable than any of those enumerated herein. 
(Ord. 1029 § 9, 2008; Ord. 871 § 3, 1997; Ord. 773 § 12, 1993; Ord. 712 § 3, 1990; Ord. 669 § 1, 1989; Ord. 660 § 4, 1989; Ord. 640 § 3, 1987; Ord. 512 § 9, 1982; Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.2.)  
19.26.040 - Uses requiring conditional use permits. 
The following uses may be permitted in the CPD zone, if a conditional use permit is obtained in the manner provided in Chapter 19.62 of this code and such use conforms to every term and condition of the permit. A permit for any of these uses may be granted by the planning commission if the applicant produces sufficient proof that the use will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or to the property in the vicinity or zone in which the use will be situated; that such effects can be prevented with the imposition of conditions, and that the permit is necessary for the owner of the property to make reasonable use of the property: 
A.  Amusement parks, golf courses both regular and miniature, golf driving ranges; 
B.  Carnivals (permanent); 
C.  Crematoriums; 
D.  Equipment rental and service with the following limitation: 
1.  Service, maintenance and repair limited to permittee's equipment only, 
2.  Limited to rental and storage of equipment as follows: 
a.  Concrete mixers, limited to one-sack size, 
b.  Small tractors, limited to the operation of a five-eighths cubic yard skip loader or a five-foot blade attachment, 
c.  Rototillers, 
d.  Home improvement or maintenance equipment, 
e.  Trailers, limited to one-ton capacity, 
f.  Hand tools and garden equipment, 
g.  Trucks, not exceeding three-ton capacity; 
E.  Golf course clubhouse; in connection with a regular or miniature golf course or golf driving range; 
F.  Public utility buildings and structures; 
G.  Skating rinks, indoors; 
H.  Theaters, outdoor; 
I.  Building heights greater than two stories or thirty-five feet; 
J.  Temporary agricultural stands in accordance with Chapter 19.62; 
K.  Arcades; 
L.  Recycling facilities—Intermediate not to exceed five hundred square feet in accordance with Chapter 19.62 (which do not occupy any required parking; 
M.  The concurrent retail sale of beer and/or wine with a service station; 
N.  The concurrent use of mini-marts with a service station; 
O.  Commercial recreation uses and sports complexes; 
P.  Drinking establishments, bars, cocktail lounges, brew pubs, taverns; 
Q.  Rest, convalescent, senior care, or nursing homes; 
R.  Emergency shelters and transitional housing; 
S.  Alcohol beverage establishments, off-sale. 
(Ord. 1029 § 10, 2008; Ord. 977 § 6, 2005; Ord. 881 § 4, 1997; Ord. 871 § 4, 1997; Ord. 867 § 2, 1997; Ord. 712 § 4, 1990; Ord. 640 § 4, 1987; Ord. 550 § 1, 1983: Ord. 537 § 3, 1982: Ord. 512 § 10 (part), 1982; Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.3.)  
19.26.050 - Signs. 
Signs may be erected in the CPD zone in accordance with the sign ordinance codified in Title 17. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.4.)  
19.26.060 - Property development and performance standards. 
The property development and performance standards set forth in Sections 19.26.070 through 19.26.180 shall apply to all lot and premises in the CPD zone. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.5 (part).)  
19.26.065 - Commercial/industrial performance standards. 
All uses within the CPD commercial planned development zone shall operate in accordance with the provisions of the performance standards contained in Chapter 19.54 of this code. 
(Ord. 763 § 11, 1992.)  
19.26.070 - Lot area and parcel dimensions. 
All lots hereafter created shall contain the following minimum standards: 
A.  Minimum zone area shall be ten thousand square feet, which may consist of one or more lots or parcels, exclusive of public right-of-way dedicated for road purposes or proposed road purposes. If more than one parcel exists however, the design of the development shall be integrated and unified by the utilization of architectural and landscaping design to the satisfaction of the planning commission. 
B.  Minimum width of lot shall be one hundred feet. 
C.  Minimum depth of lots measured at right angles to the front property line shall be one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 522 § 1, 1982: Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.5(A).)  
19.26.080 - Minimum yard requirements. 
The planning commission in their review shall determine the yard requirements based on the height and bulk of the building and adjoining land uses and the intent of the zone, but in no case below the minimum standards set forth as follows: 
A.  Front Yard. Front yard shall be not less than ten feet nor greater than fifty feet from the existing or proposed right-of-way line. 
B.  Side Yard. No interior side yards shall be required, except when adjacent to a residential zone or when abutting any street or alley which separates the CPD zone from a residential zone. In which case, minimum side yards of fifty feet shall be required. The side yard adjacent to the public road shall meet the front yard setback requirements. 
C.  Rear Yard. Rear yard shall be no less than ten feet with consideration given to providing adequate access for service vehicles. If the building height is in excess of twenty-five feet, the setback shall be increased by ten feet for each ten feet of building height or portion thereof to a maximum yard area of fifty feet. 
D.  General Yard Uses. Open storage and display of materials and equipment shall be permitted for the parking and display of automobiles, recreation vehicles, nursery, plant items or landscaping when such storage has been approved and shown on the plot plan. Whereas all other operations and display shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.5(B).)  
19.26.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be in accordance with the parking provisions of Chapter 19.44 of this code and with the standards set forth in this section: 
A.  Ingress and egress roads leading into a limited access highway should be located at intervals of not less than six hundred feet apart. Ingress and egress roads leading onto any other public road, street or highway should be located at intervals of not less than three hundred feet apart, except that when such road, street or highway is designed as a service road for any adjacent commercial area, then the ingress and egress road shall be located at intervals of not less than one hundred feet apart. 
B.  Frontage or interior service roads may be required to serve the CPD area. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.5(C).)  
19.26.095 - Off-street loading area. 
Off-street loading shall be in accordance with the loading provisions and standards set forth under the loading chapter of this title (Chapter 19.46). 
(Ord. 588 § 3, 1985.)  
19.26.100 - Fences and walls. 
A.  Whenever the commercial planned development zone sides on or rears on an R zone, there shall be erected along the property line, abutting the R zone, a solid decorative screen wall six feet in height. 
B.  Whenever the parking or circulation area abuts a public street, there shall be provided a low screen berm, wall or landscaped hedge, not greater than three feet in height, along the property lines adjacent to the parking area adjacent to the street. 
C.  The placement and design of walls and screen berms shall be submitted to and approved by the planning director. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.5(D).)  
19.26.110 - Lights. 
Lighting, including spotlights, floodlights, electrical reflectors and other means of illumination for signs, structures, landscaping, parking areas, loading areas and the like, shall be focused, directed and so arranged as to prevent glare or direct illumination on streets or adjoining property. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.5(E).)  
19.26.120 - Building coverage. 
Buildings and other structures shall not occupy more than thirty percent of the area for which the planned development permit is issued. The remaining area shall be used for landscaping automobile parking and circulation, and shall be completely improved, surfaced and marked for this purpose. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.5(F).)  
19.26.130 - Building height. 
All buildings shall be limited to a height of two stories not to exceed thirty-five feet. Greater building heights or number of stories may be permitted subject to the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 550 § 2, 1983: Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.5(G).)  
19.26.140 - Landscaping and environmental area. 
A.  The purpose of the landscaping requirements shall be to enhance, conserve and stabilize property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings. Landscaping also contributes to the relief of heat, noise and glare through the proper placement of green plants and trees. 
B.  Landscaping and all other ground space treatment shall be provided upon at least ten percent of the net developed site. All landscaping shall be provided with a permanent watering system; and shall be surrounded by a six-inch concrete curb. Landscaping shall be considered actual planting areas of lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs, or other plants. Environmental areas shall be considered those spaces related to or integrated with landscaping which provide an interesting complimentary design. Courtyards, water ponds, streams, walkways, decks, kiosks, and similar items may be permitted. Such landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Maintenance. Required landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly and healthy condition. This is meant to include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary, and the regular watering of all plantings. 
2.  Required landscaped areas shall be provided with a suitable, permanent method of watering of plants. This watering system shall consist of piped water lines terminating in an appropriate number of sprinklers to insure a sufficient amount of water for plants within the landscaped area. Sprinklers shall be so spaced as to assure a complete coverage of the required landscaped area. 
3.  The entire front yard setback shall be landscaped with the exception of that area provided for vehicles or pedestrian access and approved on the development plan. 
4.  No planting area shall be considered as such unless it contains at least twenty-four square feet of area and is a minimum of four feet in width; except raised planting boxes within close proximity to the building. 
5.  One tree, fifteen-gallon minimum, of a species approved on final landscaping plan shall be planted within a minimum thirty-six-square-foot area, at every ten rows of single row parking stalls, or at every twenty rows of double row parking stalls. 
6.  Each unused space resulting from the design of parking spaces or over twenty-four square feet in area shall be landscaped. 
7.  When the commercial development either rears on or sides on a residential zone, or where the CPD zone abuts an alley or development property, adjacent to a residential zone, it shall include a six-foot wide landscaped area to screen the commercial development. The design of the screening shall consist of evergreen trees and shrubs closely spaced. 
8.  Landscaping Plan. A plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals thirty feet shall be submitted for approval by the planning director and shall contain the following: 
a.  The dimensions and square footage of each planting area; 
b.  The total square footage of each planting area; 
c.  Identification of each plant, common and botanical name, at the planting area; the number of each and their container size; 
d.  The permanent watering system, including all pipe sizes, and type and size of all sprinkler heads; 
e.  Specification sheet indicating the soil preparation and maintenance program for continual maintenance of the landscaping area and any type of guarantee associated with the installation of the landscaping. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.5(H).)  
19.26.150 - Refuse and recycling containment. 
Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be provided in accordance with the enclosure provisions of Chapter 19.50 and the following standards: 
A.  Each commercial development established shall provide an outdoor refuse and recycling storage area which shall be easily accessible and enclosed on all sides by a minimum six-foot high brick, concrete block or masonry wall. The opening of the storage area shall be screened by a solid gate of durable wood, metal, or comparable material. 
B.  In addition, no material or waste shall be deposited in such a form or manner that it may be transferred by natural causes or force, and waste which may cause fumes, dust, or which may constitute a fire hazard or be edible by or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects, shall be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures. 
C.  The number and general placement of the enclosures shall be set forth in the planned development permit and approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 791 § 8, 1993: Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.5(1).)  
19.26.160 - Utilities. 
All utilities shall be placed underground in accordance with provisions of Chapter 18.08. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.5(J).)  
19.26.170 - Mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antennae. 
All mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antennas shall be screened by landscaping or fence or combination with the design approved by the director of planning and community development, and all rooftop equipment shall be placed behind a permanent parapet wall or equipment screen approved by the director of planning and community development or his designated representative and be completely screened from view at ground level. 
(Ord. 821 § 5, 1994: Ord. 593 § 14, 1985: Ord. 590 § 14, 1985: Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.5(K).)  
19.26.180 - Ramping and equipment for handicapped. 
Adequate ramps and equipment shall be provided to accommodate the use of the facility by the handicapped and shall include, but not be limited to, access ramps, restrooms, drinking fountains, etc. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.5(L).)  
19.26.190 - Use of the planned development permit. 
No building or improvement or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established, altered or enlarged; nor shall a lot or premises be used without first obtaining a planned development permit, nor shall an existing building be used for a new use without an occupancy permit first being obtained. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.6.)  
19.26.200 - Planned development permit—Application. 
A.  An application for a planned development permit shall be filed with the planning department in the form set forth herein and shall include a development plan containing the following: 
1.  An accurately dimensioned plot plan showing existing and proposed topography, all proposed building, parking, landscaping areas, walls and all existing or proposed streets within a three-hundred-foot radius of the property; 
2.  The dimension of all yards, setbacks, parking area, driveways and square footage of all building landscaping and building coverage; 
3.  The elevation of all buildings proposed with a notation of the type of material proposed in addition to a color and material sample. 
B.  The application and development plan shall be reviewed by the planning department and its proposed recommendations shall be prepared and submitted to the planning commission along with the development plan for their consideration. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.7.)  
19.26.210 - Planned development permit—Planning commission review. 
Notice of the time and place of the planning commission review of the application and the staff's proposed recommendation shall be given to the applicant. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.8 (part).)  
19.26.220 - Planned development permit—Consideration of proposal. 
In considering the approval, denial or modification of an application for a planned development permit, the planning commission shall consider the proposed recommendation of the staff and the following guidelines: 
A.  That the degree of compatibility of property uses for which this chapter is intended to promote and preserve shall be maintained with respect to the particular use on the particular site and consideration of existing and potential uses of property within the zone and the general area in which use is proposed to be located; 
B.  That performance standards and conditions shall be imposed upon uses which without such condition might become obnoxious, dangerous, offensive or injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare or a portion thereof by reason of the emission of noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odor or other harmful or annoying substances; 
C.  That there shall be maintained the integrity and character of the neighborhood in which the use will be located and the utility and value of property in the neighborhood and in the adjacent zones; 
D.  That the use shall be compatible with public interest, health, safety, convenience and general welfare. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.8(A).)  
19.26.230 - Planned development permit—Conditions to application. 
The planning commission may attach such conditions and make such modifications, changes or alterations in the proposed application as the commission may determine necessary to carry the purposes and intent of this zone. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.8(B).)  
19.26.240 - Planned development permit—Rejection or modification. 
If the proposed planned development would substantially depreciate property values in the vicinity, unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of property in the vicinity by occupants thereof, or would endanger the public peace, health, safety and general welfare then such proposed planned development shall be rejected, modified or conditioned to remove such objections. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.8(C).)  
19.26.250 - Planned development permit—Time extensions. 
Unless the use is inaugurated, or the construction of the structure is commenced and being diligently pursued not later than twelve months after the date the permit is granted, the permit will automatically expire on that date. However, if there have been no changes in the proposed plot plans or adjacent areas, the planning commission may grant additional extensions of time for use inauguration. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.8(D).)  
19.26.260 - Planning commission decisions—Appeals—Council review. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission approving, denying or conditionally approving an application for a plan shall be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed or a city council review is ordered as provided in this section. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a plan shall not be valid or effective for any purpose unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Each such appeal shall be in writing on a form provided by the director of planning and community development of the city ("director"), and shall identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates; and 
2.  Each such appeal shall be filed with the director prior to the planning commission decision to which the appeal relates becoming final, as provided in subsection A of this section; and 
3.  Each such appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by the city council; and 
4.  Each such appeal is filed by or on behalf of any of the following: 
a.  The owner of any real property located within the city, or 
b.  A person who lawfully occupies or is entitled to lawfully occupy any real property which is located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are the subject of the planned development permit, or 
c.  Any interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal shall be deemed complete nor effective for any purpose unless it complies with all of the provisions of this section. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before a planning commission decision becomes final pursuant to subsection A of this section, may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission decision relating to a planned development permit ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings, The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review shall stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates, pending the city council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council shall conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons shall be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show the existence of the facts which warrant the granting of the planned development permit. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk shall give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination shall be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 856 § 10, 1996: Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.8(E).) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(O), 5-25-2018)  
19.26.270 - Planned development permit—Revocation. 
A.  Any permit hereintofore or hereafter granted may be revoked by the planning commission or city council after appropriate proceedings, provided herein, for any of the following causes: 
1.  That any term or condition of the permit has not been complied with; 
2.  That the property subject to the permit, or any portion thereof, is used or maintained in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation in effect at time of approval; 
3.  That the use for which the permit was granted has not been exercised for at least twelve consecutive months or has ceased to exist, or has been abandoned; 
4.  That the use for which the permit was granted has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or as to constitute a nuisance. 
B.  After revocation of a permit, the property affected thereby shall be subject to the regulations of the applicable zone classification. 
C.  The failure of the planning commission or city council to revoke a permit whenever due cause exists or occurs does not constitute a waiver of such right with respect to any subsequent cause for revocation. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.8(F).)  
19.26.280 - Certificate of occupancy. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any change in use within a planned development permit. A change in use in an existing building may be approved by the planning director. 
B.  An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be accompanied by: 
1.  A description of the proposed commercial operation in sufficient detail to describe fully the nature and extent of the proposed use. 
C.  A certificate of occupancy for a use of the land in the CPD zone may be revoked by the city council after a public hearing if the city council finds that the holder of the certificate has failed to comply with approved plans. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.9.)  
19.26.290 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
Uses expressly prohibited in the CPD zone are: 
A.  Industrial and manufacturing uses; 
B.  Residential uses, except as specified. 
(Ord. 290 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 9408.10.)  
Chapter 19.27 - SC SERVICE COMMERCIAL ZONE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1066, § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 2011, amended Ch. 19.27 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 19.27, §§ 19.27.010—19.27.280, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 461, § 1 (part), adopted 1980; Ord. No. 493, § 1 (part), adopted 1981; Ord. No. 563, § 2, adopted 1984; Ord. No. 588, § 4, adopted 1985; Ord. No. 590, § 15, adopted 1985; Ord. No. 593, § 15, adopted 1985; Ord. No. 628, § 6, adopted 1987; Ord. No. 660, § 5, adopted 1988; Ord. No. 763, § 12, adopted 1992; Ord. No. 856, § 11, adopted 1996. 
 
19.27.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The service commercial zone (SC zone) is established to provide areas of development for service type uses that are normally heavier than general retail and somewhat lighter than the industrial categories while generally providing service, assembly of materials, craft and related or support type uses. The general placement, design and intensity of a use in the zone are required to be planned in order to protect and preserve the character of the adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.020 - Uses permitted under a planned development permit. 
A.  The following uses are permitted in the SC zone subject to the approval of a planned development permit: 
1.  Appliance service and sale facility. 
2.  Art studios/galleries. 
3.  Automotive service station and repair garages, transmission, muffler, and automobile upholstery; all storage and repair within an entirely enclosed building. 
4.  Automobile and truck sales. 
5.  Auto parts stores. 
6.  Bakery, retail and wholesale (may include ancillary outside seating). 
7.  Bookbinding. 
8.  Building materials, retail and wholesale. 
9.  Caretaker facilities as an ancillary function to self-storage facilities. 
10.  Car washes. 
11.  Catering and food services, including food preparation. 
12.  Carpet/drapery cleaning. 
13.  Carpet/drapery sales. 
14.  Coffee roasting (may include ancillary store and seating). 
15.  Dry cleaning establishments. 
16.  Electronics repair shops including sales of ancillary parts and equipment. 
17.  Feed stores (including pet sales). 
18.  Florist shops, wholesale/retail. 
19.  Ice cream and yogurt shops. 
20.  Laundry and linen service. 
21.  Locksmith shops. 
22.  Medical and dental laboratories. 
23.  Meat markets. 
24.  Metal laboratory. 
25.  Nursery plant sales and garden supply. 
26.  Offices (business and professional). 
27.  Parking lots, including parking for transit. 
28.  Photo processing. 
29.  Picture framing. 
30.  Pet shops. 
31.  Plumbing shops. 
32.  Photography studios. 
33.  Printing and publishing. 
34.  Recycling facilities, small (which do not occupy any required parking). 
35.  Rental, party and event. 
36.  Self-storage warehouse. 
37.  Sheet metal shops. 
38.  Shoe repair shops. 
39.  Sign manufacturing. 
40.  Soil and material laboratory. 
41.  Taxidermist. 
42.  Tire store. 
43.  Trade schools. 
44.  Upholstery and mattress shops. 
45.  Veterinary clinic (all indoors). 
46.  Warehousing and wholesaling. 
47.  Welding supplies sales and service. 
48.  Woodworking and cabinet shops. 
Uses and structures that are incidental and accessory to any of the uses permitted in this zone which in the judgment of the planning commission are similar to and compatible with and no more objectionable than any of these listed uses are also permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011; Ord. No. 1099, § 4(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
19.27.040 - Uses requiring a conditional use permit. 
A.  The following uses may be permitted in the SC zone if a conditional use permit is obtained in the manner provided in Chapter 19.62 of this code: 
1.  Artists lofts with studio/work space. 
2.  Bottling and canning plants. 
3.  Breweries, wineries, and distilleries, with or without tasting areas, including retail sales of alcoholic beverages manufactured on-site that will be consumed off the premises. 
4.  Buildings with a height greater than thirty-five feet. 
5.  Commercial recreational uses. 
6.  Concurrent use of mini-marts with a service station (without alcohol sales). 
7.  Dance studios. 
8.  Drinking establishments, bars. 
9.  Equipment rental and service. 
10.  Gymnasiums and health clubs. 
11.  Gymnastics. 
12.  Martial arts studios. 
13.  Museums. 
14.  Residential dwelling units above the first floor of a mixed-use building, as part of a commercial usage. 
15.  Restaurants with or without alcohol sales (may include ancillary outside seating). 
16.  Skating rinks. 
17.  Veterinary clinic with outdoor kennels. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011; Ord. No. 1099, § 4(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
19.27.045 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
A.  The following uses are expressly prohibited in the SC zone: 
1.  Drinking establishments. 
2.  General retail uses, except as specified in this chapter. 
3.  Residential uses, except as authorized under Section 19.27.040. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011; Ord. No. 1099, § 4(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
19.27.050 - Signs. 
Signs for uses in the SC zone are permitted in accordance with the applicable sign regulations in Chapter 17.04 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.055 - Tasting area standards. 
A.  Size. The total space allowed for tasting areas is limited to thirty percent of the gross floor area of the brewery, winery, or distillery to which they are ancillary. 
B.  Parking. Off street parking for tasting areas must satisfy the parking requirements of Section 19.44.080(11)(a) of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 3(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
19.27.060 - Property development performance standards. 
The property development performance standards in Section 19.27.070 through Section 19.27.170 apply to all lots and premises within the SC zone. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.065 - Commercial/industrial performance standards. 
All uses within the SC zone must operate in accordance with the performance standards in Chapter 19.54 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.070 - Lot area and parcel dimensions. 
All lots must meet the following minimum standards: 
A.  The minimum lot area is ten thousand square feet exclusive of public right-of-way dedicated for road purposes or proposed road purposes. 
B.  Minimum width of a lot is one hundred feet. 
C.  Minimum depth of lot measured at right angles to the front property line is one hundred feet. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.075 - Minimum yard requirements. 
A.  The planning commission must determine the yard requirements for a planned development permit based upon the height and bulk of the building and the adjoining land use and the intent of the zone, but in no case below the minimum standards set forth as follows: 
1.  Front yard. The front yard may not be less than fifteen feet or greater than fifty feet from the existing or proposed right-of-way line. The front yard must be landscaped. 
2.  Side yard. No interior side yard is required except when adjacent to a residential zone or when abutting a street or alley that separates the SC zone from a residential zone in which case a minimum side yard of fifty feet will be required. The side yard must include a six-foot landscaping screen adjacent to a six-foot block wall constructed on the property line, and when adjacent to a public street the front yard setback landscaping requirements must be met. 
3.  Rear yard. The rear yard may be no less than ten feet deep with consideration given to providing adequate access for service vehicles. If the building height is in excess of twenty-five feet, the setback will be increased by one foot for each one foot of building height or portion thereof for a maximum area of fifty feet. When the SC zone abuts a residential zone, a minimum rear yard of fifty feet must be provided. A minimum six-foot landscape screen with dense planting must also be provided. 
B.  General yard uses: Open storage and display of materials and equipment is prohibited. Permitted uses that normally conduct a portion of the business in the open such as equipment rental and building material storage yards must ensure that all ancillary outside sales areas are paved, have a minimum six foot wide perimeter landscaping buffer and are screened by a minimum six foot high decorative/screen wall. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.080 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking must satisfy the parking requirements of Chapter 19.44 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.085 - Off-street loading area. 
Off-street loading must satisfy the loading requirements of Chapter 19.46 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.090 - Fences and walls. 
A.  A minimum six foot high solid decorative screen wall must be erected on a property line abutting any residential zone. 
B.  All parking areas must be screened from view from the street through the use of earth mounds, landscaping, or a low screen wall with the height of the screening to be three feet as measured from the higher side between the street and parking lot area. 
C.  The placement and design of the wall or screen berm must be approved by the director. Permitted uses that normally conduct a portion of their business in the open such as equipment rental and building material storage yards must ensure that all ancillary outside sales areas are screened by a minimum six foot high decorative screen wall. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.100 - Lights. 
Lighting, including spotlights, electrical reflectors, and other means of illumination for signs, structures, landscaping, parking area, loading areas and the like, must be focused, directed, and so arranged to prevent glare or direct illumination on adjacent streets or adjoining property. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.110 - Building coverage. 
Building and other structures may not occupy more than fifty percent of the area for which the planned development permit is issued. The remaining area must be used for landscaping, automobile parking and circulation, and must be completely improved, surfaced and marked for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.120 - Building height. 
A building is limited to a height of thirty-five feet. Greater height may be permitted if a conditional use permit is granted. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.130 - Landscaping and environmental area. 
A.  The purposes of the landscaping requirements are to enhance, conserve and stabilize property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings. Landscaping also contributes to the relief of heat, noise and glare through the proper placement of green plants and trees. 
B.  Landscaping and all other ground space treatment must be provided upon at least ten percent of the net developed site. All landscaping must be provided with a permanent watering system and must be surrounded by a six-inch concrete curb. Landscaping must be considered actual planting areas of lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs, or other plants. Environmental areas will be considered those spaces related to or integrated with landscaping which provide an interesting complementary design. Courtyards, water ponds, streams, walkways, decks, kiosks, and similar items may be permitted. Such landscaping must be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Maintenance. Required landscaped areas must be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly and healthy condition. This is meant to include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary, and the regular watering of all plantings. 
2.  Watering System. Required landscaped areas must be provided with a suitable permanent method of watering of plants. This watering system must consist of piped waterlines terminating in an appropriate number of sprinklers to insure a sufficient amount of water for plants within the landscaped area. Sprinklers must be so spaced as to assure a complete coverage of the required landscaped area. 
3.  Front Yards. The entire front yard setback must be landscaped with the exception of that area provided for vehicles or pedestrian access and approved on the development plan. 
4.  Planting Areas. A planting area must contain at least twenty-four square feet of area and be a minimum of four feet in width. 
5.  Trees. One tree, 15-gallon minimum, of a species approved on final landscaping plan must be planted within a minimum thirty-six square foot area, at every ten rows of single row parking stalls, or every twenty rows of double row parking stalls. 
6.  Unused Space. Each unused space resulting from the design of parking spaces of over 24 square feet in area must be landscaped. 
7.  Screening. When the planned development is either behind or of the side of a residential zone, or where the SC zone abuts an alley or developed property, adjacent to a residential zone, it must include a minimum six-foot wide landscaped area to screen the development. The design of the screening must consist of evergreen trees and shrubs closely spaced. In addition, all parking areas must be screened from view from the street through the use of earth mounds and/or landscaping with a height of the screening to be three feet as measured from the higher side between the street and parking lot area. 
8.  Landscaping Plan. A plan must be prepared by a licensed landscape architect and must comply the city's water efficient landscape regulations (Chapter 14.10) and adopted guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.140 - Refuse containment. 
A.  An outdoor trash and refuse storage area, must be provided, be easily accessible and enclosed on all sides by a minimum six-foot high brick or decorative concrete block/masonry wall. In addition to waste, the enclosure must provide adequate room to accommodate recycling and green waste containers. The enclosure must include a solid cover within a decorative trellis design. The opening of the storage area must be screened by a solid gate of durable wood or comparable material. 
B.  In addition, all solid waste must be stored in closed containers in the required enclosures. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.150 - Utilities. 
All utilities must be placed underground in accordance with applicable provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.160 - Mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antennae. 
All ground mounted mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antennas must be screened by landscaping or solid decorative fence or combination with the design approved by the planning director. All rooftop equipment must be placed behind and shall not extend above a permanent parapet wall or roof screen. In addition, attention should be given to screening equipment from adjacent elevated views such as bridges, trains and the freeway. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.170 - Ramping and equipment for handicapped. 
Adequate ramps and equipment must be provided to accommodate the use of the facility by the handicapped and must include, but not be limited to, access ramps, restrooms, drinking fountains, etc. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.180 - Use of the planned development permit. 
No building or improvement or portion of a building may be erected, constructed, converted, established, altered or enlarged; nor may a lot or premises be used without first obtaining a planned development permit. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.190 - Planned development permit application. 
A.  An application for a planned development permit must be filed with the department and must include a development plan containing the following: 
1.  An accurately dimensioned plot plan showing existing and proposed topography, all proposed building, parking, landscaping areas, walls and all existing or proposed streets within a three hundred foot radius of the property. 
2.  The dimension of all yards, setbacks, parking area, driveways and square footage of all building landscaping and building coverage. 
3.  The elevation of all buildings proposed with a notation to the type of material proposed and a color and material sample. 
B.  The application and development plan will be reviewed by the department to determine if the application is complete for processing. 
Should an application be deemed incomplete, staff will notify the applicant of the outstanding materials required to complete the application. Should the applicant be unable to provide the information necessary to complete the application within six months from the date of the incomplete notice, the application process will be considered abandoned by the applicant and all application materials will be returned. 
If the application is deemed complete, it will be processed and staff recommendations will be submitted to the planning commission along with the development plan for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.200 - Planned development permit—Planning commission review. 
Notice of the time and place of the planning commission's consideration of the application and the staff's recommendation will be given to the applicant at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.210 - Planned development permit—Consideration of proposal. 
In considering an application for a planned development permit, the planning commission must consider the proposed recommendation of the staff and the following guidelines: 
A.  The degree of compatibility of property uses for which this chapter is intended to promote and preserve must be maintained with respect to the particular use on the particular site and consideration of existing and potential uses of property within the zone and the general area in which the use is proposed to be located, as well as consistency with any applicable specific plans or city design guidelines. 
B.  Performance standards and conditions must be imposed upon uses which, if not properly conditioned, have the potential to become obnoxious, dangerous, offensive or injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare by reason of the emission of noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odor or other harmful or annoying substances. 
C.  The use may not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.220 - Planned development permit—Conditions to applications. 
The planning commission may attach such conditions and make such modifications to the application as the commission may determine necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this zone, or maintain consistency with any applicable specific plans or city design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.230 - Planned development permit—Rejection or modification. 
If the proposed planned development would substantially depreciate property values in the vicinity, unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of property in the vicinity, would endanger the public peace, health, safety and general welfare, or is deemed inconsistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plans or city design guidelines, then such proposed planned development must be rejected, modified or conditioned to remove the objections or inconsistencies. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.240 - Planned development permit—Time extension. 
Unless the use is opened, or the construction of the structure is commenced and being diligently pursued not later than twelve months after the date the permit is granted, the permit will automatically expire on that date. However, if there have been no changes in the proposed plot plans or adjacent areas, the planning commission or director, if authorized by the planning commission, may grant extensions of time for the establishment of the use. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.250 - Planning commission decisions—Appeals—City council review. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission approving, denying or conditionally approving an application for a planned development permit will be final ten days following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless a timely and complete appeal is filed or a city council review is ordered as provided in this section. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a permit must meet all of the following requirements: 
1.  The appeal must be in writing on a form provided by the director and must identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates. 
2.  The appeal must be filed with the director prior to the planning commission decision to which the appeal relates becoming final. 
3.  The appeal must be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by city council resolution. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal will be deemed complete or effective for any purpose unless it complies with all of the provisions of subsections A and B. 
D.  Review by City Council. The city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before a planning commission decision becomes final pursuant to subsection A of this section, may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission decision relating to an application ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review will stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates, pending city council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council will conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons will be allowed to present relevant, reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable, relevant evidence. The applicant will have the burden of proof to show the existence of the facts, which warrant the granting of the planned development permit. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk must give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination will be final subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(P), 5-25-2018)  
19.27.260 - Planned development permit—Revocation. 
A.  Any planned development permit may be revoked by the planning commission or city council after notice and hearing is provided to the holder of the permit for any of the following causes: 
1.  Any term or condition of the permit has not been complied with. 
2.  The property subject to the permit, or any portion thereof is used or maintained in violation of any applicable law or regulation. 
3.  The use for which the permit was granted has not been exercised for twelve consecutive months, has ceased to exist, or has been abandoned. 
4.  The use for which the permit was granted has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, or as to constitute a nuisance. 
B.  After revocation of a planned development permit, the affected property will be subject to the current regulations of the applicable zone classification. 
C.  The failure of the planning commission or city council to revoke a permit whenever due cause exists does not constitute a waiver of the right of revocation with respect to any subsequent cause or grounds for revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
19.27.270 - Certificate of occupancy. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy is required for any change in use within a planned development. A change in use in an existing building may be approved administratively by the director. 
B.  An application for a certificate of occupancy must be accompanied by a description of the proposed commercial operation in sufficient detail to fully describe the nature and extent of the proposed use. 
C.  A certificate of occupancy for a use in the SC zone may be revoked by the city council after a public hearing if the city council finds that the holder of the certificate has failed to comply with the approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
Chapter 19.28 - L-M LIMITED MANUFACTURING ZONE 
 
19.28.010 - Established. 
There is established and added to the zones heretofore established in this title a zone to be designated L-M limited manufacturing zone. 
(Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.)  
19.28.020 - Intent and purpose. 
A.  The limited manufacturing zone is intended to provide for and encourage planned industrial districts, compatible with surrounding or abutting residential zones which would not in any way depreciate the character of the community. Uses are to be confined to those administrative, wholesaling, warehousing and manufacturing activities that can be carried on in an unobtrusive manner and to certain accessory facilities that are necessary to serve employees in the zone. Regulations provide for suitable open space, landscaping, access, parking and loading. A low intensity of development and strict performance standards are required to insure unobtrusive operations. 
B.  No industrial use shall be permitted which by its nature of development or operation will in any way adversely affect the environment of the community. 
(Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.1.)  
19.28.030 - Principally permitted uses. 
A.  The limited manufacturing zone is intended as limited manufacturing districts for restricted manufacturing uses, administrative or executive offices of business or industrial concerns, scientific research offices and laboratories and certain uses to and compatible with the district. Manufacturing uses are intended to be limited to the fabrication, assembly, compounding, processing or packaging of materials which are in a processed form and which do not in their maintenance, assembly, or manufacture, create smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, vibration, soot or lighting which might be termed obnoxious or offensive to persons residing or conducting business in either this or any other zone in the city. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any and every new use and any and every new building and premises or land in an L-M zone shall be used for or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, owned, enlarged, maintained, moved into or within such L-M zone exclusively only in accordance with the regulations set out in this chapter. 
B.  The description of principally permitted uses is illustrative of the types of uses which shall be permitted in the L-M zone and is not intended to be exclusive. Uses not listed may be permitted by the planning commission if determined to be of a similar nature and compatible with the specifically permitted uses. Uses which shall not reasonably comply with the levels of performance accepted in the L-M zone shall not be permitted to locate therein. 
(Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.2.)  
19.28.040 - Uses permitted. 
No building or improvements, or portion thereof, shall be erected, constructed, converted, established, altered or enlarged, nor shall a lot or premises be used until a development plan has been submitted to, and approved by, the planning commission. All such uses shall be within an enclosed building unless so stated otherwise. However, any use listed as permitted and proposed to be located in an existing structure may be approved by the planning director after the use has been reviewed and determined to be compatible. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in Sections 19.28.070 through 19.28.300. 
A.  Administrative or executive offices of a business or industrial establishment; such as the following: 
1.  Regional insurance offices, 
2.  Engineers, architects, planners, 
3.  Corporate headquarters, 
4.  Escrow and real estate companies, 
5.  Advertising agencies, 
6.  Governmental facilities, 
7.  Employment agencies, 
8.  Printing, duplicating and secretarial facilities; 
B.  Agricultural purposes and uses accessory thereto, but no poultry or animals shall be raised or kept on said lot or parcel; 
C.  Manufacture, processing, blending, and packaging of food and kindred products, such as the following: 
1.  Confectionery products, 
2.  Cereal breakfast foods, 
3.  Bakery products, 
4.  Drugs, 
5.  Paste products, 
6.  Fruits and vegetables, 
7.  Beverages (except fermenting and distilling), 
8.  Pharmaceuticals, 
9.  Perfumes, toiletries, 
10.  Prepared food specialties, 
11.  Dehydrated and instant foods, 
12.  Extracts, spices and dressings and similar products; 
D.  Manufacture, processing, assembling and packaging of articles, products, or merchandise from previously prepared natural or synthetic materials, such as the following: 
1.  Asbestos, 
2.  Bristles, 
3.  Bone, 
4.  Canvas, 
5.  Cellophane and similar synthetics, 
6.  Chalk, 
7.  Clay (pulverized only, with gas or electric kilns), 
8.  Cloth, 
9.  Cork, 
10.  Feathers, 
11.  Felt, 
12.  Fibre, 
13.  Fur, 
14.  Glass (including glass finishing), 
15.  Graphite, 
16.  Hair, 
17.  Horn, 
18.  Leather, 
19.  Paints (except boiling processes), 
20.  Paper, 
21.  Paraffin, 
22.  Plastics and resins, 
23.  Precious or semiprecious metals or stones, 
24.  Putty, 
25.  Pumice, 
26.  Rubber, 
27.  Shell, 
28.  Textiles, 
29.  Tobacco, 
30.  Wire, 
31.  Wood, 
32.  Wool and yarn; 
E.  Manufacturing activities, precision machine shops for producing parts, accessories, assemblies, systems, engines, major components, and whole electronic or electrical devices, automobiles, aircraft, missiles, aerospace, or underwater vehicles, or similar products, but specifically excluding explosive fuels and propellants; 
F.  Manufacture, processing, assembling and packaging of precision components and products, such as precision machine shops for products such as: 
1.  Radio and television equipment, 
2.  Business machine equipment, 
3.  Home appliances, 
4.  Scientific, optical, medical, dental, 
5.  Phonograph records and prerecorded audiovisual tape, 
6.  Measurement and control devices, 
7.  Sound equipment and supplies, personal accessories, and products of similar character; 
G.  Warehousing and distribution facilities; and the storage of goods or products, except those goods or products specifically described as permitted to be stored only as conditional uses in M-2 districts shall be prohibited; 
H.  Manufacturing, assembly and repairing of products, components, devices, equipment, systems and parts such as, but not limited to, the following examples: 
1.  Ceramic products, but not including bricks or building drain or conduit tile, 
2.  Communication transmission and reception equipment, 
3.  Control equipment and systems, 
4.  Data processing equipment and systems, 
5.  Electrical appliances, 
6.  Electronic instruments, devices and components, 
7.  Glass edging, beveling and silvering, 
8.  Graphics and art equipment, 
9.  Guidance equipment and systems, 
10.  Jewelry, including products from precious or semi-precious stones or metals, 
11.  Medical or dental equipment, 
12.  Metering instruments, 
13.  Optical devices, equipment and systems, 
14.  Photographic equipment and supplies, 
15.  Radar, infrared and ultraviolet equipment and systems, 
16.  Radios, phonographs and televisions, including small parts, such as coils, tubes and semiconductors, 
17.  Scientific and mechanical instruments or precision machine shop, 
18.  Testing equipment; 
I.  Similar Uses. The city council with the advice of the city planning commission may from time to time review and expand the uses permitted if found to be compatible with the intent and purpose and other principally permitted uses set forth in this zone; 
J.  Ancillary Uses. Uses customarily incidental to any permitted uses, provided such activities and facilities are located on the same premises on which are located the uses to which these are ancillary. Ancillary buildings shall be permitted, provided no ancillary buildings shall be located within the setback areas required by this zone. Such ancillary uses and facilities may be included, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Employee cafeteria or eating establishment, 
2.  Employee recreational activities and facilities, 
3.  Radio and microwave transmission facilities, 
4.  Visitor and employee parking, 
5.  Waiting structures for bus and taxi passengers, 
6.  One dwelling unit which shall be occupied by the superintendent and his family, or by a caretaker and his family, 
7.  Other similar uses which the city council, with the advice of the city planning commission, shall from time to time determine to be ancillary to the permitted uses; 
K.  Uses and structures which are incidental or ancillary to any of the uses permitted in this zone including retail sales on premises not exceeding thirty percent of the gross sales per year of products produced, distributed, manufactured or processed on the premises. That portion of the area devoted to retail activity shall provide parking in accordance with the general commercial zone standards. In the case of business operations which are permitted in the L-M zone as distribution facilities, all items which are distributed may be sold for retail as long as such sales do not exceed the limitation set forth herein. However, where the use is permitted in the L-M zone, because the business operation is production, manufacturing or processing, retail sales shall be limited exclusively to those items which are produced, manufactured or processed on the premises, and no other items may be brought in for retail sales as an incidental or ancillary use. 
L.  Sexually Oriented Businesses. Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted subject to compliance with the property development standards set forth in Chapter 19.64 of this code. 
(Ord. 851 § 15, 1996; Ord. 692 § 1, 1989; Ord. 530 § 1, 1982; Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.3.)  
19.28.050 - Uses subject to a conditional use permit. 
A.  The following uses are permitted with a conditional use permit as set forth in Chapter 19.62: 
1.  Bottling and canning plants. 
2.  Breweries, wineries, and distilleries, with or without tasting areas, including retail sales of alcoholic beverages manufactured on-site that will be consumed off the premises. 
3.  Buildings in excess of thirty-five feet in height. 
4.  Business park, subject to the uses permitted in the L-M zone on parcels of less than one acre but not less than twenty thousand square feet in conjunction with the development of four or more such contiguous parcels. The business park must incorporate common accessways and be designed with compatible landscaping and architectural features. 
5.  Car wash facilities, full-service and/or automated facility (excluding mini-marts and the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
6.  Commercial recreation uses and sports complexes. 
7.  Electrical substations, power booster or conversion plants. 
8.  Factory Outlet Center. The expansion of a manufactured outlet facility which is located on a lot classified in the CPD zone may be permitted on an adjoining lot classified in the LM zone. 
9.  Gas measurement stations. 
10.  Heliport landing areas. 
11.  Private water distribution facilities. 
12.  Public utility transmission substation. 
13.  Recreational vehicle sales, service and the sale of recreational vehicle equipment and ancillary activities associated with recreational vehicle sales and service in a complex consisting of a minimum combined area of fifteen acres. The complex may be a single-use development or a combination of tenants which would have common circulation, landscaping, parking and other design standards. 
14.  Restaurants. 
15.  Service stations (excluding mini-marts and the sale of alcoholic beverages). 
16.  Telephone exchange buildings. 
17.  Water pumping plants, reservoirs or water storage tanks. 
(Ord. 867 § 3, 1997; Ord. 830 § 2, 1995; Ord. 792 § 2, 1993; Ord. 727 § 1, 1990; Ord. 703 § 1, 1990; Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.4.) 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
19.28.055 - Tasting area standards. 
A.  Size. The total space allowed for tasting areas is limited to thirty percent of the gross floor area of the brewery, winery, or distillery to which they are ancillary. 
B.  Parking. Off street parking for tasting areas must satisfy the parking requirements of Section 19.44.080(11)(a) of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 3(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
19.28.060 - Signs. 
Signs may be erected in a limited manufacturing zone in accordance with the sign ordinance, codified in Title 17, for industrial uses. 
(Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.5.)  
19.28.070 - Property development and performance standards. 
The property development and performance standards set forth in Sections 19.28.080 through 19.28.300 shall apply to all lots and premises in the L-M zone. 
(Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6 (part).)  
19.28.080 - Lot area and width. 
A.  Minimum lot area shall be one acre, exclusive of any public right-of-way dedicated for road purposes or proposed road purposes. When approved under Section 19.28.050(M), the lot area may be reduced to less than one acre but in no case less than twenty thousand square feet exclusive of any area required to be dedicated for public right-of-way purposes. 
B.  Minimum width of lot for one acre or larger lots shall be one hundred fifty feet, excepting corner lots which shall be one hundred seventy feet. When approved under Section 19.28.050(M), the lot width may be reduced to one hundred feet for interior lots and one hundred twenty-five feet for corner lots. 
C.  Minimum depth of lots measured at right angles to the front property line shall be two hundred fifty feet. When approved under Section 19.28.050(M), the lot depth shall be a minimum of one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 792 § 3, 1993: Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6(A).)  
19.28.090 - Maximum population density. 
No dwelling shall be permitted within an industrial facility in this district other than a single-family residence for a superintendent or a caretaker as indicated in Section 19.28.040(J)(6). 
(Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6(B).)  
19.28.100 - Building height limit. 
All buildings shall be limited to a height of thirty-five feet unless covered by a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6(C).)  
19.28.110 - Minimum yard requirements. 
A.  Front Yard. 
1.  All buildings or structures on property adjacent to a public road shall be set back not less than thirty feet from the property line, or forty feet when adjacent to designated secondary or primary roads, or proposed property line, if future public road dedication is required, whichever is greater. 
2.  Pedestrian walks, vehicular access drives, meter pits, signs, and utility manholes shall be permitted in any front yard. The rear ten feet of the setback area may be used for parking purposes in accordance with the approved development plan. 
B.  Side Yards. 
1.  Side yards on interior property lines shall be not less than the height of the building, except that minimum side yards of fifty feet shall be required whenever a lot or parcel of land in the L-M zone abuts a lot or parcel of land in any R zone or abuts any street or alley which separates an L-M zone from any R zone. The side yard adjacent to the public road shall meet the front yard setback requirements. 
2.  A common building wall with a zero setback may be established by development plan approval by the planning commission who shall require the exchange and recordation of necessary documents to insure adequate access, parking, and easements to serve the development. The zero building setback shall be permitted only on one side of the property line where two parcels are joined together. 
C.  Rear Yards. A rear yard shall be not less than the height of the building, except that a minimum rear yard of fifty feet shall be required whenever a lot or parcel of land in the L-M zone abuts a lot or parcel in an R zone or abuts any street or alley which separates an L-M zone from any R zone. 
D.  General Yard Uses. All operations and uses, except parking, landscaping, recreational and loading uses, shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building. No outdoor storage shall be permitted except for temporary emergency storage for a period of time not to exceed twenty-four hours, or not beyond the next business day. Upon the expiration of the twenty-four-hour emergency storage, the various stored items shall be removed from the site or placed within an enclosed building. 
(Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6(D).)  
19.28.120 - Maximum coverage. 
The ground floor area of buildings and structures shall not exceed fifty percent of the total area of the premises. 
(Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6(E).)  
19.28.130 - Off-street parking and loading area. 
Off-street parking and loading shall be in accordance with the parking and loading provisions and standards set forth under the parking and loading chapters of this title (Chapters 19.44 and 19.46). 
(Ord. 588 § 5, 1985: Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6(F).)  
19.28.150 - Fences and walls. 
A.  The placement and design of walls shall be submitted to, and approved by, the planning commission. 
B.  A six-foot solid decorative masonry wall shall be provided and maintained on the boundary of the L-M limited manufacturing zone which abuts or lies across a public street or alley from a residential zone; except, on the front or side front portion of the property, the wall shall be placed in a location approved by the planning commission to provide the necessary screening from the public way. 
(Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6(H).)  
19.28.160 - Lights. 
Lighting, including spotlights, floodlights, electrical reflectors, and other means of illumination for signs, structures, landscaping, parking areas, loading areas and the like shall be focused, directed and so arranged as to prevent glare or direct illumination on streets or adjoining property. 
(Ord. 287 § 1 (part), 1975; Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6 (I).)  
19.28.170 - Performance standards—Prohibition of dangerous or objectionable elements. 
No land or building in the L-M zone shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive, or other hazard, noise or vibration, smoke, dust, odor, or other form of pollution; electrical or other disturbance; glare, liquid or solid refuse or wastes; or other substance, condition, or element in such a manner or in such an amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area or adjoining premises. Such substances or conditions shall herein be referred to as "dangerous or objectionable elements." 
(Ord. 287 § 1 (part), 1975; Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6(J)(I).)  
19.28.260 - Landscaping and environmental area. 
A.  The purpose of the landscaping requirements shall be to enhance, conserve and stabilize property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings. Landscaping also contributes to the relief of heat, noise and glare through the proper placement of green plants and trees. 
B.  Landscaping and all other ground space treatment shall be provided upon at least ten percent of the net developed site. All landscaping shall be provided with a permanent watering system; shall be surrounded by a six-inch concrete curb. Landscaping shall be considered actual planting areas of lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs, or other plants. Environmental areas shall be considered those spaces related to or integrated with landscaping which provide an interesting complementary design. Courtyards, water ponds, streams, walkways, decks, kiosks and similar items may be permitted at the discretion of the planning director or planning commission. Such landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Maintenance. Required landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly and healthy condition. This is meant to include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary, and the regular watering of all plantings. 
2.  Required landscaped areas shall be provided with a suitable, permanent method of watering or sprinkling of plants. This watering system shall consist of piped water lines terminating in an appropriate number of sprinklers to insure a sufficient amount of water for plants within the landscaped area. Sprinklers shall be so spaced as to assure a complete coverage of the required landscaped area. The use of hose bibs with portable water will not be accepted. 
3.  The entire front yard setback shall be landscaped with the exception of that area provided for vehicles or pedestrian access. 
4.  No planting area shall be considered as such unless it contains at least twenty-four square feet of area and is a minimum of four feet in width, except raised planting boxes within close proximity to the building. 
5.  One tree, fifteen-gallon minimum, of a species approved on the final landscaping plan shall be planted within a minimum thirty-six-square-foot area, at every ten rows of single row parking stalls, or at every twenty rows of double row parking stalls. 
6.  Each unused space resulting from the design of parking spaces or accessory structures over twenty-four square feet in area shall be landscaped. 
7.  When the industrial development either rears on or sides on a residential zone, or where the L-M zone abuts an alley or developed property, it shall include six-foot wide landscaped area to screen the area adjacent to that residential or developed property line. The design of the screening shall consist of evergreen trees or shrubs, closely spaced. 
8.  Landscaping Plan. A plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals thirty feet shall be submitted for approval by the planning director and shall contain the following: 
a.  The dimensions and square footage of each planting area; 
b.  The total square footage and percentage of the net developed site devoted to landscaping; 
c.  Identification of each plant, common and botanical name, at the planting area; the number of each and their container size; 
d.  The permanent watering system, including all pipe sizes, and type and size of all sprinkler heads; 
e.  Specification sheet indicating the soil preparation and maintenance program for continual maintenance of the landscaping area and any type of guarantee associated with the installation of the landscaping. 
(Ord. 287 § 1 (part), 1975; Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6(K).)  
19.28.270 - Refuse and recycling containment. 
Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be provided in accordance with the enclosure provisions of Chapter 19.50 and the following standards: 
A.  Each industrial use established shall provide an outdoor refuse and recycling storage area which shall be easily accessible and enclosed on all sides by a minimum six-foot high brick, concrete block or masonry wall. The opening of the storage area shall be screened by a solid gate of durable wood, metal, or comparable material. 
B.  In addition, no material or waste shall be deposited in such a form or manner that it may be transferred by natural causes or force, and waste which may cause fumes, dust, or which may constitute a fire hazard or be edible by or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures. 
C.  The number and general placement of the enclosures shall be set forth in the planned development permit and approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 791 § 9, 1993: Ord. 287 § 1 (part), 1975; Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6(L).)  
19.28.275 - Commercial/industrial performance standards. 
All uses within the L-M limited manufacturing zone shall operate in accordance with the provisions of the performance standards contained in Chapter 19.54 of this code. 
(Ord. 763 § 14, 1992.)  
19.28.280 - Utilities. 
All utilities shall be placed underground in accordance with the underground utilities ordinance codified in Chapter 13.08. 
(Ord. 287 § 1 (part), 1975; Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6(M).)  
19.28.290 - Mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antenna. 
All mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antennas shall be screened by landscaping or fence or combination with the design approved by the director of planning and community development, and all rooftop equipment shall be placed behind a permanent parapet wall or equipment shall be placed behind a permanent parapet wall or equipment screen approved by the director of planning and community development or his designated representative and be completely screened from view at ground level. 
(Ord. 821 § 6, 1994; Ord. 593 § 16, 1985; Ord. 590 § 16, 1985; Ord. 287 § 1 (part), 1975; Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6(N).)  
19.28.300 - Ramping and equipment for handicapped. 
Adequate ramps and equipment shall be provided to accommodate the use of the facility by the handicapped, which shall include, but not be limited to, access ramps, restrooms, drinking fountains, etc. 
(Ord. 287 § 1 (part), 1975; Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6.(O).)  
19.28.310 - Planning commission review of zone clearance. 
No zone clearance shall be issued until the planning commission, at the first available regular meeting, reviews and approves or denies the issuance of a zone clearance by resolution. 
A.  Upon application for a zone clearance, the number of copies determined by the city of the plot plan of the lot to be used, showing all property lines, existing and proposed building locations, elevations, parking areas, vehicular access facilities, outdoor storage areas, signs, walls, landscaped areas and planting screens, all adequately dimensioned, must be submitted to the planning commission to determine compliance with the provisions of this zone. The plot plan shall show the topography of the lot, abutting streets, highways and freeways, topographic features located within one hundred feet of all lot lines and any additional data which may be required by the commission to determine compliance with the provisions of this zone. 
B.  The approval of the plot plan by the planning commission shall include a determination and consideration of the work and improvements necessary for the protection of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare. 
C.  Prior to consideration of the plot plan by the planning commission, an engineering advisory meeting will be held, with notice being given to the applicant wherein the staff recommendation will be reviewed. The applicant will also receive a notice of the planning commission meeting, including staff recommendation. 
D.  The planning commission shall consider evidence of the size, type, location and character of the proposed use and, based thereon, shall make a determination as to the required work and improvements, if necessary. To insure compatibility with adjoining uses and remove any future nuisance, each specific work and improvement requirement shall be based upon a finding by the planning commission that due to size, type, location and character of the use, the public peace, health, safety and general welfare require the work or improvement. 
(Ord. 856 § 12, 1996: Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.6 (part).)  
19.28.315 - Planning commission decisions—Appeals—Council review. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission approving, denying or conditionally approving an application for a zone clearance shall be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed or a city council review is ordered as provided in this section. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a zone clearance shall not be valid or effective for any purpose unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Each such appeal shall be in writing on a form provided by the director of planning and community development of the city ("director"), and shall identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates; and 
2.  Each such appeal shall be filed with the director prior to the planning commission decision to which the appeal relates becoming final, as provided in subsection A of this section; and 
3.  Each such appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by the city council; and 
4.  Each such appeal is field by or on behalf of any of the following: 
a.  The owner of any real property located within the city, or 
b.  A person who lawfully occupies or is entitled to lawfully occupy any real property which is located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are the subject of the zone clearance, or 
c.  Any interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal shall be deemed complete nor effective for any purpose unless it complies with all of the provisions of this section. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before a planning commission decision becomes final pursuant to subsection A of this section, may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission decision relating to a zone clearance ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review shall stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates, pending the city council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council shall conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons shall be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show the existence of the facts which warrant the granting of the zone clearance. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk shall give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination shall be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 856 § 13, 1996.) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(Q), 5-25-2018)  
19.28.320 - Certificate of occupancy. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for any use or expansion of land or buildings permitted in Section 19.28.040. The building department may issue the certificate after planning commission approval of new buildings and uses. A change in use in an existing building may be approved by the planning director. 
B.  An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be accompanied by: 
1.  A description of the proposed industrial operation in sufficient detail to describe fully the nature and extent of the proposed use; 
2.  Plans or reports describing proposed treatment of noise, glare, air pollution, and treatment and handling of hazardous gases, liquids or other material; 
3.  Plans or reports showing proposed treatment and disposal of sewage and industrial wastes; 
4.  Description of any fuel proposed to be used, including engineering plans for the control of any smoke which may be generated; 
5.  Additional data which may be required by the public works department to ascertain conformance with the requirements of this zone. 
C.  Whenever appropriate and reasonable, the public works department may require the installation, maintenance and operation by the applicant of continuous recording instruments to demonstrate the operation of any machines, devices, or instruments used to control noise, glare, air pollution, smoke, hazardous gases, liquids or other material. 
D.  A change or changes in the use permitted by a certificate of occupancy shall occur only after the holder of such certificate has obtained an amendment thereto allowing such change or changes. 
E.  A certificate of occupancy for a use of the land in the L-M zone may be revoked by the city council after a public hearing, if the city council finds that the holder of the certificate has failed to comply with the approved plans. 
(Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.7.)  
19.28.330 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
A.  The following uses are prohibited in the L-M zone: 
1.  Drinking establishments. 
2.  General commercial retail sales except as set forth under Section 19.28.040(K) and as set forth under Section 19.28.050 when approved under a conditional use permit. 
3.  Motels. 
4.  Multiple-family dwellings. 
5.  Single-family dwellings. 
(Ord. 727 § 2, 1990: Ord. 270 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9410.8.) 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 3(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
Chapter 19.30 - M-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE 
 
19.30.010 - Established. 
There is established and added to the zones heretofore established in this title a zone to be designated M-1 light manufacturing zone. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.)  
19.30.020 - Intent and purpose. 
The light manufacturing zone is intended to provide facilities which by their nature are of moderate intensity and therefore may emit certain amounts of noise, vibration, heat, light and glare, or similar characteristics but which can still be located within relatively close proximity of commercial, professional or residential land uses. It is intended that the development standards provided herein are for the specific purpose of providing compatibility of diverse land uses and that without such standards the use delineated could oftentimes be considered objectionable and not be allowed. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.1.)  
19.30.030 - Uses permitted. 
A.  No building or improvements may be erected, constructed, converted, established, altered or enlarged, nor may a lot or premises be used until a development plan has been submitted to, and approved by, the planning commission unless otherwise set forth in this code. All such uses must be within an enclosed building unless stated otherwise in this chapter. However, any use listed as permitted and proposed to be located in an existing structure may be approved by the director after the use has been reviewed and determined to be compatible. All uses are subject to the property development standards in Sections 19.30.050 through 19.30.230. 
B.  The following uses are permitted: 
1.  Agricultural uses and uses accessory to an agricultural use. No poultry or animals may be raised or kept on the lot or parcel except as permitted by this chapter. A dwelling may be used only as a residence for agricultural workers employed on the farm where the dwelling is located. 
2.  Any kind of manufacturing, processing or treating of products which are not obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or other causes. 
3.  Appliance and small electrical service center (including ancillary sales). 
4.  Auction business conducted within a building but excluding livestock sales. 
5.  Automobile service stations and garages. 
6.  Bakery plants. 
7.  Blueprinting, copying and photofinishing facilities. 
8.  Blacksmith shops. 
9.  Boat building. 
10.  Bottling and canning plants. 
11.  Building materials storage and sales yards. 
12.  Cabinet and carpenter shops. 
13.  Carpet cleaning. 
14.  Contractors' storage yards. 
15.  Creameries, dairy products manufacture, and distributing plants. 
16.  Drayage, freight and trucking terminals. 
17.  Dry cleaning and laundry plants. 
18.  Dwelling for a caretaker or superintendent whenever the use requires the on-site residence for such person. 
19.  Electric and neon signs manufacture. 
20.  Emergency shelters. 
21.  Equipment rental and repair yards. 
22.  Farm equipment storage and repair yards and sales. 
23.  Feed storage and fuel yards. 
24.  Fire stations and facilities for federal, state, city and county law enforcement agencies, but not including prisons, jails, or other places of imprisonment. 
25.  Floriculture and horticulture of all types, including truck gardening and retail nursery. 
26.  Furniture warehouses. 
27.  Garment manufacture. 
28.  Ice and cold storage plants. 
29.  Laboratories, experimental and medical. 
30.  Lumber and building materials sales yards. 
31.  Machine shops. 
32.  Motion picture studios. 
33.  Newspaper and publishing plants. 
34.  Office buildings. 
35.  Paint mixing plants, but not including the manufacture of paint ingredients or the use of any boiling process. 
36.  Paper and paper products manufacturing, but not including pulp manufacturing. 
37.  Planing mills. 
38.  Plumbing shops. 
39.  Public parking lots. 
40.  Public utility buildings and structures. 
41.  Sexually Oriented Businesses; subject to compliance with Chapter 19.64 of this code 
42.  Sheet metal shops. 
43.  Shoe manufacture. 
44.  Stands, temporary; all temporary stands used for the sale of agricultural or horticultural products grown on the premises as permitted by this chapter must conform to the following conditions and limitations: 
(a)  The floor area of such stands may not exceed four hundred square feet each, 
(b)  Such stands may not be located or maintained within twenty feet of any public road, street or highway, 
(c)  The construction must be wood frame or other material suitable for a portable structure exclusively, 
(d)  The stand must be removed when not in use for a period of thirty days or more. 
45.  Storage garages. 
46.  Storage yards for transit and transportation equipment. 
47.  Textile manufacture. 
48.  Temporary Uses. Special events as set forth in Chapter 19.63. 
49.  Trade schools 
50.  Tire rebuilding, recapping and retreading. 
51.  Upholstering. 
52.  Water supply: no new private wells may be drilled, equipped or used except for agricultural purposes exclusively. 
53.  Wholesale businesses, storage buildings and warehouses, and distribution facilities. 
Other uses which in the judgment of the planning commission are similar to and compatible with any of those enumerated in this section. Should the commission find that such use is similar to and compatible with other uses enumerated in this section, then the use may be approved by resolution of the commission. 
C.  Uses and structures which are incidental or ancillary to any of the uses permitted in this zone including retail sales on premises not exceeding thirty percent of the gross sales per year of products produced, distributed, manufactured or processed on the premises are also permitted. The portion of the area devoted to retail activity must provide parking in accordance with the general commercial zone standards. In the case of business operations which are permitted in the M-1 zone as distribution facilities, all items which are distributed may be sold for retail as long as such sales do not exceed the limitation set forth in this chapter. However, where the use is permitted in the M-1 zone, because the business operation is production, manufacturing or processing, retail sales are limited exclusively to those items which are produced, manufactured or processed in the premises, and no other items may be brought in for retail sales as an incidental or ancillary use. 
(Ord. 851 § 16, 1996; Ord. 692 § 2, 1989; Ord. 628 § 7, 1987; Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.2.) 
(Ord. No. 1059, § 3, 10-13-2010; Ord. No. 1099, § 4(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
19.30.040 - Uses permitted by conditional use permit. 
A.  The following uses are permitted in the M-1 zone if a conditional use permit is obtained under Chapter 19.62 of this code: 
1.  Amusement parks and batting cage facilities. 
2.  Banks and financial institutions. 
3.  Breweries, wineries, and distilleries, with or without tasting areas, and including the retail sale of alcoholic beverages manufactured on-site that will be consumed off the premises. 
4.  Buildings in excess of forty feet, excluding rooftop mechanical equipment. 
5.  Carnivals and circuses. 
6.  Churches, temples and other places of worship. 
7.  Clubs and lodges, private. 
8.  Dairy farms. 
9.  Dog kennels. 
10.  Gymnasium or gymnastic club or studio, martial arts club and studio. 
11.  Home improvement showrooms. 
12.  Hospital or clinic for animals; provided, if large animals are to be treated, no treatment rooms or pens for large animals may be maintained closer than two hundred feet to any property line. 
13.  Hospital or clinic for small animals, dogs, cats, birds and the like; provided, that such hospital or clinic and any treatment rooms, cages, pens, or kennels must be maintained within a completely enclosed, soundproof building and that such hospital or clinic must be operated in such a way as to produce no objectionable odors or noise outside its walls. 
14.  Labor supply camps. 
15.  Race tracks. 
16.  Radio or television transmitter or stations. 
17.  Recycling facility—Large. 
18.  Restaurants with or without alcohol sales (may include ancillary outside seating). 
19.  Skating rinks, indoor. 
20.  Theaters, including open air or drive-in. 
21.  Washing facilities, automobile. 
(Ord. 988 § 1, 2006; Ord. 977 § 7, 2005; Ord. 946 § 1, 2002: Ord. 942 § 2, 2001; Ord. 888 § 2, 1997; Ord. 640 § 5, 1987; Ord. 615 § 1, 1986: Ord. 567 § 2, 1984: Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.3.) 
(Ord. No. 1059, § 4, 10-13-2010; Ord. No. 1099, § 4(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
19.30.045 - Tasting area standards. 
A.  Size. The total space allowed for tasting areas is limited to thirty percent of the gross floor area of the brewery, winery, or distillery to which they are ancillary. 
B.  Parking. Off street parking for tasting areas must satisfy the parking requirements of Section 19.44.080(11)(a) of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 3(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
19.30.050 - Property development standards. 
The development standards set forth in Sections 19.30.060 through 19.30.230 shall apply to all M-1 light manufacturing uses including land and buildings within the M-1 zone. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4 (part).)  
19.30.055 - Commercial/industrial performance standards. 
All uses within the M-1 light manufacturing zone shall operate in accordance with the provisions of the performance standards contained in Chapter 19.54 of this code. 
(Ord. 763 § 15, 1992.)  
19.30.060 - Nonconversion. 
No structure originally constructed for single-family residential use shall be converted to any M-1 use. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(A).)  
19.30.070 - Minimum lot area. 
Each lot in an M-1 zone shall contain twenty thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(B).)  
19.30.080 - Lot dimension. 
Each lot in the M-1 zone shall have a minimum frontage on a public street of not less than one hundred feet and a minimum depth of two hundred feet which shall be measured from the parcel frontage. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(C).)  
19.30.090 - Building height. 
All buildings shall be limited to a height of forty feet unless greater height is authorized under a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(D).)  
19.30.100 - Building coverage. 
Lot area coverage by building or structures shall not exceed sixty percent of the net area of the parcel. Coverage shall be based upon structures which are roofed. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(E).)  
19.30.110 - Building setbacks. 
A.  Front Yard. All buildings or structures on property adjacent to a public road shall have a front yard setback, not less than twenty feet nor greater than fifty feet from the existing or proposed right-of-way line, with the actual setback being determined by the planning commission at time of approval of the planned development permit in accordance with the planned development permit standards set forth in Section 19.30.242 and the purposes and intent of this zone. 
B.  Side Yard. 
1.  A setback shall be twenty feet for the side yard adjacent to the public road or future public right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
2.  No building setback shall be required on one side of the interior parcel's property line with the opposite side providing a setback equal to the height of the building or up to a yard of twenty-five feet unless parking and other uses require a greater setback. In any case, where a parcel abuts a residential zone, a setback equal to one and one-half feet for each vertical foot of the building height shall be provided; but in no case shall the setback exceed fifty feet, and provide a six foot screen wall installed on the property line and maintained. 
C.  Rear Yard. No rear yard shall be provided except where adjacent to a public right-of-way in which case a setback of twenty feet shall be maintained, or when adjacent to or across a street from a residential property, a setback equal to one and one-half feet for each vertical foot of building height shall be provided, but in no case shall the setback exceed fifty feet, and a six-foot screen wall be provided and maintained on the property line. 
(Ord. 617 § 1, 1986; Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(F).)  
19.30.120 - Sign. 
The area for the M-1 zone shall be in accordance with the sign ordinance codified in Title 17. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(G).)  
19.30.130 - Landscaping areas. 
Landscaping and all other ground space treatment shall be provided upon ten percent of the net developed site. All landscaping shall be provided with a permanent watering system; landscaping provided adjacent to parking and maneuvering area shall be surrounded by a six-inch concrete curb. The landscaping area shall be maintained in an orderly healthy manner, or replaced. Landscaping shall be considered actual planting areas of lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs, or other plants. Such landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  The entire required front yard setback shall be landscaped with the exception of vehicle access ways and the rear ten feet of the setback may be used for parking. 
B.  When the industrial development either rears on or sides on a residential zone or a lesser zone or developed property, it shall include a six foot wide landscaped, solid screen area adjacent to that residential or lesser zone or developed property line. 
C.  Landscaping shall consist of a combination of trees, shrubs and ground cover with careful consideration given to the eventual size and spread, susceptibility to disease and pests, durability and adaptability to disease and pests, durability and adaptability to existing soil and climatic conditions. Foundations, ponds, sculpture and decorative screening walls as an integral part of the landscaping scheme are permitted. 
D.  Landscaping Plan. A plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals thirty feet shall be submitted for approval by the planning director. 
E.  The planning director or the applicant may request the planning commission to review any landscaping plan or fence plan as provided for under Section 19.30.240 even though not required by this section and in such event, the planning commission shall replace that of the planning director. 
The approval provided for herein may be conditioned so as to insure compliance with the purpose and provisions of this part with the plan including the following: 
1.  The dimensions and square footage of each planting area; 
2.  The total square footage and percentage of the net developed site devoted to landscaping; 
3.  Identification of each plant, common and botanical name, at the planting area; the number of each and their container size; 
4.  Permanent watering system, including all pipe sizes, and type and size of all sprinkler heads; 
5.  Specification sheet indicating the soil preparation and maintenance program for continual maintenance of the landscaping area and any type of guarantee associated with the installation of the landscaping. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(H).)  
19.30.140 - Fences and walls. 
The planning director may require a six-foot solid decorative masonry wall be provided and maintained at a location to screen any exterior storage on the boundary of any industrial zone which abuts or lies across a public way from a residential or lesser zone subject to review and approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4 (I).)  
19.30.150 - Utilities. 
All utilities shall be placed underground in accordance with the underground utilities ordinance codified in Chapter 13.08. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(J).)  
19.30.160 - Off-street parking and loading area. 
Off-street parking and loading shall be in accordance with the parking and loading provisions and standards set forth under the parking and loading chapters of this title (Chapters 19.44 and 19.46). 
(Ord. 588 § 6, 1985: Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(K).)  
19.30.180 - Refuse and recycling containment. 
Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be provided in accordance with the enclosure provisions of Chapter 19.50 and the following standards: 
A.  Each industrial use established shall provide an outdoor refuse and recycling storage area which shall be easily accessible and enclosed on all sides by a minimum six-foot high brick, concrete block or masonry wall. The opening of the storage area shall be screened by a solid gate of durable wood, metal, or comparable material. 
B.  In addition, no material or waste shall be deposited in such a form or manner that it may be transferred by natural causes or force, and waste which may cause fumes, dust, or which may constitute a fire hazard or be edible by or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures. 
C.  The number and general placement of the enclosures shall be as set forth in the planned development permit and approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 791 § 10, 1993: Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(M).)  
19.30.190 - Storage. 
All storage of wares, merchandise, crates, bottles or similar items shall be completed screened from view from any adjoining public right-of-way. Screening shall be by means of a solid wood, metal or masonry wall, not more than eight feet in height, the design of the wall must be presented to the planning department for approval. The height of the storage area may exceed eight feet if a five-foot setback from the screen wall is provided for each one foot of additional storage height up to a maximum of twelve feet. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(N).)  
19.30.200 - Lighting. 
Lighting, including spotlights, floodlights, electrical reflectors, and other means of illumination for signs, structures, landscaping, parking areas, loading areas and the like shall be focused, directed and so arranged as to prevent glare or direct illumination on streets or adjoining property. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(O).)  
19.30.210 - Mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antenna. 
All mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antennas shall be screened by landscaping or fence or combination with the design approved by the director of planning and community development, and all rooftop equipment shall be placed behind a permanent parapet wall or equipment screen approved by the director of planning and community development or his designated representative and be completely screened from view at ground level. 
(Ord. 821 § 7, 1994: Ord. 593 § 17, 1985: Ord. 590 § 17, 1985: Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(P).)  
19.30.220 - Nuisance control. 
A.  The planning director or planning commission, in review of the proposed use, may require the applicant to submit a report from a professional engineer describing the proposed operation to be conducted on the property and the efforts proposed by the intended user to control the nuisance aspects typical of the particular industry, if any, and to justify the adequacy of specific requirements and modifications of the installation, change in process. or ingredients to control the nuisance. 
B.  No use or process within the M-I zone shall be permitted which creates an objectionable air pollution, noise, glare, vibration, radioactivity or electrical disturbances. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(Q).)  
19.30.230 - Ramping and equipment for handicapped. 
Adequate ramps and equipment shall be provided to accommodate the use of the facility by the handicapped, which shall include, but not be limited to, access ramps, restrooms, drinking fountains, etc. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.4(R).)  
19.30.232 - Emergency shelters. 
Emergency shelters must be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  Management Plan. The emergency shelter provider must submit to the director a written management plan, including as applicable, provisions for staff training, neighborhood outreach, security, screening of residents to insure compatibility with services provided at the facility, and training, counseling, and treatment programs for residents. 
B.  General Property Development Standards. The facility must conform to all property development standards of the M-1 Zone. 
C.  Maximum Number of Persons/Beds. The facility may not contain more than 40 beds or serve more than 40 homeless persons at any one time. 
D.  Lighting. Adequate external lighting must be provided for security purposes. The lighting must be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity compatible with the neighborhood. 
E.  Laundry Facilities. The facility must provide laundry facilities adequate for the number of residents. 
F.  Common Facilities. The facility may provide one or more of the following specific common facilities for the exclusive use of the residents. 
1.  Central cooking and dining room; 
2.  Recreation room. 
G.  Security. Parking facilities must be designed to provide security for residents, visitors and employees. 
H.  On-site Parking. On-site parking is subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 19.44 of this code. 
I.  Outdoor Activity. Outdoor activities may only be conducted between the hours of eight a.m. and ten p.m. 
J.  Concentration of Uses. No more than one facility is permitted within a radius of three hundred feet from another emergency shelter. 
(Ord. No. 1059, § 5, 10-13-2010)  
19.30.240 - Planned development permit—Required—Application process. 
A.  No building or improvement or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established, altered or enlarged; nor shall a lot or premises be used without first obtaining a planned development permit; nor shall an existing building be used for a new use without an occupancy permit first being obtained. 
B.  An application for a planned development permit shall be filed with the planning department in the form set forth herein accompanied by the filing fee and shall include a development plan containing the following: 
1.  An accurately dimensioned plot plan showing existing and proposed topography, all proposed buildings, parking, landscaping areas, and walls, and all existing or proposed streets within a one-hundred-foot radius of the property: 
2.  The dimension of all yards, setbacks, parking area, driveways and square footage of all buildings, landscaping, and building coverage; 
3.  The exterior elevations of all buildings proposed with a notation of the type of material proposed in addition to a color and material sample. 
C.  The application and development plan shall be reviewed by the planning department and its proposed recommendations shall be prepared and submitted to the planning commission along with the development plan for their consideration. 
D.  Notice of time and place of the planning commission review of the application and staff's proposed recommendation shall be given to the applicant. 
(Ord. 617 § 2, 1986: Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.5.)  
19.30.242 - Planned development permit—Planning commission consideration of proposal. 
In considering the approval, denial or modification of an application for a planned development permit, the planning commission shall consider the proposed recommendation of the staff and the following guidelines: 
A.  That the degree of compatibility of property uses for which this chapter is intended to promote and preserve shall be maintained with respect to the particular use on the particular site and consideration of existing and potential uses of property within the zone and the general area in which the use is proposed to be located; 
B.  That performance standards and conditions shall be imposed upon uses which without such condition might become obnoxious, dangerous, offensive or injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare or a portion thereof by reason of the emission of noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odor or other harmful or annoying substances; 
C.  That there shall be maintained the integrity and character of the neighborhood in which the use will be located and the utility and value of property in the neighborhood and in the adjacent zones; 
D.  That the use shall be compatible with public interest, health, safety, convenience and general welfare; 
E.  That the site plan review will take into consideration the General Plan and the various elements, including but not limited to land use, circulation, scenic highways, public safety, community design, open space, and housing. 
(Ord. 617 § 3 (part), 1986.)  
19.30.244 - Planned development permit. 
A.  In considering an application for an industrial planned development, the planning commission may approve the request subject to conditions or may approve the application as submitted. The planning commission may also deny the application if appropriate findings cannot be made in support of the request. The planning commission may attach such conditions and make such modifications, changes or alterations in the proposed application as determined necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this zone and the guidelines of Section 19.30.242. 
B.  Upon obtaining approval, the applicant has twelve months in which to initiate the construction. During the period of construction, the project must be diligently pursued. If the applicant is unable to proceed with construction during the twelve months following the date of approval by the planning commission and if an extension is not requested, then the permit will automatically expire. If there have been no changes in the proposed plot plan or adjacent areas, then the planning director may grant additional twelve-month extensions to allow for the initiation of construction. The action by the planning director in approving or denying a time extension may be appealed to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 856 § 14, 1996: Ord. 617 § 3 (part), 1986.)  
19.30.246 - Planning commission decisions—Appeals—Council review. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission approving, denying or conditionally approving an application for a plan shall be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed or a city council review is ordered as provided in this section. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a plan shall not be valid or effective for any purpose unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Each such appeal shall be in writing on a form provided by the director of planning and community development of the city ("director"), and shall identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates; and 
2.  Each such appeal shall be filed with the director prior to the planning commission decision to which the appeal relates becoming final, as provided in subsection A of this section; and 
3.  Each such appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by the city council; and 
4.  Each such appeal is field by or on behalf of any of the following: 
a.  The owner of any real property located within the city, or 
b.  A person who lawfully occupies or is entitled to lawfully occupy any real property which is located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are the subject of the planned development permit, or 
c.  Any interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal shall be deemed complete nor effective for any purpose unless it complies with all of the provisions of this section. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section to the contrary, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before a planning commission decision becomes final pursuant to subsection A of this section, may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission decision relating to a planned development permit ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review shall stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates, pending the city council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council shall conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons shall be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show the existence of the facts which warrant the granting of the planned development permit. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk shall give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination shall be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 856 § 15, 1996: Ord. 617 § 3 (part), 1986.) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(R), 5-25-2018)  
19.30.248 - Planned development permit—Revocation. 
A.  Any permit heretofore or hereafter granted may be revoked by the planning commission or city council after appropriate proceedings, provided herein, for any of the following causes: 
1.  That any term or condition of the permit has not been complied with; 
2.  That the property subject to the permit. or any portion thereof, is used or maintained in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation in effect at time of approval; 
3.  That the use for which the permit was granted has not been exercised for at least twelve consecutive months, or has ceased to exist, or has been abandoned; 
4.  That the use for which the permit was granted has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or as to constitute a nuisance. 
B.  After revocation of a permit, the property affected thereby shall be subject to the regulations of the applicable zone classification. 
C.  The failure of the planning commission or city council to revoke a permit whenever due cause exists or occurs does not constitute a waiver of such right with respect to any subsequent cause for revocation. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
19.30.250 - Certificate of occupancy. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for any use of land or new buildings permitted in Section 19.30.030. The building department may issue the certificate after the planning commission approval and completion of the new buildings. A change in the use in an existing building may be approved by the planning director. 
B.  An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be accompanied by: 
1.  A description of the proposed industrial operation in sufficient detail to describe fully the nature and extent of the proposed use; 
2.  Plans or reports describing proposed treatment of noise, glare, air pollution and treatment and handling of hazardous gases, liquids or other material; 
3.  Plans or reports showing proposed treatment and disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, and hazardous wastes; 
4.  Description of any fuel proposed to be used, including engineering plans for the control of any smoke which may be generated; 
5.  Plans or reports describing the proposed management of hazardous materials and hazardous waste; 
6.  Additional data which may be required by the department of planning and community development to ascertain conformance with the requirement of this zone. 
C.  Whenever appropriate and reasonable, and as a continued condition of occupancy, the department of planning and community development may require the installation, maintenance, and operation by the applicant of continuous recording instruments which will ensure that any machines, devices, or instruments used to monitor or control noise, glare, emissions, smoke, hazardous gases, hazardous materials, hazardous waste, liquids, or other material are operating properly and in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local permits. The acquisition, installation, maintenance, and operation of such recording instruments shall be at the sole expense of the applicant. 
D.  A change or changes in the use permitted by a certificate of occupancy shall occur only after the holder of such certificate has obtained an amendment thereto allowing such change or changes. 
(Ord. 763 §§ 16—19, 1992; Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.6.)  
19.30.260 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
A.  The following uses are prohibited in the M-1 zone: 
1.  Drinking establishments. 
2.  General retail sales except as set forth under Section 19.30.030 and as set forth under Section 19.30.040 when approved under a condition use permit. 
3.  Motels. 
4.  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(Ord. 277 § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 9411.7.) 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
Chapter 19.32 - M-2 GENERAL MANUFACTURING ZONE 
 
19.32.010 - Established. 
There is established and added to the zones heretofore established in this title a zone to be designated M-2 general manufacturing zone. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.0.)  
19.32.020 - Intent and purpose. 
The purpose of the M-2 general manufacturing zone is to establish a district for industrial uses whereby desirable manufacturing, warehousing, wholesaling, service industries, and accessory uses may be developed which by their nature may have certain characteristics such as noise, vibration, heat, or glare. The general manufacturing uses shall be situated away from residential, commercial, or other inharmonious land uses while being adjacent to necessary services such as roadways, utilities, and railways. The general manufacturing uses shall be developed with performance standards, development standards, and proper safeguards so as to promote an efficient, orderly, and attractive environment for those uses while protecting the surrounding uses for the welfare of the community. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.1.)  
19.32.030 - Uses permitted. 
The following uses are permitted within the M-2 zone subject to obtaining a planned development permit in accordance Sections 19.32.050 through 19.32.310: 
A.  Service industries. The following service industries are permitted: 
1.  Agricultural supplies and equipment sales and service; 
2.  Appliance and small electrical service center; 
3.  Automobile repair and equipment repair garages; 
4.  Blueprinting, copying and photo finishing facilities; 
5.  Bottling and canning plants; 
6.  Building materials storage and sales; 
7.  Contractor's service yards; 
8.  Equipment sales and repair; 
9.  Laundries, linen and towel services, cleaning and dyeing; 
10.  Office building; 
11.  Plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electronic shops; 
12.  Sign fabrication; 
13.  Public facilities and utility service yards and transmission substations and microwave transmission; 
14.  Trucking terminals and distribution facilities; 
15.  Veterinarian clinic. 
(Ord. 851 § 17, 1996; Ord. 692 § 3, 1989; Ord. 628 § 8, 1987; Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.2.) 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
19.32.040 - Uses permitted by conditional use permit. 
A.  The following uses are permitted in the M-2 zone if a conditional use permit is obtained in the manner provided in Chapter 19.62 of this code: 
1.  Amusement activities other than arcades, carnivals, circuses, skating rinks, theaters (outdoor) and accessory uses. 
2.  Auto salvage yards, junkyards, auto wrecking yards. 
3.  Breweries, wineries, and distilleries, with or without tasting areas, and including the retail sale of alcoholic beverages manufactured on-site that will be consumed off the premises. 
4.  Brick and terra cotta manufacturing. 
5.  Buildings in excess of forty feet, excluding rooftop mechanical equipment. 
6.  Dog kennels. 
7.  Drop forge manufacture. 
8.  Emergency shelters and transitional housing. 
9.  Exploration, drilling, production, and storage of oil and natural gas. 
10.  Fertilizer manufacture. 
11.  Glue manufacture. 
12.  Heliports, including site sales, ancillary repair and storage. 
13.  Hospital or clinic for animals; provided, that such hospital or clinic and any treatment rooms, cages, pens, or kennels be maintained within a completely enclosed, soundproof building and that such hospital or clinic be operated in such a way as to produce no objectionable odors or noise outside its walls. 
14.  Jet propulsion engine testing. 
15.  Natural resources: development of, including necessary structures and appurtenances. 
16.  Race tracks. 
17.  Recycling facility—Large. 
18.  Rifle or pistol ranges. 
19.  Rock crushing plants. 
20.  Soda and compound manufacture. 
(Ord. 977 § 8, 2005; Ord. 640 § 6, 1987: Ord. 537 § 4, 1983: Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.3.) 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
19.32.050 - Property development standards. 
All uses permitted and land in the M-2 zone shall be developed and maintained in accordance with a planned development permit and the development standards set forth in Sections 19.32.060 through 19.32.230. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4 (part).)  
19.32.060 - Minimum parcel area. 
A.  Each parcel in an M-2 zone shall contain a minimum of forty thousand square feet in area. 
B.  This shall not apply to existing lawfully created parcels having less than forty thousand square feet in area on June 14, 1978. A lawfully created parcel having less than forty thousand square feet may not be further divided but may be combined with other parcels in the M-2 zone in accordance with the subdivision ordinance. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(A).)  
19.32.070 - Parcel dimension. 
A.  Width. Each parcel in the M-2 zone shall have a minimum frontage of one hundred feet on a public street. 
B.  Depth. Each parcel in the M-2 zone shall have a minimum depth of two hundred feet. 
C.  These provisions shall not apply to any lawfully created parcel which exists on June 14, 1978, which has parcel dimensions of less than the required minimum. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(B).)  
19.32.080 - Building height. 
All buildings shall be limited to a height of forty feet in height unless greater height is authorized under a conditional use permit (Chapter 19.62). 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(C).)  
19.32.090 - Building coverage. 
Lot area coverage by buildings or structures shall not exceed sixty percent of the net area of the parcel. Coverage shall be based upon structures which are roofed. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(D).)  
19.32.100 - Building setbacks. 
A.  Front Yard. 
1.  All buildings or structures on property adjacent to a public road shall be set back not less than twenty feet from the front property line, or the established setback from the proposed right-of-way in the area, whichever is greater. 
2.  No front yard area shall be used for storage of materials, wares, or merchandise. 
B.  Side Yard. 
1.  A setback shall be twenty feet for the side yard adjacent to the public road or future public right-of-way, whichever is greater, which shall be landscaped except the rear feet may be used for parking. 
2.  No building setback shall be required on one side of the interior parcel's property line with the opposite side providing a setback equal to the height of the building or up to a yard of twenty-five feet unless parking and other uses require a greater setback. In any case, where a parcel abuts a residential zone, a setback equal to one and one-half feet for each vertical foot of the building height shall be provided, but in no case shall the setback exceed fifty feet, and provide a six-foot screen wall installed on the property line and maintained. 
C.  Rear Yard. No rear yard shall be required except where adjacent to a public right-of-way in which case a setback of twenty feet shall be maintained, or when adjacent to or across a street from a residential property, a setback equal to one and one-half feet for each vertical foot of building height shall be provided, but in no case shall the setback exceed fifty feet, and a six-foot screen wall be provided and maintained on the property line. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(E).)  
19.32.110 - Nonconversion. 
No structure originally constructed for single-family residential use shall be converted to any M-2 use. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(F).)  
19.32.120 - Sign. 
The sign area for the M-2 zone shall be in accordance with Title 17. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(G).)  
19.32.130 - Landscaping areas. 
Landscaping and all other ground space treatment shall be provided upon ten percent of the net developed site. All landscaping shall be provided with a permanent watering system; landscaping provided adjacent to parking and maneuvering area shall be surrounded by a six-inch concrete curb. The landscaping area shall be maintained in an orderly, healthy manner, or replaced. Landscaping shall be considered actual planting areas of lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs, or other plants. Such landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  The entire required front yard setback shall be landscaped with the exception of vehicle accessways and the rear ten feet of the setback may be used for parking. 
B.  When the industrial development either rears on or sides on a residential zone or a lesser zone or developed property, it shall include a six-foot wide landscaped, solid screen area adjacent to that residential or lesser zone or developed property line. 
C.  Landscaping shall consist of a combination of trees, shrubs and groundcover with careful consideration given to the eventual size and spread, susceptibility to disease and pests, durability and adaptability to disease and pests, durability and adaptability to existing soil and climatic conditions. Fountains, ponds, sculpture and decorative screening walls as an integral part of the landscaping scheme are permitted. 
1.  The planning director or the applicant may request the planning commission to review any landscaping plan or fence plan as provided for under Sections 19.32.240 through 19.32.310, even though not required by this section and in such event, the decision of the planning commission shall replace that of the planning director. 
2.  The approval provided for in this section may be conditioned so as to ensure compliance with the purpose and provisions of this part with the plan including the following: 
a.  The dimensions and square footage of each planting area; 
b.  The total square footage and percentage of the net developed site devoted to landscaping; 
c.  Identification of each plant, common and botanical name, at the planting area; the number of each and their container size; 
d.  Permanent watering system, including all pipe sizes, and type and size of all sprinkler heads; 
e.  Specification sheet indicating the soil preparation and maintenance program for continual maintenance of the landscaping area and any type of guarantee associated with the installation of the landscaping. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(H).)  
19.32.140 - Fences and walls. 
The planning director may require a six-foot, except as stated under Section 19.32.190, solid decorative masonry wall be provided and maintained to screen any exterior storage when a change of use is requested or when the boundary of any industrial zone abuts or lies across a public way from a residential or lesser zone subject to review and approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(I).)  
19.32.150 - Utilities. 
All utilities shall be placed underground in accordance with the underground utilities ordinance codified in Chapter 13.08. 
(Ord. 398 § l (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(J).)  
19.32.160 - Off-street parking and loading area. 
Off-street parking and loading shall be in accordance with the parking and loading provisions and standards set forth under the parking and loading chapter of this title (Chapters 19.44 and 19.46). 
(Ord. 588 § 7, 1985: Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(K).)  
19.32.180 - Refuse and recycling containment. 
Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be provided in accordance with the enclosure provisions of Chapter 19.50 and the following standards: 
A.  Each industrial use established shall provide an outdoor refuse and recycling storage area which shall be easily accessible and enclosed on all sides by a minimum six-foot high brick, concrete block or masonry wall. The opening of the storage area shall be screened by a solid gate of durable wood, metal, or comparable material. 
B.  In addition, no material or waste shall be deposited in such a form or manner that it may be transferred by natural causes or force, and waste which may cause fumes, dust or which may constitute a fire hazard or be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures. 
C.  The number and general placement of the enclosures shall be as set forth in the planned development permit and approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 791 § 11, 1993: Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(M).)  
19.32.190 - Exterior storage and uses. 
A.  All exterior storage shall be completely screened from view from any adjoining public right-of-way or residential property. Screening shall be by means of a solid wood, metal or masonry wall, not more than eight feet in height, the design of the wall must be presented to the planning department for approval. The height of the storage area may exceed eight feet if a five-foot setback from the screen wall is provided for each one foot of additional storage height up to a maximum of twelve feet. 
B.  There shall not be permitted any manufacturing or assembling permitted on the exterior in the M-2 zone except as permitted under a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(N).)  
19.32.200 - Lighting. 
Lighting, including spotlights, floodlights, electrical reflectors, and other means of illumination for signs, structures, landscaping, parking areas, loading areas and the like, shall be focused, directed and so arranged as to prevent glare or direct illumination on streets or adjoining property. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(O).)  
19.32.210 - Mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antenna. 
All mechanical and electrical equipment and satellite dish antennas shall be screened by landscaping or fence or combination with the design approved by the director of planning and community development, and all rooftop equipment shall be placed behind a permanent parapet wall or equipment screen approved by the director of planning and community development or his designated representative and be completely screened from view at ground level. 
(Ord. 821 § 8, 1994: Ord. 593 § 18, 1985: Ord. 590 § 18, 1985: Ord. 398 § 1 (part, 1978: prior code § 9412.4(P).)  
19.32.220 - Commercial/industrial performance standards. 
All uses within the M-2 general manufacturing zone shall operate in accordance with the provisions of the performance standards contained in chapter 19.54. 
(Ord. 763 § 20, 1992; Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(Q).)  
19.32.230 - Ramping and equipment for handicapped. 
Adequate ramps and equipment shall be provided to accommodate the use of the facility by the handicapped, which shall include but not be limited to access ramps, restrooms, drinking fountains, etc. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.4(R).)  
19.32.240 - Planned development permit—Application submission. 
The applicant shall submit to the planning commission an application for a planned development permit together with a list of all property owners taken from the last equalized rolls within a three hundred foot radius of the property and other such information shown on the application form. Residential projects which do not require a public hearing need not provide the ownership list of property owners. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.5(A).)  
19.32.250 - Planned development permit—Filing of application. 
Applications for a planned development permit shall be filed with the planning department with a legal description of the parcel and authorization of the property owner for the filing of the application and a development plan consisting of the following: 
A.  A scaled drawing showing all property lines, computations for open space; 
B.  Existing and proposed building locations, parking areas, vehicular access, outdoor storage areas, recreation areas, walls, landscaped areas and planting screens, all adequately dimensioned, to determine compliance with the provisions of this zone; 
C.  General elevations or perspective drawings of all proposed buildings, walls and structures, and samples of colors and materials; 
D.  The plot plan shall show the topography of the lot, abutting streets, highways and freeways, topographic features located within one hundred feet of all lot lines and any additional data which may be required by the commission to determine compliance with the provisions of this zone. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.5(B).)  
19.32.260 - Planned development permit—Construction sequence. 
Each planned development permit shall include the submittal of a construction sequence for the land covered by the permit showing the order in which particular structures will be constructed, and, upon approval of the sequence, the applicant shall not deviate without written approval by the planning director. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.5(C).)  
19.32.270 - Planned development permit—Meeting of development advisory committee. 
Prior to consideration of the plot plan by the planning commission, a development advisory committee meeting will be held, with notice being given to the applicant wherein the staff recommendation will be reviewed. The applicant will also receive a notice of the planning commission meeting including staff recommendation. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.5(D).)  
19.32.280 - Planned development permit—Public hearing. 
A.  When a completed application for a planned development permit is accepted by the community development department, a public hearing before the planning commission will be set following the development advisory committee meeting and compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
B.  Notice of the public hearing will be provided in accordance with Chapter 19.84. 
C.  At the public hearing, the planning commission will consider all aspects of the planned development permit requested as provided for under this code. In addition, the planning commission will consider the necessary findings under Section 19.32.290. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.5(E).) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(S), 5-25-2018)  
19.32.290 - Planned development permit—Required findings. 
The planning commission consideration, and/or city council in considering a request for a planned development permit, shall consider and determine that the following can be made or that the project may be conditioned to insure consistency with the required finding prior to approval of the request: 
A.  The project will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare; 
B.  The project has been designed to be compatible with the various uses and zones within the area it is proposed to be located; 
C.  The developer has demonstrated that his project includes various amenities to meet the general intent of the ordinance by taking advantage of modern site planning techniques; 
D.  That the project is necessary to make reasonable use of the property; 
E.  The permit includes conditions which in the opinion of the commission and/or city council are imposed to insure compatibility and/or to mitigate any adverse conditions involved with the use or intensity of development, both public and private; 
F.  That the project will provide an environment of stable, desirable character with adequate open space, light, air, pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.5(F).)  
19.32.300 - Planned development permit—Planning commission action. 
A.  The planning commission in considering an application for a planned development permit may approve the request subject to conditions or may approve the application as submitted. The commission shall deny the application if appropriate findings cannot be made in support of the request. 
B.  Upon obtaining approval, the applicant has twelve months in which to initiate the construction. During the period of construction, the project must be diligently pursued. If for some reason the applicant is unable to proceed with construction during the twelve months following the date of approval by the planning commission and if an extension is not granted, then the permit will automatically expire. If there have been no changes in the proposed plot plan or adjacent areas, the planning director may grant additional twelve-month extensions to allow for the initiation of construction. The action of the planning director in approving or denying a time extension may be appealed to the planning commission. 
C.  Any permit hereintofore or hereafter granted may be revoked by the planning commission or city council after appropriate proceedings, provided herein, for any of the following causes: 
1.  That any term or condition of the permit has not been complied with; 
2.  That the property subject to the permit, or any portion thereof, is used or maintained in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation in effect at time of approval; 
3.  That the use for which the permit was granted has not been exercised for at least twelve consecutive months or has ceased to exist, or has been abandoned; 
4.  That the use for which the permit was granted has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or as to constitute a nuisance. 
D.  After revocation of a permit, the property affected thereby shall be subject to the regulations of the applicable zone classification. 
E.  The failure of the planning commission or city council to revoke a permit whenever due cause exists or occurs does not constitute a waiver of such right with respect to any subsequent cause for revocation. 
(Ord. 856 § 16, 1996; Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.5(G).)  
19.32.310 - Planning commission decisions—Appeals—Council review. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission approving, denying or conditionally approving an application for a planned development permit shall be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed or a city council review is ordered as provided in this section. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a plan shall not be valid or effective for any purpose unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Each such appeal shall be in writing on a form provided by the director of planning and community development of the city ("director"), and shall identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates; and 
2.  Each such appeal shall be filed with the director prior to the planning commission decision to which the appeal relates becoming final, as provided in subsection A of this section; and 
3.  Each such appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by the city council; and 
4.  Each such appeal is field by or on behalf of any of the following: 
a.  The owner of any real property located within the city, or 
b.  A person who lawfully occupies or is entitled to lawfully occupy any real property which is located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are the subject of the planned development permit, or 
c.  Any interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal shall be deemed complete nor effective for any purpose unless it complies with all of the provisions of this section. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section to the contrary, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before a planning commission decision becomes final pursuant to subsection A of this section, may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission decision relating to a planned development permit ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review shall stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates, pending the city council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council shall conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons shall be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show the existence of the facts which warrant the granting of the planned development permit. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk shall give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination shall be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 856 § 17, 1996: Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.5(H).) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(T), 5-25-2018)  
19.32.320 - Certificate of occupancy. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for any use of land or new buildings permitted in Section 19.32.030. The building department may issue the certificate after the planning commission approval and completion of the new buildings. A change in the use in an existing building may be approved by the planning director. 
B.  An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be accompanied by: 
1.  A description of the proposed industrial operation in sufficient detail to describe fully the nature and extent of the proposed use; 
2.  Plans or reports describing proposed treatment of noise, glare, air pollution and treatment and handling of hazardous gases, liquids or other material; 
3.  Plans or reports showing proposed treatment and disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, and hazardous wastes; 
4.  Description of any fuel proposed to be used, including engineering plans for the control of any smoke which may be generated; 
5.  Plans or reports describing the proposed storage of hazardous materials and containment of hazardous wastes; 
6.  Additional data which may be required by the department of planning and community development to ascertain conformance with the requirement of this zone. 
C.  Whenever appropriate and reasonable, and as a continued condition of occupancy, the Department of planning and Community Development may require the installation, maintenance, and operation by the applicant of continuous recording instruments which will ensure that any machines, devices, or instruments used to monitor or control noise, glare, emissions, smoke, hazardous gases, hazardous materials, hazardous waste, liquids, or other material are operating properly and in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local law and permits. The acquisition, installation, maintenance, and operation of such re-cording instruments shall be at the sole expense of the applicant. 
D.  A change or changes in the use permitted by a certificate of occupancy shall occur only after the holder of such certificate has obtained an amendment thereto allowing such change or changes. 
(Ord. 763 §§ 21—24, 1992; Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.6.)  
19.32.330 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
A.  The following uses are expressly prohibited in the M-2 zone: 
1.  Drinking establishments. 
2.  General retail sales except as set forth under Section 19.32.030(E)(4) and Section 19.32.040 when approved under a conditional use permit. 
3.  Motels. 
4.  Multiple-family dwellings. 
5.  Restaurants. 
6.  Single-family dwelling except as provided in Section 19.32.030(C) and (E)(3). 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9412.7.) 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4(Exh. A), 12-10-2014)  
Chapter 19.34 - O-S OPEN SPACE ZONE 
 
19.34.010 - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent of this chapter to provide for the preservation, maintenance and enhancement of valuable natural, environmental and recreational resources while permitting reasonable and compatible uses of land. In order to properly manage these resources, criteria and regulations must be formulated to guide uses in the following open space capacities as defined in the open space element: productive, protective, structural, recreational and scenic preservation. The purpose and intent of this chapter shall be the advancement of the following objectives: 
A.  To assure the continued availability of agricultural land for the production of food and fiber; 
B.  To protect and preserve land areas for the managed production of natural resources; 
C.  To protect, maintain and enhance watershed management to assure as a continuing supply of safe water; 
D.  To protect, maintain and enhance air quality; 
E.  To maintain and promote the historical and cultural heritage of the county; 
F.  To promote the health, safety, and welfare of all citizens of the county, through the protective management of hazard areas; 
G.  To shape and guide urban development through open space management; 
H.  To assure the continued availability of open space lands for the enjoyment of outdoor recreation; 
I.  To preserve and enhance areas of significant scenic amenity, unique natural features, and areas of educational and scientific research; 
J.  To maintain and enhance land areas necessary for the continued survival of valuable wildlife and vegetation; 
K.  To implement the conservation and open space elements of the general plan; 
L.  To seek coordination of open space lands with the county; 
M.  To promote the multiple use of open space lands for the maximum social, economic and ecological benefit to the general public; 
N.  To promote a wide range of land use options for future generations. 
(Ord. 405 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9413.)  
19.34.020 - Scope of land types to be included in the open space zone. 
In order to achieve the purposes of this chapter, particular land types are to be incorporated in the open space zone. Such types may include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Agricultural lands for the production of food and/or fiber; 
B.  Areas of mineral and oil extraction; 
C.  Land areas vital to water resources in terms of supply, recharge and/or critical watersheds; 
D.  Lands for public and private recreational uses; 
E.  Forested areas; 
F.  Areas of scenic value and unique natural features; 
G.  Floodplains; 
H.  Geologic hazard areas including active faults, areas subject to ground shaking, landslides and unstable soils; 
I.  Fire hazard areas. 
(Ord. 405 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9413.1.)  
19.34.030 - Uses permitted. 
Uses permitted within the open space zone are as follows: 
A.  Agricultural uses as follows; uses may not be within a critical watershed or groundwater recharge area except when located within those areas defined by the general plan open space and conservation element, as adopted: 
1.  Trees for fruit, nut or timber; 
2.  Bushes or vines for berries and grapes; 
3.  Field, vegetable, and truck or row crops; 
4.  Orchards, vineyards, and bushes for fruit or nuts; 
5.  Forest land; 
6.  Drying of crops, hay, straw and seed; 
7.  Storage and wholesaling of crops grown on the property; 
8.  Animal breeding, pasturing or ranching; 
9.  The growing and harvesting of flowers, ornamentals and turf; 
B.  Petroleum products, storage of, required for permitted agricultural uses on the premises; 
C.  Single-family dwelling upon land not located within a critical watershed or groundwater recharge area; 
D.  [Reserved.] 
E.  Wells for the production of water on any lot or parcel of land if water from the well is used only upon the lot or parcel upon which the well is located; 
F.  Flood control and water conservation facilities; 
G.  Designated cultural heritage sites and historical monuments; 
H.  The keeping of farm animals and fowl for recreation, agricultural and school projects; 
I.  Stand (temporary); one stand on forty or more acres of land is permitted for the sale of agricultural, horticultural, floricultural or farming products, grown or produced on the premises and must conform to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  The floor area per stand may not be more than four hundred square feet, 
2.  The stand must be located or maintained not less than twenty feet from any property line, public road, street or highway, 
3.  The stand must be removed when not in use for a period of thirty days; 
J.  Temporary movie sets or locations in connection with motion pictures, television programs or commercials; 
K.  Parks owned by public agencies; 
L.  Nurseries and greenhouses without retail sales; 
M.  Commercial or private stables and riding academies; boarding and care of horses, including living quarters for grooms and caretakers located within the same building; 
N.  The production and dispensing of water together with normal appurtenances accessory thereto on any lot or parcel of land under the ownership of any mutual water company, established water district or other public water supply agency; 
O.  Fire stations and facilities for federal, state and county law enforcement, excluding jails, prisons and other places of confinement; 
P.  Cottage food operations as set forth in Chapter 19.74. 
(Ord. 405 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9413.2.) 
(Ord. No. 1069, § 10, 1-11-2012; Ord. No. 1079, § 4(Exh. B), 9-25-2013)  
19.34.040 - Uses subject to a conditional use permit. 
The following uses may be permitted if a conditional use permit is obtained in the manner provided in the zoning ordinance and such use conforms to every term and condition of the permit. A permit for any of these uses may be granted by the planning commission if the applicant produces sufficient proof that the use will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or to the property in the vicinity or zone in which the use will be situated; that the effects can be prevented with the imposition of conditions, and that the permit is necessary for the owner of the property to make reasonable use of the property: 
A.  Public and privately owned recreational centers, clubhouses and similarly used buildings open to the public including tennis, swimming or similar activities, other than arcades; 
B.  Cemeteries, columbariums, crematories and mausoleums; 
C.  Buildings, structures and maintenance yards owned by public utilities and all other public entities; 
D.  Feed lots for the raising of livestock; 
E.  Radio and television towers and related facilities excluding studios; 
F.  Rifle, pistol, skeet or trap ranges; 
G.  A mobile home used as temporary housing for a caretaker on parcels of forty acres or more, where an employee must be on the property for a substantial portion of each day for vital functions or protection from vandalism; 
H.  Oil exploration and extraction; 
I.  Golf courses with or without clubhouses and restaurants within the clubhouse; 
J.  Campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks; 
K.  Any operation performed in a permanently fixed structure or establishment on the farm or on a moving packing plant on the farm for the purposes of preparing agricultural horticultural, egg, poultry, meat, rabbit or dairy products for market where such operations are done on the premises owned and operated by the same person who produce the products referred to herein and includes all operations incidental thereto; 
L.  Satellite dish antennas in a side yard or at heights greater than fifteen feet. 
(Ord. 593 § 19, 1985: Ord. 590 § 19, 1985; Ord. 537 § 5, 1982: Ord. 405 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9413.3.)  
19.34.050 - Development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply to all developments within the O-S open space zone and all buildings or structures hereinafter erected shall conform to the following: 
A.  Lot Area. Minimum parcel size shall be ten acres unless designated for greater lot area by a suffix after the zone designation. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Lot width shall be a minimum of three hundred feet. 
2.  Lot depth shall be a minimum of four hundred feet. 
C.  Setbacks. 
1.  Front Yard. All buildings shall be setback a minimum of fifty feet. 
2.  Side Yard. All buildings shall be setback a minimum of fifty feet. 
3.  Rear Yard. All buildings shall be setback a minimum of fifty feet. 
D.  Accessory Buildings and Structures. An accessory building and structure shall not occupy any portion of the front yard. There shall be a minimum of fifty feet between buildings used for human habitation and accessory buildings and structures, except as provided in subsection K of this section. 
E.  Parking. Parking shall be provided as set forth in the parking regulations, Chapter 19.44. 
F.  Fences and Walls. 
1.  A fence, wall or hedge, not to exceed six feet in height, may be located or maintained along the side or rear lot lines provided such fence, wall or hedge does not extend within twenty feet of the front property line or within a corner cutback area in which case such fence or wall shall be limited to three feet in height. 
2.  No fence, wall or hedge shall exceed three feet in height in any corner cutback area. 
G.  Building Height. Building height shall not exceed twenty-five feet. 
H.  Utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground in accordance with provisions of Chapter 13.08. 
I.  Signs. Signs may be erected in the O-S zone in accordance with the residential section of the sign ordinance codified in Title 17. 
J.  Animals and Fowl Maintenance. The keeping of animals and fowl shall be maintained in accordance with the following: 
1.  The area where animals and fowl are maintained shall not create a nuisance in relation to adjoining property and shall be kept in a healthful manner. 
2.  The animals and fowl shall be contained in such a manner to restrict their movement onto the public right-of-way or adjoining property. 
3.  The area where animals or fowl are maintained shall be a minimum of fifty feet from any building used for human habitation excepting domestic pets such as dogs or cats. 
K.  Satellite Dish Antenna, Rear Yard. A satellite dish antenna may extend into a rear yard; provided, that such antenna is not more than fifteen feet in height, and not less than six feet from the main building. A roof-mounted satellite dish antenna is strictly prohibited. The placement of such antenna in a side yard, or at heights greater than fifteen feet, may be permitted upon the granting of a conditional use permit. The antenna shall incorporate an earth-tone or background color which blends with adjacent structures and land features, and corrosive resistant material. The antenna shall be erected in a secure, wind resistant manner, and shall conform to applicable city building code regulations. 
(Ord. 593 § 20, 1985; Ord. 590 § 20, 1985; Ord. 405 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9413.4.)  
III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Chapter 19.36 - YARDS 
 
19.36.010 - Measurement procedure. 
Yards shall be measured perpendicular to the property line or from a future street or highway line as shown on the general plan or setback ordinance. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(A).)  
19.36.020 - Application to main and accessory structures. 
Yard provisions shall apply to both main and accessory structures. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(B).)  
19.36.030 - Required yard or open space not to apply to other buildings. 
No required yard or other open space surrounding existing building or any building hereinafter erected shall be considered as providing a yard or other open space for any other building on an adjoining lot or building site. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(C).)  
19.36.040 - Projections. 
A.  Garage doors shall not project beyond a lot line when open or being opened. 
B.  Except as otherwise specified in individual residential zones, no accessory building in excess of fifteen feet in height shall occupy any part of the required rear yard. 
C.  In case of reverse frontage, no accessory building shall be erected closer than six feet to the line of the abutting lot to the rear thereof. 
D.  Mechanical equipment consisting of ventilation or air conditioning equipment shall not be placed in the front or side yard area, unless an administrative minor modification is approved in accordance with Chapter 19.68. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(D).)  
19.36.050 - Detached accessory buildings—Generally. 
Detached accessory buildings including garages or open parking spaces may occupy not more than forty percent of the required rear yard provided that such building is not more than fifteen feet in height and the walls of such building are located not less than six feet from the nearest wall of a main building on the same lot or a wall on a contiguous lot. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(E)(1).)  
19.36.060 - Detached accessory buildings—Rear yard. 
Detached accessory buildings on the rear one-third of a lot not used for human habitation may be built to within three feet of the interior lot line and the rear lot line but on a corner lot the accessory building shall observe the stated side yard setback requirement on the street side. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(E)(2).)  
19.36.070 - Breezeways. 
Breezeways connecting a main building to an accessory building may be permitted. Such breezeways shall remain open on one side and shall not be considered part of the main building. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(E)(3).)  
19.36.080 - Covered patios—Rear yard. 
A covered patio attached or unattached which is enclosed on not more than three sides may extend into the required rear yard provided the distance between the rear property line and the patio at the nearest point is not less than ten feet. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(E)(4).)  
19.36.090 - Covered patios—Side yard. 
A covered unenclosed patio may project out from a house wall to within thirty-six inches of the interior side property line with the supporting poles also to within thirty-six inches of the interior side property line. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(E)(5).)  
19.36.100 - Architectural features. 
Eaves, cornices, canopies, belt courses, sills, buttresses, and other similar architectural features may project into a required front yard not more than four feet and may extend into the required side or rear yard not more than four inches for each one foot of width of such required side or rear yard. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(E)(6).)  
19.36.110 - Chimneys and fireplaces. 
Chimneys and fireplaces may project into required yards not more than two feet provided that such chimney or fireplace shall not be closer than three feet to any side line on the lot or parcel line. Where more than one building is located on the same lot or parcel, such chimney or fireplace shall not be closer than three feet to a line midway between the main walls of such buildings. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(E)(7).)  
19.36.120 - Balconies, fire escapes, and stairways. 
Open, unenclosed stairways, or balconies not covered by roofs or canopies may extend into required rear yards not more than four feet and into required front yards not more than two and one-half feet. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(E)(8).)  
19.36.130 - Landings or porches. 
Uncovered porches, platforms or landings which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend into required front and rear yards not more than six feet except that an openwork railing not more than thirty-six inches in height may be installed or constructed on such porch, platform or landing without affecting this provision. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(E)(9).)  
19.36.140 - Depressed ramps. 
Openwork fences, hedges, guard railings or other landscaping or architectural devices for safety or protection around depressed ramps may be located in required yards provided that such devices are not more than three and one-half feet in height. 
(Ord. 821 § 9, 1994: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(E)(10).)  
19.36.150 - Swimming pools. 
A.  Outdoor swimming pools, spas and the equipment for such may be located only in the side or rear yard areas. 
B.  All types of outdoor swimming pools, in-ground spas, and the equipment for such must be located at least three feet from any property line or building line. 
C.  All outdoor swimming pools, spas and the equipment for such may not be located in any utility easement unless permission is granted by the appropriate utility. 
D.  Outdoor pool and spa equipment shall be enclosed with a solid wall or fence to reduce the sound level, the design of which is to be approved by the director of planning and community development or his designee. 
(Ord. 784 § 2, 1993: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9501(E)(11).)  
19.36.160 - Maintenance and development standards for yards in residential zones. 
A.  Residential Landscaping Required. Notwithstanding any other provision in the city's official zoning ordinance to the contrary, all front yards and all street-side yards visible to the public right-of-way of each developed lot which is classified in the residential zone shall have constructed and installed thereon residential landscaping including an irrigation system as defined by Section 19.04.431 and Section 19.04.432. 
B.  Maintenance. Upon the installation of the required residential landscaping and irrigation system serving same, as required by Section 19.36.160A, the owner or other persons entitled to occupancy of the lot upon which such residential landscaping and irrigation system is located shall maintain the residential landscaping in a trimmed, primarily weed-free, and healthy condition with an irrigation system in an operable condition in accordance with the water waste ordinance. 
C.  The entire front yard area, including the minimum required front yard setback, shall be properly maintained in a neat and clean manner and kept free and clear of all automotive parts, trash, debris, trash storage receptacles, and inoperable vehicles. 
D.  Parking of vehicles shall be allowed only on approved surfaces in accordance with Chapter 19.44. 
E.  Side and rear yards which abut a public right-of-way and are visible from the public right-of-way shall be maintained in a neat and clean manner and kept free and clear of all automotive parts, trash, debris and inoperable vehicles. 
F.  Exceptions to landscaping and irrigation. 
1.  Front Yard Areas. Front yard areas shall be maintained with residential landscaping and an irrigation system therein except for those portions of the required front yard area within which are located improvements expressly permitted pursuant to the city's official zoning ordinance, such as driveways, walkways and fences. 
2.  Side Yard Areas. Side yard areas visible from the public right-of-way shall be maintained with residential landscaping and an irrigation system except for those portions of the side yard area within which are located improvements expressly permitted pursuant to the city's official zoning ordinance. These improvements may include paved driveways which serve as access off a public or private street to an off-street parking space located on the lot where the side yard area is located. 
3.  Time Period of Installation of On-Site Landscaping and Irrigation. Each lot classified in the residential zone shall install on-site landscaping and irrigation not later than one calendar year following the adoption of this section or one calendar year from the date of occupancy of the residential unit, whichever occurs later. Date of occupancy is established as the date when a permanent utility service is provided to the current occupant. 
(Ord. 829 § 2, 1995: Ord. 784 § 3, 1993.)  
Chapter 19.38 - WALLS, FENCES, AND LANDSCAPING 
 
19.38.010 - Purposes. 
The purposes of this chapter include to: 
A.  Regulate the location and height of walls, fences and landscaping, so as to provide for the beneficial use of private property, while protecting the public safety of persons using sidewalks and streets from visibility impacts. 
B.  Protect the public welfare by enhancing the aesthetic appearance of the city through the regulation of landscaping and the use of water for landscape irrigation purposes. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9502 (part).) 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 1, 6-11-2014)  
19.38.020 - Fence and wall heights. 
A.  Wall and fences not exceeding six feet in height shall be permitted along all side and rear yard lot lines. All walls and fences in any front yard may not exceed three feet in height. In the corner cutback area of corner lots, the height of mature landscaping without pruning, walls, fences, or other obstructions may not exceed three feet in height unless visual clearance can be shown due to the open type of landscaping proposed and a determination is made by the director of public works as to the adequacy of visual clearance. 
B.  Notwithstanding the above provisions, existing walls and fences shall be permitted to remain unless the wall or fence creates a public nuisance or a public hazard. 
C.  Fences enclosing tennis courts located in the rear half of a lot may be over six feet in height and shall be wire mesh or other materials whose vertical surface is not more than forty percent solid. 
D.  A fence, wall or hedge may be located or maintained along the side or rear lot lines provided such fence, wall, or hedge does not exceed six feet in height and does not extend into the required front yard or a side yard along the street side of a reverse corner lot. If access is provided to the rear of a reverse corner lot, a fence or wall shall be limited to three feet in height. 
E.  When within five feet of the opposite sides of a fence or wall the ground level differs by more than two feet, the wall may be increased in height one foot for each two feet of difference in grade but in no case greater than eight feet. The wall design shall be approved by the department of public works. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9502(A).)  
19.38.030 - Hazardous areas. 
A fence or wall six feet in height may be required by the director of public works or director of planning and community development along the perimeter of any area considered dangerous when one of the following is determined to be a physical hazard, such as frequent inundation, erosion, excavation, or grade differential. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9502(B).)  
19.38.040 - Temporary security fencing. 
A.  Security fencing as required by any governmental agency or jurisdiction shall be permitted notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter within the general yard setback area. 
B.  Barbed wire and concertina wire may only be used in the commercial industrial zones under a permit from the director of planning and community development. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9502(C).)  
19.38.050 - Intersection visibility and corner cutbacks—Streets and alleys. 
A.  Intersection Visibility at Uncontrolled Intersections. 
1.  At intersections where traffic is not required to stop on any approach, there shall be no visual obstruction within the corner cutoff area of any corner lot. The corner setback shall be defined by a line on a horizontal plane connecting two points along the front and side street property lines and forming a triangle. These points shall be measured fifty feet back from the intersection or the prolongation of the front and street side property lines. Properties that were approved or developed prior to April 26, 1995 shall be considered exempt and may continue to be subject to the comer setback of thirty feet as measured from the front and side lot line. 
2.  Projects which are located in a planned development area with private streets would be considered under a residential planned development permit subject to review and approval by the planning commission. However, intersecting streets from the private project to the public street shall comply with the corner cutback provision or include appropriate traffic control measures approved by the city. 
B.  Intersection Visibility at Controlled Intersections. At controlled intersections, the procedure for providing the "sight triangle" which is the area to be clear of obstruction for sight distance at controlled intersections shall be in accordance with Caltrans Design Manual (Figure 1, set out at the end of this section, illustrates the sight triangle). The manual specifies a driver eye height of 3.5 feet, an approaching vehicle height of 4.25 feet, a driver's eye setback of fourteen feet from the flowline (four-foot stop bar setback plus ten-foot eye setback from the stop bar) and the sight distances included in Table 1. Within the sight triangle, all objects shall be below three feet in height and above seven feet in height. In cases where providing intersection sight distance is unreasonable due to site characteristics as determined by the director of engineering services and the director of planning and community development, adjustment can be made as long as a safe stopping sight distance can be provided. Examples of unreasonably costly conditions include areas where a wall or building exists on an adjoining lot or in hillside areas where extreme grading would be necessary. 
Table 1 
Sight Distance at Controlled Intersections 
Major Street Speed 
(mph) 	Desirable 
Intersection 
Sight Distance a 
(feet) 
25 	275 
30 	330 
40 	450 
45 	500 
50 	550 
55 	600 
 
  
(Ord. 874, § 1, 1997; Ord. 403, § 1 (part), 1978; prior code § 9502(D).)  
19.38.060 - Landscaping and irrigation guidelines. 
The city council may by resolution establish guidelines for the regulation of landscaping and irrigation within the city. Residential, commercial, and industrial development projects that include new landscaping modifications to existing landscaping must comply with such guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 6-11-2014)  
Chapter 19.40 - BUILDING HEIGHTS 
 
19.40.010 - Projections above building height limits. 
Roof structures for the housing of elevators and required stairways may be erected above the height limits herein prescribed when approved by the director of planning and community development. No penthouse or roof structure or any other space above the height limit shall be allowed or may be used to provide additional living or floor space areas. The action of the director of planning and community development is appealable to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9503(A).)  
19.40.020 - Mechanical and electrical equipment. 
All mechanical equipment or electrical equipment shall be completely screened behind a parapet structure or be completely restricted from all view from the ground level. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9503(B).)  
Chapter 19.42 - VEHICULAR ACCESS 
 
19.42.010 - Access required. 
Each building or structure or use shall have permanent vehicular access to the approved public or private street or right-of-way on which the lot or building site has frontage unless a secondary means of permanent vehicular access such as an alley or service road have been approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9505(A).)  
19.42.020 - Access rights. 
Each lot or building site shall have at least one vehicular access from the street on which it has frontage unless access rights to the street have been waived and such offer and waiver have been accepted by the city or where such access is limited by architectural design or where common access is provided by a planned development project. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9505(B).)  
19.42.030 - Location of accessways, general. 
All vehicular accessways shall be located not less than thirty feet from the ultimate curbline of the intersecting streets or right-of-way. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9505(C).)  
Chapter 19.44 - OFF-STREET PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1054, § 2, adopted May 12, 2010, repealed the former Ch. 19.44, §§ 19.44.010—19.44.280. Section 3(Att. No. 1) of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 19.44 as set out herein. The former Ch. 19.44 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code §§ 9506—9509; Ord. 288(part), adopted 1975; Ord. 382, § 1, adopted 1978; Ord. 384, §§ 1(part), 2(part), adopted 1978; Ord. 460, §§ 1—4, adopted 1980; Ord. 491, §§ 4, 5, adopted 1981; Ord. 536, § 1, adopted 1982; Ord. 539, § 2, adopted 1982; Ord. 567, § 2, adopted 1984; Ord. 588, § 8, adopted 1985; Ord. 635, §§ 1—4, adopted 1987; Ord. 638, § 1, adopted 1987; Ord. 660, § 6, adopted 1988; Ord. 707, § 1(part), adopted 1990; Ord. 721, § 1, adopted 1990; Ord. 766, §§ 2, 3, adopted 1992; Ord. 773, § 13, adopted 1993; Ord. 804, §§ 1—4, adopted 1994; Ord. 808, § 1, adopted 1994; Ord. 833, § 2, adopted 1995; Ord. 853, § 1, adopted 1996; Ord. 898, § 2, adopted 1998; Ord. 977, § 9, adopted 2005; Ord. 996, § 2, adopted 2006. 
 
19.44.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter include: 
A.  To establish parking standards to effectively regulate the design of parking facilities including the requirement of providing the necessary number of parking spaces for various land uses. 
B.  To assure that an adequate number of spaces is available to accommodate the anticipated demand and to lessen traffic congestion and adverse impacts on surrounding properties. 
C.  To maximize compatibility between adjoining uses. 
D.  To promote vehicular and pedestrian safety. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.020 - General provisions. 
A.  The off-street parking requirements of this chapter apply at the time of the construction, alteration, intensification, change in use or occupant load, or change in form of ownership of a building or use. As used in this chapter, "change in form of ownership" means conversion of all or a portion of a project to condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperatives or other similar forms of ownership. 
B.  Off-street parking must be maintained in connection with any existing building or use so long as the building or use remains unless an equivalent substitute number of such spaces are provided and thereafter maintained in conformance to the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  Where off-street parking space in connection with a building or use does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, then the building or structure may not be altered, extended, expanded, nor may its form of ownership be changed, unless the current parking requirements of this chapter are satisfied. Any such non-conforming use that is discontinued for one year may not reestablish unless the use complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  A parking space is an area for the parking of a motor vehicle plus such additional areas as required to provide for safe ingress to and egress from the space. 
E.  The area set aside to meet the parking requirements of this chapter must be usable and must have permanent access. 
F.  Where multiple uses are provided, the required parking must satisfy the individual and cumulative needs of that complex and provide the minimum number of parking spaces necessary to serve the various uses except as otherwise provided for mixed-use developments. If the parking area is reserved or restricted to a particular use, such reservation or restriction must be strictly limited to a period of time and not to a particular use. Any such limitation requires the city's prior written approval and must remain in force as long as deemed necessary by the city to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
G.  Uses that include service vehicles must provide parking spaces above the minimum number of spaces required by this chapter. This is to ensure that adequate space for the employees and customers will be maintained on-site. 
H.  Required off-street parking spaces and parking areas may be used only for parking operable vehicles of residents, employers, employees, customers and visitors as appropriate to the allowed uses of the applicable zone. 
I.  All off-street parking spaces and aisles must be kept clear of any temporary or permanent obstructions. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.025 - Computation of parking requirements. 
A.  The floor area calculation will be based on the gross floor area of the building or use except where otherwise provided. 
B.  Restrooms, utility rooms, equipment rooms, elevator shafts, duct space, and stair wells will be excluded from the square footage when computing floor area for parking purposes. 
C.  The floor area includes exterior walls but excludes exterior areas. 
D.  Interior hallways will be included as part of the floor area for determining the gross floor area. 
E.  Any fractional spaces over fifty percent will be construed as one full space. 
F.  In any place of public assembly utilizing benches, pews, or other non-individualized seating structure, each 18-inch section of such structure will be construed as one seat. 
G.  A building or portion of a building devoted to off-street parking will have no off-street parking requirements. 
H.  In the case of mixed uses in a building or on a lot, the total requirements for off-street parking facilities will be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. Off-street parking facilities for one use will not be considered as providing required parking facilities for any other use except as specified in this chapter for common facilities or joint uses. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010) 
_____ 
19.44.030 - Residential uses. 
Parking for residential uses must be provided in accordance with Table 19.44.030: 
Table 19.44.030 Parking Spaces Required for Residential Uses 
Residential Use 	Required Number of Spaces 
1. Single-Family Residence 	Two (2) enclosed spaces, plus one (1) open or enclosed space for the parking of a recreational vehicle. 
2. Multifamily Residential (apartments) 	Required spaces must be enclosed, unless specifically modified in accordance with Chapter 19.16 as follows:one (1) space for each studio unit, one-and-one-half (1.5) spaces for each one (1) bedroom unit, two (2) spaces for each two (2) bedroom unit, two-and-a-half (2.5) spaces for each three (3), or three (3) spaces for each four (4) bedroom unit; plus, two (2) open guest spaces for every five (5) units; plus, one (1) space for the parking of a recreational vehicle for every five(5) units. 
3. Townhouse, Condominium, or Other Multifamily Ownership Project with three (3) bedrooms or fewer, (optional bonus rooms, bedrooms, offices, or similar rooms, are to be classified as bedrooms for the purpose of calculating required parking) 	Two (2) enclosed spaces per unit, plus one (1) space for the parking of a recreational vehicle for every five (5) units, plus, two (2) open guest spaces for every five (5) units where parking is provided in front of garages or a dedicated parking stall is provided on site for each unit, or three (3) open guest spaces for every five (5) units where parking is not provided in front of garages, or a dedicated parking stall is not provided on site for each unit. 
4. Townhouse, Condominium, or Other Multifamily Ownership Project with four (4) bedrooms or more, (optional bonus rooms, bedrooms, offices, or similar rooms, are to be classified as bedrooms for the purpose of calculating required parking) 	Two (2) enclosed spaces per unit, plus one (1) space for the parking of a recreational vehicle for every five (5) units, plus, two (2) open parking spaces in front of garages, or as dedicated parking stalls on site for each unit, and three (3) open guest spaces for every five (5) units. 
5. Accessory Dwelling Unit 	The required number of spaces is as set forth in Section 19.56.060. 
6. Fraternity or Sorority Houses 	One (1) space for each room, or for each 100 square feet of dormitory area, which will be considered equivalent to a guest room 
7. Senior Housing 	In senior housing, public housing, or federally-assisted housing for elderly persons, 0.75 space for each unit. The developer must record a covenant approved by the City that runs with the land, and provides that if the use is changed to any use other than an elderly housing project, then the development must comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010; Ord. No. 1102, § 3, 1-28-2015; Ord. No. 1110, § 3, 6-24-2015; Ord. No. 1119, § 6, 1-27-2016; Ord. No. 1140, § 4, 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 4, 4-26-2017; Ord. No. 1158, § 3, 10-24-2018) 
_____ 
19.44.035. - Recreational and oversized vehicles. 
A.  Recreational Vehicles. A recreational vehicle, boat or a boat trailer may be parked in a residential zone only as follows: 
1.  In a recreational vehicle storage area approved as part of a Residential Planned Development permit or as part of a Conditional Use Permit for a multi-family residential development, or in any enclosed structure that conforms to the zoning requirements of the particular zone where located, 
2.  Outside of a structure in the side yard or rear yard area of a residential zoned lot provided that: 
a.  The recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer is parked on a surface of concrete, brick, brick pavers, asphalt, gravel or crushed rock. All such surfaces and the design are subject to the review and approval by the director. The design must provide adequate vehicle support together with dust, weed and erosion control for the drive, parking area and area underneath the recreational vehicle. 
b.  The recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer, except for motorized recreational vehicles customarily used for ordinary transportation purposes may not obstruct the access to parking in the garage or carport area required under Table 19.44.030. 
c.  In the event the side or rear yard is not accessible or is insufficient in size to accommodate a recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer, it may be parked in the front setback area. A corner lot will be determined to have reasonable access to the rear yard unless a grade difference of three feet or more exists. The existence of a fence or wall separating the front yard from the side yard will not be determined to prevent reasonable access. 
d.  Parking in a structure is not possible due to size of the recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer. 
3.  The body of the recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer must be at least thirteen feet from the face of any curb and parked generally perpendicular to the front curb. 
4.  No part of the recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer may extend over the public sidewalk or public right-of-way. 
5.  Parking is permitted only for storage purposes and a recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer may not be: 
a.  Used for dwelling purposes except for limited overnight sleeping for a maximum of fourteen days in any 12-month period; 
b.  Permanently connected to sewer lines, water lines or electricity; the recreational vehicle may be connected to electricity temporarily for charging batteries and other purposes; 
c.  Used for storage of goods, materials, or equipment other than those items considered to be part of the recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer or essential for its immediate use. 
6.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer may be parked no more than forty-eight hours on the driveway for loading or unloading purposes provided that it does not overhang the public right-of-way. 
7.  A recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer must be owned or rented by the resident or guest of the resident on whose property the recreational vehicle or boat trailer is parked or stored. 
8.  A recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer that is stored for a period of seventy-two hours or more may not obstruct the line of sight from any adjoining property owner needed to obtain access to a public right-of-way. Upon a determination by the city that a potential safety hazard exists, the recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer may be required to be relocated or removed from the site. 
9.  Where multiple recreational vehicles are stored on the site, each recreational vehicle must conform to the above requirements of this subsection (A). 
B.  Oversized Vehicles. No person may stop, stand or park an oversized vehicle on any lot or parcel in a residential zone unless it is necessary to carry out work or service that requires the presence of such a vehicle on the lot or parcel. For the purpose of this section an "oversized vehicle" is defined as a vehicle used for commercial purposes containing three or more axles. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010) 
_____ 
19.44.050 - Educational and day care uses. 
Parking for educational and day care uses must be provided in accordance with Table 19.44.050: 
Table 19.44.050 Parking Spaces Required for Educational Uses 
Educational Uses 	Required Number of Spaces 
1. Elementary Schools 	One and a half spaces for each classroom. 
2. Junior High Schools 	One space for each employee; plus, one additional space for each 25 students the school is designed or approved to accommodate. 
3. Senior High Schools 	One space for each employee; plus, one additional space for each eight students the school is designed or approved to accommodate. 
4. Colleges or University 	One space for each employee; plus, one additional space for each five students the school is designed or approved to accommodate. 
5. Business, Professional, or Trade Schools 	One space for each employee; plus, one additional space for each three students the school is designed or approved to accommodate. 
6. Children's Art, Music, Dancing, or Similar Schools 	One space for each employee; plus, one additional space for each five students or one space for each 300 square feet of gross floor space whichever is greater. 
7. Children's Day Care Nurseries 	One space for each employee, plus one additional space for each five children for the first 100 enrolled, then one parking space for each 20 children in excess of 100 that the facility is licensed to accommodate. 
Spaces provided in a drop-off/pick-up area may contribute towards satisfying the on-site parking requirements. 
8. Large Family Day Care in a Residential Zone 	One space for each employee. The owners of the residential facility must park their personal vehicles in the garage or on an approved surface. Additional vehicles owned by the day care facility owner must be parked in the driveway as long as all provisions of this standard are met. 
9. Libraries 	One space for each 250 square feet, plus parking for other uses including assembly rooms and food uses in accordance with Section 19.44.060. 
 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.060 - Recreational uses. 
Parking for recreational uses must be provided in accordance with Table 19.44.060. 
Table 19.44.060 Parking Spaces Required for Recreational Uses 
Recreational Uses 	Required Number of Spaces 
1. Auditoriums 	One space for each three fixed seats or 40 square feet of assembly area not devoted to permanent seating, whichever is greater. 
2. Billiard Parlors and Pool Rooms 	Three spaces for each billiard or pool table. 
3. Bowling Alleys 	Three parking spaces for each alley. 
4. Community Center 	One space for every 40 square feet of assembly area. 
5. Dance Studios 	One space for every 40 square feet of the dance floor. 
6. Golf Courses—Miniature Golf 	One space for each golf hole. 
7. Golf Courses—Private 	Five spaces for each golf hole in addition to parking for all uses as specified by this chapter. 
8. Golf Courses—Public 	Eight spaces for each golf hole in addition to parking specified under this chapter for each component use. 
9. Golf Driving Ranges 	One space for each golf hole or driving tee. 
10. Gun Clubs 	One space for each three members thereof. 
11. Gymnasium 	One space for each employee plus one additional space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area devoted to recreational pursuits; plus, parking based on any individual uses. 
12. Health Clubs 	a. One space for every 40 square feet of open floor area devoted to group exercise activities. 
b. One space for every 250 square feet of exercise equipment area. 
c. Additional uses require parking consistent with this chapter. 
13. Martial Arts Studios 	One space for every 100 square feet of group assembly area. 
14. Other Public Assembly 	One space for each three fixed seats or 40 square feet of assembly area not devoted to permanent seating, whichever is greater. 
15. Parks—Neighborhood 	Four spaces per acre which may be satisfied by the adjacent local neighborhood or collector street if on-street parking is permitted. 
16. Parks—Community 	Four spaces per acre. Additional parking must also be provided for ancillary uses in accordance with this chapter. 
17. Picnic Shelters 	One space per four seats. 
18. Racquetball Courts 	a. One space for every 40 square feet of open floor area devoted to group exercise activities. 
b. One space for every 250 square feet of exercise equipment area. 
c. Three spaces for each racquetball court. 
19. Skating Rinks 	a. One parking space for each 100 square feet of rink floor area. 
b. One parking space for each three fixed seats or for each 45 square feet of floor area available for assembly where there are no fixed seats. 
20. Skateboard Park 	a. One space for each 250 square feet of floor area. 
b. One space for each 500 hundred square feet of skateboarding area. 
21. Sports Fields—Softball, Baseball, Soccer, Football, or Similar Fields 	a. Practice fields: 15 spaces for each field. 
b. Competitive fields: 40 spaces for each field. 
22. Stables—Boarding or Riding 	One parking space for each stall retained for rental purposes on the site; plus, one parking space for each employee. 
23. Stadiums, Sports Arenas 	One space for each three fixed seats or 40 square feet of assembly area not devoted to permanent seating, whichever is greater. 
24. Swimming Pools 	One space for every 250 square feet of pool, deck and recreational area; plus, one space for each employee. 
25. Tennis Clubs 	a. Two spaces for each tennis court. 
b. One space for each 250 square feet of floor area excluding restrooms, locker rooms, and mechanical rooms. 
c. One space for each three fixed seats and/or 40 square feet of assembly area (excluding the court) when a tournament court is provided, whichever is greater. 
26. Tennis Courts 	Three spaces per court. 
27. Theaters 	One space for every four fixed seats and one space for every 100 square feet of assembly area not devoted to permanent seating. Off-site parking may be considered towards satisfying this requirement, if a conjunctional parking agreement is provided, and where it can be shown that parking demand conflicts would not exist between uses. 
 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.070 - Office uses. 
Parking for office uses must be provided in accordance with Table 19.44.070: 
Table 19.44.070 Parking Spaces Required for Office Uses 
Office Uses 	Required Number of Spaces 
1. Banks and Financial Institutions 	One space per 250 square feet. 
2. Data Processing/Telemarketing/Medical Claims 	Six spaces per 1,000 square feet. 
3. Governmental Offices 	To be established based on parking study for the proposed use if not covered by the categories in this table. 
4. Medical and Dental Offices 	One space per 200 square feet. 
5. Other Medical Related Facilities 	One space per 200 square feet. 
6. Professional Offices, General Business Offices 	One space per 250 square feet. 
 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.080 - Commercial uses. 
Parking for commercial uses must be provided in accordance with Table 19.44.080: 
Table 19.44.080 Parking Spaces Required for Commercial Uses 
Commercial Uses 	Required Number of Spaces 
1. Auto, Boat, Trailer or Truck Sales or Rentals 	One space for each 1,000 square feet of gross land area devoted to such use, exclusive of building areas which will be computed as one space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
2. Car Wash—Automatic 	One space for each employee on the largest shift; plus, 50 square feet of stacking space (need not be marked) for each auto the facility is capable of washing in one hour of constant operation. 
3. Car Wash—Self Service 	Two spaces for each washing area. 
4. Furniture, Carpet and Appliance Stores 	One space for each 500 square feet of floor area. 
5. Garages—Automobile Repair 	a. One space for each 250 square feet of retail or office area with a minimum of two spaces provided. 
b. Three spaces for each service or repair bay provided or area available for a service bay. 
c. If rental trucks or trailers are maintained, one space for each rental unit. 
6. General Retail 	One space per 250 square feet. 
7. Hotels with Conference Center 	One space for each guest room plus one space for each two employees on the major shift. 
Parking for the conference center, office areas, restaurants, and other uses will be based on a parking study prepared for the subject property including an analysis of shared parking. 
8. Lumber Yards 	One space for each 1,000 square feet of gross land area devoted to such use, exclusive of building areas which must be computed as one space for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
9. Mortuaries, funeral homes 	One space for every 45 square feet of floor area or assembly area; plus, one space for each vehicle owned by such establishment. 
10. Motels and Hotels 	One space for each guest room plus one space for each two employees on the major shift. Additional parking must be provided for ancillary uses in accordance with this chapter. 
11. Restaurants, bars and taverns 	a. One parking space for each three fixed seats or for each 45 square feet available for seating, whichever is greater. 
b. One parking space for each 100 square feet of noncustomer area including storage areas and utility space. 
c. In no event may less than ten parking spaces be provided regardless of the number of fixed seats, dining area, noncommercial area or number of employees. 
12. Restaurants, in line in shopping centers of 55,000 square feet or more 	a. Restaurants in line that occupy up to 15% of the floor area of the retail center, excluding free-standing restaurants, must provide a minimum of one parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
b. All freestanding restaurants and any in-line restaurant occupying in excess of 15% of the total floor area of the center must provide parking in accordance with subsection 11 of Table 19.44.080. 
13. Retail—Outlet Centers or Discount Superstores 	One space per 200 square feet. 
14. Retail Nurseries 	One space for each 1,000 feet of gross land area devoted to such use, exclusive of building areas which will be computed as one space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
15. Service Stations 	a. One space for each 250 square feet of retail or office area with a minimum of two spaces provided. 
b. Three spaces for each service or repair bay provided. 
c. If rental trucks or trailers are maintained, one space for each rental unit. 
 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the planning commission or city council may increase the number of parking spaces required under this section for commercial uses in order to provide adequate off-street parking if such additional parking is deemed necessary to mitigate potential parking demand. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.090 - Industrial uses. 
A.  Parking for industrial uses must be provided in accordance with Table 19.44.090: 
Table 19.44.090 Parking Spaces Required for Industrial Uses 
Industrial Uses 	Required Number of Spaces 
1. Light Industrial 	One space per 500 square feet. 
2. General Industrial 	One space per 500 square feet. 
3. Data Processing/Telemarketing/Call Centers/Medical Claims 	Six spaces per 1,000 square feet. 
4. Medical Related Facilities 	One space per 200 square feet. 
5. Professional Offices, General Business Offices 	One space per 250 square feet. 
6. Auto Wrecking or Dismantling or Salvage Facilities 	One space for each 2000 square feet of gross lot area utilized or designed for a wrecking or dismantling or salvaging process excluding the required parking area. 
7. Transportation and Trucking Terminals 	One parking space for each 500 square feet of warehouse, shop, or loading area; plus, one additional space for each truck-trailer dispatched from the terminals; plus, one truck space for each truck normally found or maintained on the premises. 
8. Mini-Warehouses 	One space per 500 square feet of which the spaces may be used for the storage of boats, trailers and other recreational vehicles except that a minimum of five spaces must remain available for customer parking. No exterior storage of materials is allowed in the outdoor parking spaces. 
9. Warehouse Uses 	One space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area if a determination is made as part of an Industrial Planned Development Permit that the use is designed solely as a warehouse use and will not convert to a manufacturing, office or other use. In such a situation, a covenant will be required to be recorded against the property indicating that the use is limited to warehousing only unless additional parking is provided to satisfy the provisions of this chapter for a change in use. 
 
B.  Industrial parks, light industrial and general industrial may devote up to 20 percent of the floor space for the use as office in support of the primary activity and provide one parking space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area. Any area above the 20 percent factor used for office purposes must provide one parking space per 250 square feet of floor area. All floor area above the first floor (including mezzanines) will be counted as office area. 
C.  Office and retail uses must provide one parking space for every 250 square feet of floor area. 
D.  Each use must provide adequate off-street parking if their need exceeds the minimum requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.100 - Other uses. 
Parking for other uses must be provided in accordance with Table 19.44.100: 
Table 19.44.100 Parking Spaces Required for Other Uses 
Other Uses 	Required Number of Spaces 
1. Animal Hospitals, Veterinary Clinics, Animal Day Care, Animal Grooming 	One space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
2. Churches, Temples, and Other Places of Worship 	One space for each four fixed seats and forty square feet of assembly area not devoted to permanent seating including areas used concurrently with the main sanctuary. When the facility is approved in an industrial zone, shared parking with adjacent uses may be approved under a CUP subject to a parking study. 
3. Convalescent Hospitals, Nursing Homes, Congregate Care and Assisted Living Facilities 	One space for each four beds; plus, one space for each employee on the largest shift. 
4. Emergency Shelters 	One space for each ten beds. 
5. Hospitals 	One space for each two beds plus one space for each employee on the largest shift. 
6. Recycling Center 	Recycling Center—Small: No additional parking required. 
Recycling Center—Intermediate or large: One space for each 500 square feet of floor area. 
7. Tattoo Parlors 	One space for each 250 square feet. 
8. Transitional Housing 	One-half space for each bedroom; plus, one guest space for each five bedrooms. 
 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010) 
_____ 
19.44.105 - Drive-through facilities. 
In addition to providing parking as required under this chapter for the main use, drive-through facilities must comply with the following regulations: 
A.  Drive-through facilities for food uses must provide the following: 
1.  A minimum stack-up space from the pick-up window to the entrance to the drive-through lane that provides for minimum of ten vehicles. 
2.  Separate window areas: one for the payment for the food items and a second window to pick up the food items. 
3.  The drive-through lane must include an ordering panel a minimum of thirty feet ahead of the payment window, and a preview panel a minimum of twenty-four feet ahead of the ordering panel. If the ordering panel is visible a second order station may be substituted for the preview panel. 
4.  No more than one drive-through lane is permitted. 
5.  The pick-up window must have a roof extension from the building to architecturally incorporate the area as part of the use. 
6.  A separate area for loading as required under Chapter 19.46 (Off-Street Loading). 
B.  Drive-up kiosks must provide for the following: 
1.  A minimum of two stacking spaces at each window clear of the required driving lanes. 
2.  A maximum of two drive-through lanes is permitted. 
C.  Drive-up banking facilities must provide the following: 
1.  A minimum of four stack-up spaces. 
2.  A maximum of four drive-up lanes is permitted. 
D.  Other types of drive-through uses, including drive-up retail uses, must provide a minimum of four stack-up spaces and no more than two drive-through lanes. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.110 - Uses not specified. 
If a use is not specified in this chapter, the director is authorized to establish appropriate parking requirements for such use based on the similarity of such use to other uses specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.120 - Camarillo Old Town parking requirements. 
The following parking requirements apply to the Camarillo Old Town area, which area is bounded on the north by Highway 101, on the east by Lewis Road, on the west 290 feet east of Geneive, and on the south by the existing public alley and Chapel Drive, between Elm Drive and Glenn Drive: 
Table 19.44.120 Parking Spaces Required for Uses within the Camarillo Old Town area 
Use 	Required Number of Spaces 
1. Motel or Hotels 	One space for each guest room. 
2. Places of Public or Semi-Public Assembly 	One space for each five fixed seats of the assembly area, or where seating capacity cannot be measured, one space for 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
3. Commercial and Office Buildings 	One space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
4. Restaurants and Cafes 	One space for each four fixed seats or one space for each 100 square feet of building area, exclusive of area used for storage of utility equipment whichever is greater. 
5. Bars and Taverns 	One space for every four seats or one space for 30 square feet available for seating. 
6. Multi-Family Residential—Apartments 	One enclosed space for each unit containing two or fewer bedrooms, two enclosed spaces for each unit containing three bedrooms or more. 
7. Multi-Family Residential—Townhouse or Condominiums 	Two spaces for each unit in an enclosed garage. 
 
A.  Properties in the COT (Camarillo Old Town) zone may, in lieu of furnishing the parking spaces required by the provisions of this section, satisfy such requirements by the payment of an amount per required parking space to the city's off-street parking fund prior to the issuance of a building permit. The in-lieu payment for each required parking space must be paid in accordance with the amount established by city council resolution. This in lieu fee applies only to existing structures but may be applied to alterations, modifications or additions that require eight or more off-street parking spaces in addition to what was previously provided. An in-lieu payment may be made only once per parcel or development project. 
B.  Funds placed in the off-street parking fund, pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, must be used exclusively for the purpose of acquiring and developing off-street parking facilities and to the extent practicable, such facilities must be located in the general vicinity of the premises for which the in-lieu payments were made. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.125 - Camarillo Commons parking requirements. 
The following parking requirements apply to new development within the Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan area, which is the area bounded by Arneill Road on the east, Ponderosa Drive on the north, Mobil Avenue on the west, and Daily Drive on the south. along with the lots on the west side of Mobil Ave for the first 300 feet north of Daily Drive. 
Table 19.44.125 Parking Spaces Required for Uses within the Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan Area 
Uses 	Required Number of Spaces 
1. Multifamily Residential—Apartments 	One enclosed space for each studio unit, one and one-half enclosed spaces for each one bedroom unit, two enclosed spaces for each unit containing two bedrooms or more; plus, two open guest spaces for every five units. 
2.  Multifamily Residential—Townhouse or Condominiums with three bedrooms or fewer, (optional bonus rooms, bedrooms, offices, or similar rooms, are to be classified as bedrooms for the purpose of calculating required parking) 	Two enclosed spaces per unit; plus, two open guest spaces for every five units where parking is provided in front of garages, or a dedicated parking stall is provided on site for each unit, or three open guest spaces for every five units where parking is not provided in front of garages, or a dedicated parking stall is not provided on site for each unit. 
3. Townhouse, Condominium, or Other Multifamily Ownership Project with four (4) bedrooms or more, (optional bonus rooms, bedrooms, offices, or similar rooms, are to be classified as bedrooms for the purpose of calculating required parking) 	Two (2) enclosed spaces per unit, plus one (1) space for the parking of a recreational vehicle for every five (5) units, plus, two (2) open parking spaces in front of garages, or as dedicated parking stalls on site for each unit, and three (3) open guest spaces for every five (5) units. 
4. Commercial Retail 	One space for each 250 square feet of floor area. 
5. Restaurants and Food Uses 	One space for each three seats; plus, one space for each 100 square feet of kitchen area. Where shared parking is approved, then parking may be reduced to not less than the parking required for commercial retail in this section. 
6. Office 	One space for each 250 square feet of floor area. 
7. Other uses 	For uses not specified in this section, parking must be as otherwise provided in this chapter (e.g. church, educational or recreational uses); provided, however, that a reduced parking requirement may be approved if a parking study demonstrates that adequate shared parking will be provided. 
 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010; Ord. No. 1102, § 4, 1-28-2015; Ord. No. 1110, § 4, 6-24-2015) 
_____ 
19.44.140 - Location of required off-street parking area. 
A.  For all residential uses, the parking spaces must be located on the same lot, parcel, or site as the buildings they serve. 
B.  No off-street parking lot, parcel, or site may be located more than three hundred feet from a building lot, parcel, or site it is intended to serve. 
C.  When off-street parking is located on a different lot, parcel, or site than that of the building it is intended to serve, a parking agreement must be approved by the director and recorded against the property providing the parking. 
D.  No permanent parking is permitted in the required front yard of any residentially zoned lot, parcel, or site. 
E.  Automobile repair garages with service bays may count the service bay towards the parking requirement of such use if the area conforms to this chapter and there is adequate circulation. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.150 - Size of parking spaces. 
A.  Open off-street parking spaces must be a minimum of nine feet wide and twenty feet long. 
B.  Enclosed or covered off-street parking spaces must be a minimum of ten feet wide and twenty feet long, interior dimensions. Tandem spaces or single stall enclosed parking spaces must be a minimum of twelve feet in width. Tandem enclosed or open spaces are prohibited in Townhouse, Condominium, or Other Multifamily Ownership Projects. 
C.  Compact car spaces must be a minimum of eight feet six inches in width and seventeen feet in depth. Compact spaces may only be permitted in limited areas where it has been shown that due to the configuration of the parcel the use of compact parking is necessary to achieve an adequate design and that the use of compact parking would not be detrimental to the use of the parking lot. 
D.  A recreational vehicle parking space must be a minimum of ten feet in width and twenty-five feet in depth. 
E.  A handicapped parking space must comply with the requirements of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations or other applicable regulations." 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010; Ord. No. 1110, § 5, 6-24-2015)  
19.44.155 - Drive-through standards. 
A.  Drive-through lanes must be a minimum width of twelve feet with increased widths at turns and proper radii to accommodate the turning of vehicles. 
B.  Each stack-up space must be a minimum length of twenty-four feet as measured at the center line of the drive-through lane. 
C.  The drive-through lane must be designed so that the access to the drive-through lane is from on the site and must not interfere with traffic in the public right-of-way. Direct access to a drive-through lane from the public right-of-way is not permitted. 
D.  The drive-through lane must be separate from on-site access drives and may not serve parking areas or loading space areas. 
E.  The drive-through lane must be designed to avoid interference with on-site pedestrian access. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.160 - Access. 
A.  The minimum width of a residential driveway may not be less than ten feet and must be of sufficient width to provide direct access to required parking (except that a center strip over which the wheels of a vehicle will not pass in normal use need not be paved). 
B.  A residential driveway that is one hundred feet or longer must be a minimum of sixteen feet wide or two ten-foot wide one-way drives must be provided. A residential driveway longer than two hundred fifty feet must provide turn-outs to allow traffic to pass by at intervals subject to the approval of the city's traffic engineer. 
C.  A residential driveway serving four or more units must be a minimum of twenty feet wide. 
D.  Access may not be unobstructed by any portion of a building. 
E.  A commercial or industrial driveway must be a minimum of twenty feet wide. 
F.  Off-street parking areas must be designed with an appropriate turnaround so that all vehicles may enter the street by forward motion and avoid a dead-ended condition unless otherwise approved by the planning commission or city council. 
G.  The gradient of access to and within all parking facilities including parking lots and parking garages may not exceed a maximum of fifteen percent slope. Driveways and ramps must have appropriate transitional vertical curves so as to allow a passenger vehicle to pass over the access ramping without interference to the vehicle's undercarriage. The design of access ways is subject to review and approval by the city's traffic engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.170 - Parking charges. 
A fee for parking may be charged for parking within a required parking lot so long as the charge does not significantly exceed the costs necessary to defray the operation of the parking lot and does not otherwise render the required parking spaces not being used. In cases where parking overflows from a parking lot due to the monetary charge for parking, the city may require the owner to submit a parking management plan that addresses the operation of the parking lot including the parking demand, costs, and parking impacts. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.180 - Shared parking facilities. 
Shared parking facilities may be provided in lieu of the individual requirements contained in this chapter, but such facilities must be approved by the director as to the size, shape, and relationship to the site served. In addition, the total number of such off-street parking spaces may not be less than the amount required for the various uses if computed separately. Such shared parking facility must be attached or adjacent to the building that it is intended to serve and be subject to parking agreement approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.190 - Transportation demand management facilities. 
A.  For all nonresidential development, preferential carpool and vanpool parking spaces must be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  For retail commercial projects, a minimum of one preferential vanpool or carpool parking space must be provided for projects of fifty thousand square feet to one hundred thousand square feet of floor area and two such spaces for projects over one hundred thousand square feet of floor area. 
2.  For office and industrial projects, at least two percent of the required parking spaces must be reserved for carpool and vanpool vehicles. 
3.  All carpool and vanpool parking spaces must be provided with appropriate signage and striping. The designated spaces must be located as close as practical to employee building entrances and may not displace handicapped or customer parking needs. The designated spaces must be identified on the applicable site plan. 
4.  All parking spaces reserved for carpool and vanpool vehicles must be accessible. When located within a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet two inches must be provided for such spaces. 
5.  The size of vanpool and carpool parking spaces must comply with the requirements of Section 19.44.150 of this chapter. 
6.  Upon request of a property owner or other authorized person, the director may authorize parking spaces in existing projects to be designated as carpool and vanpool spaces. 
B.  Bicycle Racks. For all nonresidential development, bicycle parking must be provided as follows: 
1.  Bicycle parking must be by means of bicycle racks or other secured parking. A fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle will be considered an approved secured bicycle parking facility. 
2.  Bicycle racks or other secured bicycle parking must be provided to accommodate four bicycles for the first fifty thousand square feet of floor area. One additional bicycle space must be provided for each additional increment of fifty thousand square feet of floor area. 
3.  The location and designation of the type of bicycle parking must be shown on the plans prior to approval of a planned development. 
4.  Additional bicycle parking spaces for existing planned development permits may be approved if deemed to be appropriate and in keeping with the approved development permit. 
5.  If an existing development does not easily accommodate the placement of bicycle parking on the site, vehicle parking spaces may be altered for the parking of bicycles within an existing development if determined that the bicycle parking will not otherwise adversely affect the parking of vehicles on the lot. 
C.  Transit Stops. Transit stop improvements (bus turnouts, bus pads, bus shelters) may be required for nonresidential development of one hundred thousand square feet or more of floor area and for residential developments of one hundred dwelling units or more. If determined to be appropriate, after consultation with the bus service provider, transit needs facilities may be required. Nothing herein prevents the city from imposing transit stop improvement requirements on developments of a lesser size if necessary to mitigate adverse impacts. 
D.  Transportation Information Centers. All nonresidential developments employing at least fifty individuals are required to provide a bulletin board, display case or kiosk displaying transportation information as a condition of project approval. The information displayed should include the following: 
1.  Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit serving the site; 
2.  Telephone numbers for the regional ride sharing agency and local transit operators; 
3.  Ridesharing promotional material; 
4.  Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/ or local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information; and 
5.  A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicycle transit riders and pedestrians at the site. 
E.  Pedestrian Access. All development must provide safe, convenient and direct pedestrian and bicycle access from the internal circulation system to adjacent collector and arterial roadways. 
F.  Interim Improvements. A planned development permit for industrial buildings, may allow a portion of the required parking to be phased for later improvement subject to a city-approved agreement and performance guarantee. In addition, the applicant must demonstrate that the parking would not be essential during the time period the improvements are delayed and that the use will have an active ridesharing program. The area proposed for future parking area improvements may be used for interim landscaping, recreation, or other similar uses if the phased parking will not cause adverse impacts to the proposed use or adjoining uses. 
G.  Modification. The planning commission or city council may require that nonresidential projects provide a greater number of carpool/vanpool parking spaces or bicycle parking facilities than set forth in this section, and may also require the transportation demand management facilities described in this section be applied to projects smaller than the prescribed thresholds if deemed necessary to reduce traffic and air quality impacts. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.210 - Waiver of parking provisions for public or semipublic uses. 
The planning commission or city council may, by resolution, waive or modify the provisions of this chapter for uses such as electric power generating plants, electrical transformer stations, public utility or corporation storage yards, or other uses of public or semi-public nature employing a limited number of persons. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.220 - Storage and/or parking of commercial vehicles in R zones. 
No commercial vehicle exceeding a gross weight of ten thousand pounds may be parked or stored on a lot or parcel in any R (residential) zone. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.225 - Motorcycle parking. 
1.  Uses required to provide for more than fifty parking spaces must provide a minimum of one motorcycle parking space plus one space for every fifty parking spaces thereafter up to the first two hundred parking spaces. For parking facilities with more than two hundred parking spaces, one motorcycle parking space for every one hundred parking spaces must be provided. 
2.  A use may be given credit in lieu of providing motorcycle parking if the parking facility provides a greater amount of parking than otherwise required by this chapter. In such instance, one additional automobile parking space will count for two required motorcycle parking spaces. Similarly, additional motorcycle parking may be credited for automobile parking spaces (up to a maximum of eight parking spaces) at a ratio of two motorcycle parking spaces for each one automobile parking space. 
3.  Motorcycle parking spaces must have a minimum dimension of at least four feet in width and seven feet in length, and must be accessed by a drive aisle of at least eight feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.230 - Tandem parking. 
1.  All required parking spaces must be accessible from a drive aisle or street. 
2.  Parking spaces may not be located in tandem, except in a parking garage, mobilehome unit, or where specifically approved by the planning commission or city council. In situations where tandem spaces are provided (other than a mobilehome unit), an attendant must be present at all times that the parking facility is in use. 
3.  When tandem parking spaces are permitted for multi-family residential units, the spaces must be a minimum of twelve feet wide and must have access directly to the residential unit for which the parking is designated. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.240 - Parking lot dimensions—Open parking. 
All open parking must comply with the following exhibits. Compact spaces may only be used in the event practical difficulties or a hardship results from the strict enforcement of these standards due to existing permanent buildings, the topography of the site, or an irregularly shaped parcel. 
  
N 
Parking Angle 
Degrees 	P 
Width of Parking 
Section 
(lin. ft.) 	S 
Depth of Stall 
(lin. ft.) 	A 
Width of Aisle One-Way Traffic 
(lin. ft.) 	A' 
Width of Aisle Two-Way Traffic 
(lin. ft.) 	c 
Curb Length per Car 
(lin. ft.) 	P' 
Width of Parking 
Section 
(lin. ft.) 	S' 
Depth of Stall 
(lin. ft.) 
0° 	30' 0? 	9' 0? 	12' 0? 	18' 0? 	24' 0? 	30' 0? 	9' 0? 
30° 	47' 0? 	16' 0? 	12' 0? 	18' 0? 	18' 2? 	41' 0? 	13' 0? 
45° 	55' 0? 	20' 6? 	14' 9? 	18' 0? 	12' 9? 	48' 8? 	17' 4? 
60° 	61' 0? 	21' 0? 	18' 	18' 0? 	10' 5? 	57' 2? 	19' 7? 
90° 	66' 0? 	20' 0? 	26' 	26' 0? 	9' 0? 	66' 0? 	20' 0? 
 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.245 - Parking lot dimensions—Parking structures. 
All parking within parking structures must comply with the following exhibits. Compact spaces may be used in the event practical difficulties or a hardship results from the strict enforcement of these standards due to modular design of parking structures or the configuration of the site. 
  
N 
Parking Angle 
Degrees 	P 
Width of Parking 
Section 
(lin. ft.) 	S 
Depth of Stall 
(lin. ft.) 	A 
Width of Aisle One-Way Traffic 
(lin. ft.) 	A' 
Width of Aisle Two-Way Traffic 
(lin. ft.) 	c 
Curb Length per Car 
(lin. ft.) 	P' 
Width of Parking 
Section 
(lin. ft.) 	S' 
Depth of Stall 
(lin. ft.) 
0° 	30' 0? 	9' 0? 	12' 0? 	18' 0? 	24' 0? 	30' 0? 	9' 0? 
30° 	47' 0? 	16' 0? 	12' 0? 	18' 0? 	18' 2? 	41' 0? 	13' 0? 
45° 	55' 0? 	20' 6? 	14' 9? 	18' 0? 	12' 9? 	48' 8? 	17' 4? 
60° 	61' 0? 	21' 0? 	18' 	18' 0? 	10' 5? 	57' 2? 	19' 7? 
90° 	64' 0? 	20' 0? 	24' 	26' 0? 	9' 0? 	64' 0? 	20' 0? 
 
A.  The design of all vertical dimensions is subject to review and approval by the director of public works to ensure that proper vertical transition occurs at driveways, ramps and aisles. Driveways with grades greater than five percent must provide a vertical transition. No driveway may have a slope greater than twenty percent. 
B.  Safe and secure pedestrian ways must be provided on each level of parking leading to stairways and elevator to buildings and public sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.250 - Parking lot lighting. 
Lighting must be indirect, hooded and arranged to reflect light away from adjoining properties and streets. Light standards may not exceed twenty feet in height. 
A parking lot lighting plan must be submitted for review and approval prior to the issuance of the zoning clearance and building permit as required under Section 19.44.280 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.255 - Corner stalls. 
Where two parking spaces adjoin on the inside corner of a 90-degree change in the direction of a drive aisle, the adjacent parking space to the corner area must be widened by one foot or the adjoining area must include an offset of a minimum of one foot in each direction as shown on the following exhibit. 
  
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.260 - Landscaping of parking areas. 
Landscaping of parking areas within the multifamily, professional, commercial, and industrial zones must comply with the following regulations: 
A.  Peripheral landscaping at least five feet in width, or greater depending on the zone, must be provided along the interior of all property lines and adjacent to all public streets. 
B.  One tree, 15-gallon minimum must be planted within a minimum five foot wide (as measured from the inside face of the curbing) at no more than every ten parking stalls. 
C.  Each unused space resulting from the design of parking spaces or accessory structures over twenty-four square feet in area must be landscaped. 
D.  Maintenance. All planting areas must be maintained in a healthy, stable condition or replaced. 
E.  Irrigation System. All landscaping must be provided with a permanent watering system. The design of the irrigation system must be drawn to scale and must include water pressure, pipe size, and type of heads (sprinkler, bubbler, or rainbirds). 
F.  Identification of Plant Materials. The common and botanical names of each plant, its container size, the number of each, and the location of the plant within the parking area must be clearly illustrated. 
G.  Choice of Plant Materials. Landscaping must consist of a combination of trees, shrubs and groundcover, with careful consideration given to eventual size and spread, susceptibility to disease and pests, durability and adaptability, and adaptability to existing soil and climatic conditions. 
H.  Parking Space Overhang. Parking spaces are allowed to overhang into a landscaped area a maximum of two feet; provided, however, that the two foot overhang area is sufficiently level to adequately allow the vehicle overhang and the plant materials, irrigation system or other improvements are compatible with such vehicle overhang. 
I.  Parking spaces may overhang two feet into a paved pedestrian area where the pedestrian area has a minimum width of six feet as measured from the face of the curb that serves as a wheel stop. 
J.  The landscape plan must include an adequate number and type of trees to achieve a parking lot coverage canopy. The landscape plan must demonstrate that the parking lot canopy coverage will be achieved in reasonable amount of time. 
K.  The required landscape plan must be prepared by a landscape architect and comply with all other city landscape guidelines or regulations and is subject to review and approval by the Director of Community Development or designee. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.270 - Parking area improvements. 
All parking areas must be improved as follows: 
A.  Paving must be either a portland cement or asphalt surface and graded to drain adequately with the design to the satisfaction of the city engineer. The use of porous paving is encouraged as a best management practice for water quality practices. Other materials may only be used when determined to comply with this standard or to meet other alternative practices. 
B.  All parking stalls must be clearly striped. 
C.  A continuous six-inch concrete curb above parking lot level must be installed and serve as a wheel stop for cars on all periphery areas of the parking lot and as an edging for planting areas and islands and protection for walls for entrances and exits. 
D.  Where parking abuts a residential zone, a solid masonry wall six feet in height must be installed on the zone boundary line. Such wall may not exceed three feet in height within any corner cutback area or within the front yard area of the abutting residential zone. 
E.  Recreational vehicle parking areas for cluster, townhouse, or apartment projects must be enclosed by a decorative block wall at least six feet in height with a solid metal or wood gate. The design of the wall and gate is subject to the approval of the planning director. 
F.  Compact car spaces and handicapped parking spaces must be adequately marked with appropriate logos or wording on the paving. 
G.  Where parking fronts onto a public street, a wall, hedge, berm or combination of these must provide screening of the parking lot that is at least thirty-six inches high. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
19.44.280 - Parking lot plot plan. 
A.  A plot plan of any proposed off-street parking area must be submitted to the Department of Community Development at the time of the application for a development plan approval. 
B.  A zoning clearance and building permit is required for all off-street parking areas or lots which are not otherwise constructed as part of a project requiring a building permit. 
C.  Minor changes to the design of a parking lot may be authorized by the director through a zone clearance approval subject to the provisions of this chapter. More substantial changes require the approval of a modification to the approval as specified Title 19 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3(Att. No. 1), 5-12-2010)  
Chapter 19.46 - OFF-STREET LOADING* 
 
19.46.010 - General provisions. 
Every use hereafter inaugurated, and every building or structure hereafter erected or altered, shall have permanently maintained off-street loading and unloading spaces. All loading or unloading facilities shall be located at such a depth within a lot or parcel, or within a completed enclosed building as set forth herein to reasonably contain and restrict emission of noise, typically attributed to such functions, and the following standards: 
A.  When the lot upon which loading spaces are located abuts upon an alley, such loading spaces shall have access from the alley. The length of the loading space may be measured perpendicular to or parallel with the alley. Where such loading area is parallel with the alley and the lot is fifty feet or less in width, the loading area shall extend across the full width of the lot. 
B.  Loading spaces shall be so located and designed that trucks shall not back into a public street or alley nor shall a loading area be designed to require the use of a public right-of-way for access to a loading dock. 
C.  No part of an alley or street shall be used for loading excepting areas designated by the city for loading. 
D.  No loading space required by the provisions herein shall be eliminated, reduced, or converted in any manner unless equivalent facilities are provided. 
E.  All loading areas shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way by an architecturally designed masonry wall, or other approved method of screening. 
F.  In no case shall a loading area be provided on the front portion of an industrial structure. 
G.  Loading areas shown inside buildings must be dock height design with a truck well to insure its usability as a loading space. 
(Ord. 588 § 9 (part), 1985.)  
19.46.020 - Size and location. 
A.  Each loading and unloading space shall be located off the streets. 
B.  Standard loading spaces shall be not less than twelve feet in width extending fifty feet in depth and fourteen feet in height. Loading spaces for industrial uses up to ten thousand square feet shall provide a small loading space twelve feet by twenty-four feet. 
C.  Each loading space shall be accessible, provide adequate maneuvering area, and not interfere with the normal flow of traffic on the site. 
(Ord. 588 § 9 (part), 1985.)  
19.46.030 - Number required. 
A.  Where the primary uses involve storage, warehousing, manufacturing, assembling, processing or packaging of materials the following standards shall apply: 
Gross Floor Area (in square feet) 	Spaces Required 
Under 3,000 	1 
3,001 to 30,000 	2 
30,001 to 90,000 	3 
90,001 to 150,000 	4 
150,001 to 230,000 	5 
Excess 230,000 	5 plus one space for each 80,000 square feet or fraction thereof in excess of 230,000 square feet. 
 
B.  Where primary uses involve personal, professional and business service offices, the following standards shall apply: 
Gross Floor Area (in square feet) 	Spaces Required 
Under 5,000 	0 
5,000 to 100,000 	1 
100,001 to 350,000 	2 
Excess of 350,000 	2 plus one space for each 300,000 square feet or fraction thereof in excess of 350,000 square feet. 
 
The size of loading spaces (standard or small) for the above uses shall be determined in conjunction with planned development review. 
C.  When primary uses involve commercial and retail, the following standards shall apply. 
Total Square Feet of Each Building Use (gross floor area) 	Loading Spaces Required 
Under 3,000 	0 
3.000 to 15.000 	1 
15,001 to 40,000 	2 
40,001 to 90,000 	3 
90,001 to 150,000 	4 
150,001 and over 	5 
 
The size of loading spaces for the above uses shall be determined in conjunction with planned development review. 
D.  Hotels, motels, restaurants, grocery stores, drugstores, hospitals, theaters, institutions, schools, and similar special uses shall have the number and size of loading spaces determined in conjunction with planned development or conditional use permit review. 
(Ord. 588 § 9 (part), 1985.)  
19.46.040 - Mixed occupancies. 
In the case of mixed uses, the total number of required loading spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. Loading space facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing required loading space facilities for any other use. 
(Ord. 588 § 9 (part), 1985.)  
Chapter 19.48 - BUILDING PERMITS 
 
19.48.010 - Zone clearance required. 
It is unlawful to commence any work pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion or alteration of any building, or any addition to any building, until a zone clearance is secured from the department of planning and community development and a building permit from the building department. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9511(A).)  
19.48.020 - Certificate of occupancy required. 
No building or land shall be occupied or used unless a certificate of occupancy, and a license for such use where required, is first obtained from the department or person vested with the duty or authority to issue same. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9511(B).)  
19.48.030 - Application. 
Each application for a building permit shall be made on a printed form to be obtained at the building department and shall be accompanied by accurate information and dimensions as to the size and location of the lot; the size and location of the buildings on the lot, the dimensions of all yards and open spaces; and such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of these regulations. Where complete and accurate information is not readily available from existing records, the department of planning and community development may require the applicant to furnish a survey of the lot prepared by a licensed surveyor or registered civil engineer. The original of such application shall be kept in the office of the department of building and safety. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9511(C).)  
19.48.040 - Dedication of streets. 
A.  The applicant for a building permit in any zone district shall dedicate street right-of-way as follows: 
1.  To provide for sufficient street right-of-way in accordance with the ultimate right-of-way shown in the city's general plan circulation element; and 
2.  To provide for sufficient right-of-way not shown on the city's general plan circulation element but in accordance with the street improvement program. 
B.  Hillside street improvement shall be in accordance with the general plan and city standards. 
C.  Street dedication shall not be required as follows: 
1.  When a building permit is issued for the purpose of remodeling, and said remodeling does not involve the front of a building and where it would be possible to conform to required setbacks; 
2.  When a building permit is issued for an addition which does not increase the floor area of an existing structure by more than ten percent or when an addition, in the opinion of the director of planning and community development, does not increase the use of the property involved; the decision of the director may be appealed to the planning commission; 
3.  When a building permit is issued for the purpose of the demolition of a structure; 
4.  When a building permit is issued for the construction of a wall, as long as the wall is not to be constructed within an existing right-of-way or any future right-of-way as indicated on the general plan circulation element. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9511(D).)  
19.48.050 - Improvements. 
The applicant for a building permit shall provide for the street improvements, landscaping and irrigation to be installed abutting the lots desired to be built upon as determined by the department of public works when the improvements exceed the improvement value by fifty percent or more of the assessment value. Fire hydrants shall be installed by the developer for all construction and in accordance with requirements of the fire department. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9511(E).)  
19.48.060 - Issuance of permit prohibited when. 
No building permit shall be issued for the erection or use of any structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land which is not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and in conformity with the approved development plan or conditional use permit, where required by this chapter. Any permit issued contrary to the provisions of this chapter or not in conformity with approved development plan or conditional use permit shall be void and of no effect. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9511(F).)  
19.48.070 - Flood hazard. 
The director of public works shall refuse the issuance of a building permit or permits to any applicant upon the determination that the applicant's lots are geographically located in such a manner as to constitute a flood hazard either to the proposed structure of the applicant or to structures adjacent to the lot or lots upon which the applicant desires to build. Persons aggrieved by the ruling of the director of public works shall have a right to appeal to the planning commission. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9511(G).)  
Chapter 19.49 - DENSITY BONUS AND OTHER INCENTIVES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1068, § 2, adopted Sept. 28, 2011, amended Ch. 19.49 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 19.49, §§ 19.49.010—19.49.040, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 770, § 1 (part), adopted 1992. 
 
19.49.005 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
"Affordable housing cost" has the definition set forth in California Health & Safety Code Section 50052.5. 
"Affordable rent" has the definition set forth in California Health & Safety Code Section 50053. 
"Child care facility" means a facility other than a family day care home, including but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age child care centers. 
"Common interest development" has the definition set forth in California Civil Code Section 1351. 
"Concession" or "Incentive" means any of the following: 
1.  A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission, as provided in Part 2.5 (the State Building Code commencing with Health & Safety Code Section 18901) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, including but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements, and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required, that results in identifiable and actual cost reductions. 
2.  Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with a housing project, if commercial, office, industrial or other land uses will reduce the cost of a housing development, and if the commercial, office, industrial or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing project will be located. 
3.  Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the city that result in identifiable and actual cost reductions. 
This definition does not limit or require the provision of direct financial incentives for a housing development, including the provision of publicly owned land, by the city or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements. 
"Disabled veteran" has the definition set forth in California Government Code Section 18541. 
"Density bonus" means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning code provisions and the land use element of the general plan as of the date of application by the applicant to the city. 
"Development standard" means the site or construction conditions that apply to a residential development pursuant to any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, or other city condition, law, policy, resolution or regulation. 
"Director" means the director of community development or the director's designee. 
"Homeless person" has the definition set forth in 42 U.S.C. Section 11301 and following. 
"Housing development" means a development project for five or more residential units, including mixed-use developments. "Housing development" also includes a subdivision or common interest development, or the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in the number of residential units. 
"Lower income households" has the definition set forth in California Health & Safety Code Section 50079.5. 
"Major transit stop" has the definition set forth in Public Resources Code Section 21155. 
"Maximum allowable residential density" means the density allowed under the zoning code, or if a range of density is permitted, the maximum allowable density for the specific zoning range applicable to the project. 
"Moderate income households" has the definition for "persons or families of moderate income" set forth in California Health & Safety Code section 50093(b). 
"Multifamily dwelling" has the definition set forth in California Government Code Section 65863.4(d). 
"Property containing existing affordable housing" means any property that includes any parcel on which rental dwelling units are or have been: (1) subject to any other form of rent or price control through a public entity's valid exercise of its police power; (2) occupied by lower or very low income households; or (3) subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and households of lower or very low income. Such rental dwelling units include rental dwelling units that have been vacated or demolished in the five-year period preceding the application seeking the density bonus. 
"Replace" has the definition set forth in California Government Code Section 65915(c)(3)(B). 
"Senior citizen housing development" has the definition set forth in California Civil Code Section 51.3. 
"Specific, adverse impact" has the definition set forth in California Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2). 
"Special needs housing development" has the definition set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 51312. 
"Transitional foster youth" has the definition set forth in California Education Code Section 66025.9. 
"Unobstructed access" means access where a resident is able to travel without encountering natural or constructed impediments, as outlined in California Government Code Section 65915(p)(2). 
"Very low income households" has the definition set forth in California Health & Safety Code Section 50105. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-28-2011; Ord. No. 1141, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.49.010 - General density bonus provisions. 
A.  Application. Any person that desires a density bonus must make an application on a form approved by the director at the time of submitting an entitlement application for the housing development for which a density bonus is requested. The density bonus provided by this chapter only applies to housing developments consisting of five or more dwelling units. 
B.  Incentives and concessions. When an applicant seeks a density bonus for a housing development or for the donation of land for housing within the city, the city must provide the applicant incentives or concessions for the production of housing units and child care facilities as provided in this chapter. 
C.  Available density bonus options. The planning commission or city council will grant one density bonus, the amount of which will be as specified in Section 19.49.030, and incentives or concessions as described in Section 19.49.020, when an applicant for a housing development seeks and agrees to construct a housing development, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus awarded pursuant to this chapter, that will contain at least one of the following: 
1.  Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for lower income households. 
2.  Five percent of the total units of a housing development for very low income households. 
3.  Ten percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development for moderate income households, provided that all units in the housing development are offered to the public for purchase. 
4.  A senior citizen housing development. 
5.  Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for transitional foster youth, to be provided at the same affordability level as very low-income units. 
6.  Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for disabled veterans, to be provided at the same affordability level as very low-income units. 
7.  Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for homeless persons, to be provided at the same affordability level as very low-income units. As used in this subsection, "total units" or "total dwelling units" does not include units permitted by a density bonus awarded pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  Applicant's election of basis for bonus. For purposes of calculating the amount of the density bonus pursuant to Section 19.49.030, the applicant who requests a density bonus pursuant to this section must elect whether the bonus will be awarded on the basis of paragraphs (1), (2), (3) or (4) of Section 19.49.010(C). 
E.  Continued affordability. 
1.  Qualified Households. An applicant must agree that the occupants of the low, very low, and moderate income units that are directly related to the receipt of the density bonus in a housing development or common interest development must be low, very low, or moderate income households, as applicable. 
2.  Term. 
(a)  An applicant must agree to set rents at affordable rent levels and to the continued affordability of all rental units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus for a period of 55 years or a longer period of time if required by any applicable construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. 
(b)  All for-sale units must initially be sold at an affordable housing cost and will remain subject to a resale affordable housing cost restriction for a period of 55 years or a longer period of time if required by any applicable construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or other subsidy program. The applicable resale affordable housing cost restriction period will reset upon each sale of an affordable unit. 
3.  Equity Sharing. The city will require an equity-sharing agreement for all for-sale units, unless such an agreement would be in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law. 
F.  Housing development involving property containing existing affordable housing. 
An applicant is not eligible for a density bonus, or any other incentives or concessions under this chapter, for a proposed housing development involving a property containing existing affordable housing, unless: 
1.  The proposed housing development replaces the existing affordable housing units; and 
2.  Either: 
(a)  The proposed housing development, inclusive of the units replaced, contains affordable units at the percentages set forth in Section 19.49.010(C); or 
(b)  Each unit in the development, exclusive of a manager's unit or units, is affordable to, and occupied by, either a lower or very low income household. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-28-2011; Ord. No. 1141, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.49.015 - Requirements for equity-sharing agreement. 
The following provisions must be included in any equity-sharing agreement required under this chapter: 
A.  Upon resale, the seller of the unit may retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate share of appreciation. The city will recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, which amount must then be used within five years for any of the purposes that promote home ownership, as described in California Health & Safety Code section 33334.2(e). 
B.  For purposes of this section, the city's initial subsidy will be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale, minus the initial sale price to the very low, low, or moderate income household, as applicable, plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale will be used as the initial market value. 
C.  For purposes of this section, the city's proportionate share of appreciation will be equal to the ratio of the initial subsidy to the fair market value of the unit at the time of initial sale. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-28-2011; Ord. No. 1141, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.49.020 - Incentives and concessions. 
A.  An applicant for a density bonus pursuant to Section 19.49.010 may submit a proposal for the specific incentives or concessions that the applicant requests pursuant to this chapter, and may request a meeting with the director. 
B.  Subject to subsection (C) below, the applicant will receive the following number of incentives or concessions: 
1.  One incentive or concession for projects that include at least ten percent of the total units for lower income households, at least five percent for very low income households, or at least ten percent for moderate income households in a common interest development. 
2.  Two incentives or concessions for projects that include at least twenty percent of the total units for lower income households, at least ten percent for very low income households, or at least twenty percent for moderate income households in a common development. 
3.  Three incentives or concessions for projects that include at least thirty percent of the total units for lower income households, at least fifteen percent for very low income households, or at least thirty percent for moderate income households in a common interest development. 
C.  The planning commission or city council must grant the concession or incentive requested by the applicant, unless it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that: 
1.  The concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in Section 19.49.010(E); 
2.  The concession or incentive would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health and safety, or the physical environment, or on any real property listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low and moderate income households; or 
3.  The concession or improvement would be contrary to state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-28-2011; Ord. No. 1141, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.49.025 - Waiver or reduction of development standards. 
A.  An applicant may submit to the city a proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards that the applicant believes will have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a housing development that meets the criteria of Section 19.49.010(C) at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this chapter, and may request a meeting with the director. Such proposal may not increase the number of incentives or concessions that the applicant is entitled to under Section 19.49.020. 
B.  The planning commission or city council must waive or reduce the development standard requested by the applicant, unless it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that: 
1.  The waiver or reduction would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health and safety, or the physical environment, or on any real property listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact; or 
2.  The waiver or reduction would be contrary to state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-28-2011; Ord. No. 1141, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.49.030 - Calculation of density bonus. 
A.  The applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus. 
B.  The amount of density bonus to which the applicant is entitled will vary according to the amount by which the percentage of affordable housing units exceeds the percentage established in Section 19.49.010(C). 
C.  For housing developments meeting the criteria of Section 19.49.010(C)(1), the density bonus will be calculated as follows: 
Percentage Low Income Units 	Percentage Density Bonus 
10 	20 
11 	21.5 
12 	23 
13 	24.5 
14 	26 
15 	27.5 
17 	30.5 
18 	32 
19 	33.5 
20 	35 
 
D.  For housing developments meeting the criteria of Section 19.49.010(C)(2), the density bonus will be calculated as follows: 
Percentage Very Low Income Units 	Percentage Density Bonus 
5 	20 
6 	22.5 
7 	25 
8 	27.5 
9 	30 
10 	32.5 
11 	35 
 
E.  For housing developments meeting the criteria of Sections 19.49.010(C)(4), 19.49.010(C)(5), 19.49.010(C)(6), and 19.49.010(C)(7), the density bonus will be 20 percent. 
F.  For housing developments meeting the criteria of Section 19.49.010(C)(3), the density bonus will be calculated as follows: 
Percentage Moderate Income Units 	Percentage Density Bonus 
10 	5 
11 	6 
12 	7 
13 	8 
14 	9 
15 	10 
16 	11 
17 	12 
18 	13 
19 	14 
20 	15 
21 	16 
22 	17 
23 	18 
24 	19 
25 	20 
26 	21 
27 	22 
28 	23 
29 	24 
30 	25 
31 	26 
32 	27 
33 	28 
34 	29 
35 	30 
36 	31 
37 	32 
38 	33 
39 	34 
40 	35 
 
G.  All density calculations resulting in fractional units will be rounded up to the next whole number. The granting of a density bonus will not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, study other than those provided under Government Code section 65915(j)(1), or other discretionary approval. 
H.  Granting a density bonus will not be interpreted to require the waiver of a city ordinance or provisions of a city ordinance unrelated to development standards, except as provided for in Sections 19.49.20 and 19.49.25. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-28-2011)  
19.49.035 - Additional density bonus through donation of land. 
When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the city, as provided for in this section, the applicant will be entitled to a 15 percent increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning and the land use element of the general plan for the entire development, as follows: 
Percentage Very Low Income 	Percentage Density Bonus 
10 	15 
11 	16 
12 	17 
13 	18 
14 	19 
15 	20 
16 	21 
17 	22 
18 	23 
19 	24 
20 	25 
21 	26 
22 	27 
23 	28 
24 	29 
25 	30 
26 	31 
27 	32 
28 	33 
29 	34 
30 	35 
 
A.  This increase will be in addition to any increase in density mandated by Section 19.49.010(C), up to a maximum combined density increase of thirty-five percent, if an applicant seeks increases required pursuant to both this section and Section 19.49.010(C). 
1.  All density calculations resulting in fractional units will be rounded up to the next whole number. 
2.  Nothing in this section will be construed to enlarge or diminish the authority of the city to require a developer to donate land as a condition of development. 
B.  An applicant will be eligible for the increased density bonus described in this section if all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The applicant donates and transfers the land no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map or parcel map or residential development application. 
2.  The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low income households, in an amount not less than ten percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development. 
3.  The transferred land is at least one acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at least 40 units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned for development as affordable housing, and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure. 
(a)  The land must have appropriate zoning and development standards to make the development of the affordable units feasible. 
(b)  No later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or of the residential development, the transferred land must have all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the transferred land, except that the local government may subject the proposed development to subsequent design review, to the extent authorized by California Government Code section 65583.2(i), if the design is not reviewed by the city prior to the time of transfer. 
4.  The transferred land and the affordable units will be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with Section 19.49.010(E)(1) and (2), which restriction will be recorded on the property at the time of the transfer. 
5.  The land is transferred to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city. The city may require the applicant to identify and transfer the land to such housing developer. 
6.  The transferred land must be within the boundary of the proposed development or, if the city agrees, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-28-2011; Ord. No. 1141, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.49.040 - Additional density bonus or concession or incentive through provision of child care facility. 
A.  When an applicant proposes to construct a housing development that conforms to the requirements of Section 19.49.010(C) and includes a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the project, the planning commission or city council must grant either of the following: 
1.  An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility; or 
2.  An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility. 
B.  The planning commission or city council will require, as a condition of approving the housing development, that the following occur: 
1.  The child care facility must remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the density bonus units are required to remain affordable pursuant to Section 19.49.010(E). 
2.  Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of very low income households, lower income households, or moderate income households must equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for very low income households, lower income households, or moderate income households pursuant to Section 19.49.010(C). 
C.  Notwithstanding any requirement of this section, the planning commission or city council is not required to provide a density bonus or concession for a child care facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child care facilities. 
D.  For the purpose of calculating a density bonus, the residential units do not have to be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels. The density bonus is permitted in geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the units for the lower income households are located. 
E.  The granting of a concession or incentive will not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-28-2011; Ord. No. 1141, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.49.045 - City's discretion in granting density bonus. 
Nothing in this chapter will be construed to prohibit the planning commission or city council from granting a density bonus greater than what is described in this chapter for a development that meets the requirements of this chapter, or from granting a proportionately lower density bonus than what is required by this chapter for developments that do not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-28-2011; Ord. No. 1141, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.49.050 - Parking requirements. 
A.  Upon the request of the applicant, the city will not require a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, of a development meeting the criteria of Section 19.49.010(C), that exceeds the following ratios: 
1.  Zero to one bedrooms: one onsite parking space. 
2.  Two to three bedrooms: two onsite parking spaces. 
3.  Four and more bedrooms: two and one-half parking spaces. 
B.  The applicant may apply for a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, that does not exceed .5 onsite parking spaces per bedroom, for a development meeting the criteria of Section 19.49.010(C), that is located within .5 miles of a major transit stop, and has unobstructed access to the major transit stop. 
C.  The applicant may apply for a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, that does not exceed .5 onsite parking spaces per unit for a development that consists solely of rental units (exclusive of a manager's unit) with an affordable housing cost to lower income households, and is either: 
1.  Located within .5 miles of a major transit stop, and has unobstructed access to the major transit stop; or 
2.  A for-rent housing development for individuals who are 62 years of age or older that complies with Sections 51.2 and 51.3 of the Civil Code, and has either paratransit service, or unobstructed access to a fixed bus route service that is within .5 miles and operates at least eight times per day. 
D.  The applicant may apply for a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, that does not exceed .3 onsite parking spaces per unit, for a development that consists solely of rental units (exclusive of a manager's unit) with an affordable housing cost to lower income households, and is a special needs housing development, and has either paratransit service, or unobstructed access to a fixed bus route service that is within .5 miles and operates at least eight times per day. 
E.  If the total number of parking spaces required for a development is other than a whole number, the number will be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this section, a development may provide "onsite parking" through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking. 
F.  This section applies to a development that meets the requirements of Section 19.49.010(C), but only at the request of the applicant. An applicant may request additional parking incentives or concessions beyond those provided in this chapter, subject to Section 19.49.020. 
G.  Notwithstanding Sections 19.49.050(B) and (C), if the city or an independent consultant has conducted an area-wide or jurisdiction-wide parking study in the last seven years, then the city may impose a higher vehicular parking ratio, not to exceed the ratio described in Section 19.49.050(A), based upon substantial evidence found in the parking study that includes an analysis of parking availability, differing levels of transit access, walkability access to transit services, the potential for shared parking, the effect of parking requirements on the cost of market-rate and subsidized developments, and the lower rates of car ownership for low- and very low income individuals, including seniors and special needs individuals. The city will pay the costs of any new study. The city may make findings, based on a parking study completed in conformity with this section, supporting the need for the higher parking ratio. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-28-2011; Ord. No. 1141, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.49.060 - Commercial developer partnerships provisions. 
A.  Eligibility. When an applicant for approval of a commercial development has entered into an agreement for partnered housing to contribute affordable housing through a joint project or two separate projects encompassing affordable housing, the city will grant the commercial developer a development bonus as described in Section 19.48.060(E). 
B.  Agreement for partnered housing. The commercial developer must enter into an agreement for partnered housing between a commercial developer and a housing developer that is approved by the city, and identifies how the commercial developer will contribute affordable housing within the city. The commercial developer must partner with a housing developer partner that provides no less than either 30 percent of the total units for low-income households or 15 percent of the total units for very low-income households. 
C.  Contribution of affordable housing. The commercial developer may contribute affordable housing by directly building the affordable housing units, donating property to the affordable housing developer as a site for affordable housing, making a cash payment to the affordable housing developer for use towards the cost of constructing the affordable housing project. 
D.  Affordable housing site requirement. Housing must be constructed on the site of the commercial development or on a site that meets all of the following: 
1.  Within the boundaries of the city; 
2.  Within close proximity to public amenities, including schools and employment centers; and 
3.  Within one-half mile of a major transit stop. 
E.  Development bonus. The development bonus granted to the commercial developer means incentives, mutually agreed upon by the developer and the city, including any of the following: 
1.  Up to a 20-percent increase in maximum allowable intensity in the General Plan. 
2.  Up to a 20-percent increase in maximum allowable floor area ratio. 
3.  Up to a 20-percent increase in maximum height requirements. 
4.  Up to a 20-percent reduction in minimum parking requirements. 
5.  Use of a limited-use/limited-application elevator for upper floor accessibility. 
6.  An exception to a zoning ordinance or other land use regulation. 
F.  Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If construction of the affordable units do not commence within the timelines specified by the agreement for partnered housing, then the city may withhold certificates of occupancy for the commercial development until the construction of the affordable housing units are complete. 
(Ord. No. 1141, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
Chapter 19.50 - REFUSE AND RECYCLING ENCLOSURES 
 
19.50.010 - Requirements. 
A.  Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be provided for all uses in each zone, except the R-1, RPD-5U or less, R-E and A-E zones. The enclosures shall be constructed so that the contents, including containers shall not be visible from a height of six feet above ground level on any street frontage. Areas for refuse and recycling enclosures shall be adequate in capacity, number and distribution to serve the development. Wherever feasible, enclosures shall be designed to accommodate containers for both recyclable materials and solid wastes in one enclosure. 
B.  No material or waste shall be deposited in such a form or manner that it may be transferred by natural causes or force, and waste which may cause fumes, dust, or which may constitute a fire hazard or be edible by or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects may be stored only in closed containers within required enclosures. 
C.  The construction of refuse/recycling enclosures shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  The enclosure shall be constructed of masonry, block or decorative block. Texture and color shall blend with the architecture of the building; 
2.  The size of the enclosures shall be sufficient to conceal all contents within the enclosure, including the containers. Wall heights shall be no less than six feet for bins and five feet for cans measured from finished grade at the exterior of the enclosure. Interior dimensions for an enclosure containing two three-cubic yard bins, shall be no less than ten feet by seven feet; 
3.  Baffled openings or other approved designs which allow individual access to the enclosures may be approved in addition to the main enclosure gates which are intended for use by collection vehicles; 
4.  Each refuse and recycling enclosure shall be provided with solid wood or metal gates. The gate height shall be equal to the height of the enclosure and the gate shall be equipped with a latch or other device to insure that the gate remains closed when not in use. The gate shall be of a color and design compatible with that of the enclosure; 
5.  A six-inch concrete curb around the bottom interior portion of the enclosure walls shall be provided. A concrete floor designed so that it can be washed out and kept in a sanitary condition shall also be required; 
6.  All enclosures shall be oriented on the property so that convenient access is provided for waste disposal service vehicles with the location to be approved by the department of planning and community development; 
7.  Driveways or travel aisles shall provide unobstructed access for collection vehicles and personnel and provide at least the minimum clearance required by the collection methods and vehicles utilized by the haulers in the area; 
8.  Recycling areas shall be designed to be secured to prevent the theft of recycling materials by unauthorized persons, while allowing authorized persons access for disposal of materials; 
9.  Either the recycling areas or the bins and containers placed therein must provide protection against adverse environmental conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable. 
D.  Location of Refuse/Recycling Enclosures. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, to the contrary, the director shall authorize the location of facilities for the temporary storage of refuse and/or the temporary storage of recyclables on any lot classified in Zones MHPD, RPD-6U through RPD-30U, and all commercial and industrial zones, if the director finds all of the following conditions are to be met: 
1.  That as to a principal use, additional facilities for the temporary storage of refuse and/or recyclable materials are required to properly service such use; and 
2.  That the location of the refuse facilities and/or recycling facilities will not unreasonably interfere with other principal and/or accessory uses located upon the lot; and 
3.  That such additional refuse and/or recycling containers are located on the lot so as to be reasonably accessible to one another and service the uses located upon the lot. 
(Ord. 878 § 2, 1997; Ord. 791 § 12, 1993: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9512(A).)  
19.50.020 - Compliance with recycling enclosure requirements. 
All existing uses in the RPD-6U or greater zone shall provide recycling bins for the temporary storage of recycled material at each existing enclosure in accordance with municipal code Section 9.06.010. The recycling bins shall be placed within a trash enclosure area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Where the enclosure is not of sufficient size to accommodate the recycling bins, the bins shall be placed in close proximity of the enclosure until such time as the trash enclosure has been modified in accordance with the time frame set forth under Section 19.58.113. 
(Ord. 905 § 1, 1998: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9512(B).)  
Chapter 19.52 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
 
19.52.010 - Conditions. 
The conditions set forth in this chapter shall apply to all buildings and uses, with the exceptions as indicated in Section 19.48.020. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514 (part).)  
19.52.020 - For use of buildings. 
A.  No building hereafter erected, moved, enlarged or altered shall be occupied, used, or changed in use until after a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the department of building and safety. Such certificate shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued only after such building, enlargement, or alteration has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this code and with an approved development plan and required conditions and when the proposed use conforms to the code and required conditions. 
B.  Any use legally occupying an existing building at the time this code became effective may be continued but shall not be changed unless a certificate of occupancy for the new use shall have been issued by the department of building and safety after finding that such use conforms to this code and required conditions. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9513(A).)  
19.52.030 - For use of land. 
A certificate of occupancy shall be issued before any vacant land is hereafter used or before an existing use of land is changed provided such use is in conformity with the provisions of this code and required conditions. However, no certificate of occupancy shall be required where the land is to be used for tilling the soil and growing thereon farm, garden or orchard products. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 part), 1978: prior code § 9513(B).)  
19.52.040 - Contents of certificate. 
The certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or land has complied with all laws and codes, including the provisions of this code, and with an approved site plan and any conditions required by this code relating to the proposed building or use. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9513(C).)  
19.52.050 - Record. 
A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of building and safety, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the subject building, use or land. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9513(D).)  
Chapter 19.54 - COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
 
19.54.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of the performance standards is to ensure that any development in a commercial or industrial zone will be located in a manner that minimizes any adverse environmental effect upon surrounding properties for the health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. 763 § 25 (part), 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(A).)  
19.54.020 - Application. 
A.  The performance standards shall apply to any and all uses in the commercial and industrial zones. The hazardous material and hazardous waste sections shall apply to the A-E agricultural exclusive zone. The requirements contained herein shall apply to uses existing at the time of the adoption of the performance standards. 
B.  In the event that a similar, more restrictive federal, state, county, or city regulation be applicable, it shall have precedence over the provisions of these performance standards. 
(Ord. 763 § 25 (part), 1992; Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(B).)  
19.54.030 - Prohibition of dangerous or hazardous elements. 
No land or building in the commercial or industrial zones shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious, or any other hazardous elements such as fire, explosive, noise or vibration, smoke, dust, odor, or other form of pollution; electrical or other disturbance; glare; liquid or solid refuse or wastes; or other substance, condition, or element in such a manner or in such an amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area or adjoining properties. Such substances or conditions shall here in be referred to as "dangerous elements." 
(Ord. 763 § 25 (part), 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(C).)  
19.54.040 - Point of measurement. 
The location, unless otherwise specified, at which point measurements shall be made to determine compliance with the provisions of these regulations shall be at the parcel line of the use or development. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code 9514(D).)  
19.54.050 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of these regulations shall not apply during short periods of equipment failure, modification, maintenance, or similar reason affecting the use when it is evident that such cause could not be reasonably preventable. Notification by the operator of the use to the planning director shall be made in writing stating cause, time period, and description of the problem at the earliest possible moment. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(E).)  
19.54.060 - Criteria—Generally. 
The criteria used to determine when any condition, substance or element becomes dangerous or objectionable shall be called performance standards and shall be set forth in the following provisions. Continued compliance with the performance standards shall be required of all uses. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(F) (part).)  
19.54.070 - Smoke and particulate matter. 
Visible emissions of smoke will not be permitted which exceed Ringlemann No. 1 on the Ringlemann Chart of the U.S. Bureau of Mines, other than the exhausts emitted by motor vehicles or other transportation facilities. The requirement shall also be applicable to the disposal of trash and waste materials. Wind borne dust, dirt, fly ash, airborne solids, sprays and mists originating in plants will not be permitted. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(F)(1).)  
19.54.080 - Toxic or noxious matter. 
A.  Toxic Gases, etc. Toxic gases or matter shall not be emitted which can cause any damage to health, to animals or vegetation, or other forms of property, or which can cause any excessive soiling beyond the lot lines of the use. 
B.  Odorous Matter. The matter of odors which are detectable at any point beyond the point of measurement of any plant will not be permitted. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(F)(2).)  
19.54.085 - Hazardous material and hazardous waste management—Siting criteria. 
Businesses which use or manage hazardous materials or hazardous waste shall be reviewed by the director prior to occupying or building on a site in Camarillo. The director may call on other agencies for their review and technical expertise. The director's review shall indicate if the proposed business is adequately buffered from residential neighborhoods, schools, hospitals, and other sensitive land uses. The size of the buffer area shall be based upon the hazardous material or hazardous waste managed at the subject site. The director may require the use of expert consultants in the establishment of the buffer area. The cost of such expert consultant shall be borne solely by the applicant. 
Each change of land use shall require the submittal to the department of planning and community development of a program which explains and details the users' use and management of hazardous materials and hazardous waste. The program shall include, but not be limited to, a listing of type and quantity of hazardous materials and hazardous waste managed on-site. 
Businesses which generate, treat, recycle, store, utilize, dispose of, or otherwise manage hazardous materials or hazardous waste on site shall be reviewed by the Director and developed in accordance with the siting criteria set forth in this section. 
A.  In reviewing the business, the director shall take into account the type, quantity, and nature of hazardous material and hazardous waste as compared to the risks to individuals and sensitive land uses with relation to the following factors: 
1.  Proximity to existing or proposed schools, hospitals, residential neighborhoods or other sensitive land uses or areas such as parks where large numbers of the public may assemble; 
2.  Proximity to wetlands and biologically sensitive areas (i.e., rare and endangered species habitat, wildlife area, etc.); 
3.  Stability of geologic characteristics of soil, including type and permeability; 
4.  Prevailing wind patterns which may carry smoke or emissions to residential areas; 
5.  Proximity to major highways and designated access routes for emergency services. Highways and access routes shall provide safe access with respect to road conditions and level of service; 
6.  Other factors which may affect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
B.  Businesses which use or manage reportable quantities of hazardous materials or hazardous waste shall locate within areas designated for industrial land uses. 
C.  Businesses which use or manage reportable quantities of hazardous materials or hazardous waste shall not locate solely on topographical gradients of more than twenty percent. 
D.  Businesses which use or manage reportable quantities of hazardous materials or hazardous waste shall not locate over aquifer recharge areas and existing or potential sources of drinking water. 
E.  Businesses which use or manage reportable quantities of hazardous materials or hazardous waste shall not locate overlying or within flood plains, earthquake faults, seiches, or surge areas. 
F.  Businesses which use or manage hazardous materials or hazardous waste shall ensure that appropriate runoff control facilities are installed and maintained to control run-off water on site. 
G.  Buffer areas shall be established as part of the planned development permit review to separate land uses which manage hazardous materials or hazardous waste from surrounding land uses (i.e., schools, hospitals, residential neighborhoods, etc.). This will apply to new planned development permits or any major modification to an existing permit. The size of the buffer area will be based on a risk assessment conducted by the city or consultant at the sole expense of the applicant. 
(Ord. 763 § 26, 1992.)  
19.54.090 - Glare or heat. 
Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within an enclosed or screened area in such a manner that the glare or heat emitted will not be discernible from the point of measurement. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(F)(3).)  
19.54.100 - Noise. 
No noise or disturbance or sound shall be permitted beyond the point of measurement which noise, disturbance or sound is in excess of the ambient level at any given time (as such level may be established by a competent authority). 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(F)(4).)  
19.54.110 - Vibrations. 
Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration generated by the use is not harmful or injurious to the use of surrounding properties. No vibration and/or noise shall be permitted which is perceptible without instruments at any point along the point of measurement above .003 of an inch as measured on which the use is located. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(F)(5).)  
19.54.120 - Electrical and radioactivity. 
No activity shall be permitted which causes electrical disturbances affecting the operation of any equipment located beyond the property line of the property. In no event shall radioactivity, when measured at the point of measurement be in excess of 2.7 × 10.11 microcuries per milliliter of air at any moment of time. Radio and television transmitters shall be operated at the regularly assigned wave lengths (or within the authorized tolerances therefor) as assigned thereto by the appropriate governmental agency. Subject to such exception, the operation of domestic household equipment shall be suitably wired, shielded and controlled so that in operation they shall not, beyond the point of measurement emit any electrical impulses or waves which shall adversely affect the operation and control of any other electronic devices and equipment. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(F)(6).)  
19.54.130 - Liquid and solid wastes. 
The community services department shall review any proposed use which has the potential to generate or manage liquid or solid wastes in such quantity of types so as to interfere with normal wastewater treatment operations or sanitary landfill regulations. No operation or use may generate any solid or liquid waste which may pollute any watercourse or groundwater supply or interfere with bacterial progress in sewage treatment without proper treatment prior to discharge. 
(Ord. 763 § 27, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(f)(7).)  
19.54.140 - Flammable, combustible, and explosive materials. 
Any uses involving the manufacture or storage of flammable, combustible, or explosive materials shall comply with all federal, state, county, and local standards and shall be provided with adequate safety devices as required by the fire marshal for the prevention and suppression of fire and explosive hazards in compliance with the Ventura County fire prevention regulations. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(F)(8).)  
19.54.150 - Compliance with regulations required. 
The director shall be authorized to require that substantial compliance with the performance standards contained herein be achieved for any commercial or industrial land use subject to these regulations and shall conduct an objective evaluation as to compliance with such performance standards within a reasonable period of time. The director shall notify the owner or operator of any land use in writing within a reasonable time as to any violations of such performance standards. The director may require to the extent permitted by state and federal law, modifications to the operation so as to be in conformance with the performance standards. Such modifications may include cessation of the operation if so directed by the director upon a finding by the director that such operation threatens the public health, safety and welfare, or environmental quality. The owner or operator shall be given a reasonable length of time to comply with this chapter as prescribed by the director. 
(Ord. 763 § 28, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(G).)  
19.54.160 - Required data. 
The director may require that the owner or operator of any commercial or industrial use which is suspected to be in violation of any provision of this chapter to submit any or all of the following within a reasonable time in order to objectively analyze the suspected violation: 
A.  Development or construction plans; 
B.  Description of machinery, processes, or products; 
C.  Specifications of equipment, products; 
D.  Measurements of dangerous or objectionable elements; 
E.  Description and location of hazardous materials and hazardous waste stored on the property and method of storage. 
(Ord. 763 § 29, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(H).)  
19.54.170 - Report by expert consultant. 
The director may require that qualified consultants be retained to aid in the analysis of development permit requests and compliance with the siting criteria set forth in this chapter. Such consultants shall be fully qualified and mutually agreeable to the director and operator of the use. The fees involved with the consultants service shall be borne by the owner or operator of the use. 
In the event of an emergency, the city or its designated representative shall have the right of entry onto the property to assess any potential violation of any requirement imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 763 § 30, 1992: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(I).)  
19.54.180 - Cancellation of approvals. 
If the use is still determined to be in violation with the performance standard as determined by the director of planning and community development or his designated representative at the end of time granted for compliance, any approvals granted for the use shall become void, and the operator shall cease operation until the violation is remedied. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(J).)  
19.54.190 - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the director of planning and community development or his designated representative shall be made in writing and filed with the department of planning and community development within ten days from the date of notice to the applicant of the decision from the director or his designated representative requesting the planning commission review. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9514(K).)  
Chapter 19.55 - CANNABIS FACILITIES, CULTIVATION, AND DELIVERIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1120, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 27, 2016, amended Ch. 19.55 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 19.55, §§ 19.55.010—19.55.060, pertained to medical marijuana facilities, and derived from Ord. No. 1052, § 3, 4-14-2010. 
 
19.55.010 - Definitions. 
"Accessory structure" means a completely enclosed and secure structure and, where required by law, must be constructed pursuant to a building permit issued by the city. 
"Cannabis" has the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(f) and includes all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. "Cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Commercial cannabis activity" has the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(k), and includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, distribution, or sale of cannabis or cannabis products as provided under MAUCRSA. 
"Commercial cannabis facility" means any building, facility, use, establishment, property, or location where any person or entity establishes, commences, engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits another person or entity to establish, commence, engage in, conduct, or carry on, any commercial cannabis activity that requires a state license or nonprofit license under Business and Professions Code sections 26000 and following, including but not limited to cannabis cultivation, cannabis distribution, cannabis transportation, cannabis storage, manufacturing of cannabis products, cannabis processing, the sale of any cannabis or cannabis products, and the operation of a cannabis microbusiness. Commercial cannabis facility also includes any building, facility, use, establishment, property, or location where cannabis and/or cannabis products are sold or distributed in exchange for compensation in any form for medicinal purposes under Health and Safety Code sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 and following. 
"Cultivation" has the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(l) and includes any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
"Medical cannabis" or "medicinal cannabis" is cannabis used for medical purposes where that medical use is deemed appropriate and has been recommended by a physician who has determined that the person's health would benefit from the use of cannabis in the treatment of acquired immune deficiency syndrome ("AIDS"), anorexia, arthritis, cancer, chronic pain, glaucoma, migraine, spasticity, or any other serious medical condition for which cannabis is deemed to provide relief as defined in subsection (h) of Health and Safety Code § 11362.7. 
"Primary caregiver" shall have the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code sections 11362.5(e) and 11362.7(d). 
"Private residence" means, as provided in Health and Safety Code § 11362.2(b)(5), a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling. 
"Qualified patient" shall have the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code section 11362.7(f). 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3(Exh. A), 1-27-2016; Ord. No. 1146, § 3(Exh. A), 11-15-2017)  
19.55.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit commercial cannabis facilities and to regulate cannabis cultivation, as defined above, within the city limits. It is recognized that it is a federal violation under the Controlled Substances Act to possess or distribute cannabis even if for medical purposes. Additionally, there is evidence of an increased incidence of crime-related secondary impacts in locations associated with a cannabis facilities, which is contrary to policies that are intended to promote and maintain the public's health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3(Exh. A), 1-27-2016; Ord. No. 1146, § 3(Exh. A), 11-15-2017)  
19.55.030 - Prohibition on commercial cannabis facilities and cannabis deliveries. 
A.  Commercial cannabis facilities are prohibited in all zones in the City. No person or entity may establish or operate a commercial cannabis facility within city limits. A property owner may not allow its property to be used by any person or entity as a commercial cannabis facility. 
B.  The delivery of cannabis to any person within the city limits is prohibited, except for deliveries of medical cannabis by a primary care giver to one of the primary caregiver's qualified patients. These deliveries are subject to the following requirements: (1) Deliveries are only permitted to occur from the hours of 7:00 am to 8:00 pm; (2) The delivery must be in an unmarked vehicle and (3) Deliveries are only permitted to a private residence. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3(Exh. A), 1-27-2016)  
19.55.040 - Residential Cannabis Cultivation. 
A.  All cannabis cultivation within city limits is prohibited except that a person may cultivate no more than six living cannabis plants inside a private residence, or inside a fully enclosed and secure accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of that private residence. Such cultivation shall only occur in residences and accessory structures that are fully enclosed and secured against unauthorized entry. If the accessory structure has windows, then the windows must be closed during any times that cannabis is being cultivated or located in the accessory structure. 
B.  If a private residence is not occupied or inhabited by the owner of the private residence, then no persons living in the residence may cultivate cannabis without written consent signed by the owner expressly allowing cannabis cultivation to occur at the private residence. 
C.  Persons cultivating cannabis in a residence shall comply with all applicable Building Code requirements set forth in the Camarillo Municipal Code. 
D.  There shall be no use of gas products (CO 2 , butane, propane, natural gas, etc.) on the property for purposes of cannabis cultivation. 
E.  All private cultivation under this section shall comply with Health and Safety Code section 11362.2(a)(3). 
(Ord. No. 1146, § 3(Exh. A), 11-15-2017)  
19.55.050 - Violation—Separate offense. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any such person commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation thereof, and may be penalized accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3(Exh. A), 1-27-2016); Ord. No. 1146, § 3(Exh. A), 11-15-2017)  
19.55.060 - Penalties. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter is subject to penalties as set forth in Municipal Code Chapter 1.12. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3(Exh. A), 1-27-2016; Ord. No. 1146, § 3(Exh. A), 11-15-2017)  
19.55.070 - Civil injunction. 
Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance per se and contrary to the public interest and will at the discretion of the city, be subject to a cause of action for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3(Exh. A), 1-27-2016; Ord. No. 1146, § 3(Exh. A), 11-15-2017)  
Chapter 19.56 - ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS 
 
19.56.010 - Definitions. 
The following terms when used in this chapter will have the meanings provided in this section: 
"Accessory dwelling unit" or "ADU" will have the meaning set forth in Government Code section 65852.2(i), which is: an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, and includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An accessory dwelling unit also includes the following: (a) an efficiency unit, as defined in Health and Safety Code section 17958.1, and (b) a manufactured home, as defined in Health and Safety Code section 18007. 
"Attached ADU" means an ADU that is attached to the existing single-family dwelling unit. 
"Detached ADU" means an ADU that is detached from the existing single-family dwelling unit. 
"Integrated ADU" means an ADU that is located within the living area of the existing single-family dwelling unit. 
"Public transit" means the Camarillo Metrolink station, or a fixed bus route with regular service covering a significant portion of the city that is not a subscription service. 
(Ord. No. 1140, § (Exh. A), 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.56.020 - Owner-Occupancy requirement. 
A.  The applicant for an ADU must be an owner-occupant. 
B.  Upon approval of an ADU application, a declaration that provides that either the main dwelling unit or the ADU will be occupied by the property owner must be recorded before occupancy and will be binding on all future owners of the parcel. 
C.  Beginning one year after the approval date of the ADU, and annually thereafter, the owner must file an annual report listing the occupants of the main dwelling unit and ADU in order to ensure compliance with this condition. 
(Ord. No. 1140, § (Exh. A), 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.56.030 - Permitted zones and lots. 
A.  ADUs are permitted only on legal lots with an existing single-family residence or in conjunction with a proposed single-family residence in the R-E Rural Exclusive Zone, R-1 Single Family Zone, and RPD Residential Planned Development Zone. 
B.  An ADU may only be constructed on a legal lot that conforms to the lot area, width and depth requirements of the underlying zone. 
C.  Only one ADU is permitted on a lot. 
(Ord. No. 1140, § (Exh. A), 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.56.040 - Review process. 
A.  For an attached or detached ADU, a plan review application must be filed and approved in accordance with the applicable provisions of the underlying zone. The ADU must be designed to be compatible with the main dwelling unit, including, as applicable, the use of the same exterior materials, roof covering, colors, and other architectural features as the main dwelling unit. 
B.  For an integrated ADU, a zone clearance application must be filed and approved by the department in accordance with the applicable provisions of the underlying zone. 
(Ord. No. 1140, § (Exh. A), 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.56.050 - Setback requirements. 
The minimum front, side and rear setbacks of the underlying zone apply to an ADU, except that no setback will be required for an existing garage that is converted to an ADU, and a setback of no more than five feet from the side and rear lot lines will be required for an attached ADU that is constructed above a garage. 
(Ord. No. 1140, § (Exh. A), 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.56.060 - Off-street parking. 
A.  Number. The parking requirements for an ADU is one open or enclosed parking space per unit. No additional parking, or reconfiguration of existing parking on the lot, is required for an integrated ADU. 
B.  Location. Required parking spaces may be provided as tandem parking on a driveway. Off-street parking is permitted in setback areas in locations determined by the city or through tandem parking, unless specific findings are made that parking in setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based upon specific site. 
C.  Exemption. No parking is required for an ADU in any of the following instances: 
1.  The ADU is located within one-half mile of public transit. 
2.  The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district. 
3.  The ADU is an integrated ADU. 
4.  When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the ADU. 
(Ord. No. 1140, § (Exh. A), 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017; Ord. No. 1152, § 3, 4-25-2018)  
19.56.070 - Unit size. 
A.  On lots less than one acre in size, the following size limits apply: 
1.  An ADU may not have more than one bedroom. 
2.  An ADU may not exceed 700 square feet in area in the R-E Rural Exclusive Zone, and 640 square feet in area in the R-1 Single Family Zone and RPD Residential Planned Development Zone. 
B.  On lots of one or more acres in size, the following size limits apply: 
1.  An ADU may not have more than two bedrooms. 
2.  An ADU may not exceed 30 percent of the size of the existing living area of the main dwelling unit or 1200 square feet, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 1140, § (Exh. A), 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.56.080 - Building height. 
The height of a detached ADU may not exceed 15 feet. The height of an attached ADU may not exceed the maximum height permitted in the zone. 
(Ord. No. 1140, § (Exh. A), 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.56.090 - Code compliance. 
The ADU must comply with all applicable building, health and fire codes, except that an ADU is not required to provide fire sprinklers if sprinklers are not required for the main dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 1140, § (Exh. A), 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.56.100 - Driveway access. 
The ADU must be served by the same driveway access to the street as the existing main dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 1140, § (Exh. A), 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
19.56.110 - Common entrance. 
An attached ADU may be served either by a common entrance with the main dwelling unit or a separate entrance to the ADU, which must be located on the side or at the rear of the main dwelling unit. No ADU will be required to provide a new passageway from the ADU to the street. 
(Ord. No. 1140, § (Exh. A), 4-12-2017; Ord. No. 1139, § 3(Exh. A), 4-26-2017)  
IV. - PROCEDURES  
Chapter 19.58 - NONCONFORMING USE—NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE 
 
19.58.010 - Application. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply and govern all nonconforming uses of land, building and structures arising out of the application of the zoning title. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9600.)  
19.58.020 - Nonconforming use of land. 
A.  Termination of Use. The nonconforming use of land shall be terminated not later than three years after such use becomes nonconforming. As used in this section, the term "use of land" includes the use of land only and the use of accessory buildings or structures in conjunction with the use of land when the aggregate assessed value of such buildings or structures for tax purposes is not more than seven hundred and fifty dollars. 
B.  Expansion Prohibited. The nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded or extended in any way either on the same or any adjoining land. 
C.  Discontinuance or Change. The discontinuance of a nonconforming use of land or a change of nonconforming use constitutes abandonment and termination of the nonconforming use, and thereafter the use of the land must conform to the regulations of the applicable zone classification. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9600.1.)  
19.58.030 - Nonconforming use—Conforming building or structure. 
A.  Termination of Use. The nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure shall be discontinued not later than five years after such use becomes nonconforming. As used in this section, the term "conforming building or structure" means a building or structure all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a purpose or use permitted in the zone in which it is located. 
B.  Expansion Prohibited. The nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such conforming building or structure. 
C.  Discontinuance. The discontinuance of a nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure for a period of one hundred twenty days constitutes abandonment and termination of the nonconforming use, and thereafter the use of the conforming building or structure shall conform to the regulations of the applicable zone classification. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9600.2.)  
19.58.040 - Nonconforming buildings or structures. 
A.  Continuation of Use. The use of nonconforming buildings or structures may be continued subject to the following conditions: no additions or enlargements shall be made to such buildings or structures, except additions or enlargements required by law; or additions or enlargements if such additions or enlargements otherwise conform to the regulations in effect for the zone in which such buildings or structures are located. 
B.  Expansion within Structure. The nonconforming use of a nonconforming building or structure may be expanded or extended throughout such building or structure provided that no structural alterations shall be made therein except as required by law. 
C.  Nonconforming Use Change. The nonconforming use of a nonconforming building or structure may be changed to another use permitted in the same zone or a more restrictive use, provided that no structural alterations are made thereto. 
D.  Sequence of Use Restriction. If the nonconforming use of a conforming building is changed to a use which is a more restrictive use, the sequence of the uses, the first being the most restrictive and the last being the least restrictive is as follows: one-family residential use, multiple-family residential use, office use, neighborhood commercial use, general commercial use, limited industrial use and heavy industrial use. When the use of a nonconforming building is changed to a use which is permitted in a more restrictive zone, such a nonconforming building shall not thereafter be used for a use which is permitted only in a less restrictive zone. 
E.  Any use which conformed to the parking provisions prior to adoption of amendment on October 28, 1987 of the parking section increasing the number of parking spaces required, shall be allowed to be continued subject to the following: 
1.  That no additions or enlargements shall be made to such building or structure except additions or enlargements required by law or additions or enlargements which otherwise conform to the regulations in effect for the zone and use in which the building is located; 
2.  The nonconforming use may be changed to another use permitted in the same zone or the same classification in the zone or to a more restrictive use: provided, that no structural alterations are made thereto, other than interior modifications. The use shall also be subject to the provisions in Section 19.58.040 D dealing with sequence of use restrictions. 
(Ord. 638 § 2, 1987; Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9600.3.)  
19.58.045 - Temporary agricultural stands. 
Temporary agricultural stands shall be determined nonconforming and shall cease and desist within ninety days from the date a conditional use permit is required therefor unless a conditional use permit is obtained and all conditions are satisfied. 
(Ord. 512 § 11 (part), 1982.)  
19.58.050 - Involuntary partial destruction. 
Whenever in any zone a nonconforming building or structure is involuntarily damaged or destroyed to the extent of fifty percent or less of its reasonable value, it may be restored and the occupancy or use of such building or structure or part thereof which existed at the time of such partial destruction may be continued, if such restoration is started within a period of twelve months of such damage or destruction and is diligently pursued to completion. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9600.4.)  
19.58.060 - Voluntary partial destruction. 
Whenever in any zone a nonconforming building or structure is voluntarily removed, damaged or destroyed to the extent of fifty percent or less of its reasonable value, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless such portion of such building or structure is made to conform to the regulations of the new zone classification in which it is located. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9600.5.)  
19.58.070 - Substantial destruction or removal. 
Whenever in any zone a nonconforming building or structure is removed or is voluntarily or involuntarily damaged or destroyed to the extent of more than fifty percent of its reasonable value, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to the regulations of the new zone classification in which it is located. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9600.6.)  
19.58.080 - Building repair or restoration. 
In no event shall the repair or restoration of any building or structure increase or prolong the time within which the nonconforming use thereof must be terminated. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9600.7.)  
19.58.090 - Use of nonconforming lots. 
The use of land as permitted for the zone or subzone in which it is located shall be permitted on a lot or parcel or a combination of contiguous lots or parcels of less area or frontage than that required by the regulation of such zone or subzone only if the owner or, if there is more than one, any one of the owners of such lot or parcel or combination thereof does not own, in whole or part, any adjoining property and has not owned, in whole or part, any adjoining property since September 27, 1978. Whenever use of land is permitted pursuant to this section, the side yard of any lot may be reduced to not less than ten percent of the average lot width or three feet, whichever is greater and a front yard setback of ten percent of the lot depth and a rear yard setback equal to ten percent of the depth but in no case shall the combined total exceed twenty-five feet. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9600.8.)  
19.58.100 - Nonconforming uses of land or buildings. 
A variance or permit is granted automatically hereby, so as to permit the continuation of the particular existing uses of any building, structure, improvement or premises existing in the respective zones immediately prior to the time the ordinance codified in this chapter or any amendment thereof becomes effective if such existing use was not in violation of this or any other ordinance or law. Whenever the zone classification of any property is changed, any property being used pursuant to variance or permit may be used thereafter in the manner authorized by the variance or permit as a nonconforming use for the duration of the variance or permit. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9600.9.)  
19.58.110 - Nonconforming lots resulting from lot splits. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no building permit shall be issued for any lot or parcel which results from a sale of part of a lot or parcel or any other type of lot split wherein any one of the resulting lots or parcels does not meet the zoning requirements which apply to the land at that time unless, prior to the sale or split, a variance is obtained from the planning commission. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9600.10.)  
19.58.113 - Nonconforming trash and recyclable enclosures in the RPD-6U and greater zone. 
Existing developments in the RPD-6U or greater zones which are mandated to have containers for the temporary storage of recyclable material which do not have sufficient area within the existing trash enclosure(s) are deemed to be nonconforming as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Each such nonconforming trash and recyclable enclosure shall be modified to provide sufficient area for the storage of trash and recyclables within two years from the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The enclosure shall be modified in accordance with a plan to be submitted for review and approval by the director of planning and community development. 
(Ord. 905 § 2, 1998.)  
19.58.115 - Nonconforming antenna system. 
A.  An existing antenna system, which has been constructed and in place at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, shall be considered a legal, nonconforming use if it does not comply with the current standards. However, the owner of an existing ground-mounted antenna system whose system has not previously been approved by the department of building and safety must submit an application for a building permit to the department of building and safety within one year of the date of the adoption of this chapter. 
B.  A nonconforming antenna is no longer a legal nonconforming use if the antenna support structure is moved or if the height of the antenna support structure is increased, and such antenna is then subject to all the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 730 § 5, 1990.)  
19.58.116 - Nonconforming garages in COT zone. 
A.  Termination of Use. A public garage in the COT (Camarillo Old Town) zone shall be deemed a nonconforming use of a building or structure five years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. Such nonconforming use shall then be immediately discontinued unless a conditional use permit is obtained. 
B.  Expansion Prohibited. The nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such conforming building or structure unless a conditional use permit is obtained. 
C.  Discontinuance. The discontinuance of a nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure for a period of one year constitutes abandonment and termination of the nonconforming use, and thereafter the use of the conforming building or structure shall conform to the regulations of the applicable zone classification. 
D.  Any change of ownership of a public garage, as defined in Section 19.04.335, in the COT zone will not change the nonconformity status of the use or the time period for compliance. 
(Ord. 898 § 3, 1998.)  
19.58.117 - Nonconforming drinking establishments. 
A.  Termination of Use. A drinking establishment shall be deemed a nonconforming use of a building or structure five years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. Such nonconforming use shall then be immediately discontinued unless a conditional use permit is obtained. 
B.  Expansion Prohibited. The nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such conforming building or structure unless a conditional use permit is obtained. 
C.  Discontinuance. The discontinuance of a nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure for a period of one year constitutes abandonment and termination of the nonconforming use, and thereafter the use of the conforming building or structure shall conform to the regulations of the applicable zone classification. 
D.  Any change of ownership of drinking establishments as defined in Section 19.04.278 will not change the nonconformity status of the use or the time period for compliance. 
(Ord. 871 § 5, 1997.)  
19.58.118 - Nonconforming large family day care facilities. 
Large day care facilities properly licensed at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section may remain in use; however, all applicable city approvals and licenses shall be applied for within ninety days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, except as otherwise expressly provided herein. 
(Ord. 773 § 14, 1993.)  
19.58.119 - Nonconforming alcoholic beverage establishments, off-sale. 
Off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments properly licensed at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section are considered a legal nonconforming use and may remain in use; however, the use may not be expanded or extended into any other portion of the conforming building or structure in which the use is located unless a conditional use permit is obtained. The discontinuance of a legal nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure for a period of one hundred eighty days or more constitutes abandonment and termination of the nonconforming use, and thereafter the use of the conforming building or structure must conform to the regulations of the applicable zone classification. A change of ownership of an off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment will not change the legal nonconformity status of the use. 
(Ord. 1029 § 12, 2008.)  
19.58.120 - Nonconforming use violation. 
A.  Prohibition—Record Owner. It is unlawful for any record owner of land to use or permit to be used the land or any building or structure thereon for any nonconforming use which is in violation of this nonconforming section of the title. 
B.  Prohibition—Lessee or Sublessee. It is unlawful for any lessee or sublessee of real property to use or permit to be used the leased premises of any building or structure thereon for any nonconforming use which is in violation of the nonconforming section. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code 9600.11.)  
19.58.130 - Nonconforming use a public nuisance. 
In addition to the penalties provided, any nonconforming use caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this chapter is a public nuisance and is subject to summary abatement by the city, in which case the city may recover from the owner of the land or the owner of such public nuisance, in an action brought in the name of the city for that purpose, the city's expense of removal of such public nuisance including court costs and reasonable attorney's fees to be fixed by the court. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part): prior code § 9600.12.)  
19.58.140 - Involuntary nonconformance. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no parcel of land shall be considered nonconforming within the purview of the nonconforming section if such parcel were rendered nonconforming as a result of a conveyance of any interest in the parcel to a public entity through eminent domain proceedings, under threat of eminent domain proceedings or to meet a requirement of any public entity having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 404 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9600.13.)  
Chapter 19.60 - SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION 
 
19.60.010 - Similar uses permitted by commission determination. 
A.  It is recognized that in the development of comprehensive zoning regulations: 
1.  Not all uses of land can be listed, nor can all future uses be anticipated; 
2.  A use may have been omitted from the list of those specified as permissible in each of the various zones in this title designated; or 
3.  Ambiguity may arise concerning the appropriate classification of a particular use within the meaning and intent of this title. 
Hence, the phrase, "other uses which the commission may determine to be similar to those listed above and not more obnoxious or detrimental to other uses permitted in the zone or to the public health, safety, and welfare," appears under "uses permitted" in each zone. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9601(A).)  
19.60.020 - Procedure. 
A.  When an unlisted use is proposed for a particular zone or when classification of an unlisted use is requested, it shall be the duty of the commission to ascertain all pertinent facts concerning the use and by resolution of record set forth its findings and the reasons for designating a specific classification for such use. 
B.  Findings. In permitting or classifying an unlisted use, the commission shall first make a finding that all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  That the use is in keeping with the stated intent and purpose of the zone; 
2.  That field investigations have disclosed that the subject use and its operation are compatible with the uses permitted; 
3.  That the subject use is similar to one or more uses permitted in the zone within which it is proposed to be located; and 
4.  That the subject use will not cause substantial injury to the values of property in the zone within which it is proposed to be located. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9601(B).)  
Chapter 19.61 - TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 
 
19.61.010 - Purpose. 
The temporary use permit is intended to allow for the short-term placement of uses on privately or publicly owned property with appropriate regulations so that such activities will be compatible with the surrounding areas. 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 3(Exh. A), 2-11-2015)  
19.61.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Uses that that are substantially similar to those listed as permitted uses in the applicable zone, which, in the opinion of the director, are compatible with the district and surrounding land uses. In making such a compatibility determination, the director must first make all the findings set forth in Chapter 19.60, Section 19.60.020(B) of this code. 
B.  Uses that are conditionally permitted in the applicable zone. 
C.  Nonconforming uses that can be made compatible with the surrounding uses and area through the imposition of conditions under the temporary use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 3(Exh. A), 2-11-2015)  
19.61.030 - Permit required; general procedure; duration and extension 
A.  A temporary use permit approved by the director must be issued prior to the commencement of any requested temporary use. 
B.  Applications for a temporary use permit and the extension of a temporary use permit must be filed with the department on the form provided. 
C.  The director may issue a temporary use permit for a period up to six months. 
D.  A one-time extension of a temporary use permit may be approved by the director for a period up to six months. The director may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the extension, as deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community, as though the temporary use extension was a new application for use. The completed application for time extension must be submitted thirty days in advance of the expiration of a previously permitted temporary use. No additional time extensions may be approved. 
E.  A public hearing will not be required prior to the issuance of a temporary use permit, or for an extension of a temporary use permit; provided, however, the director sends written notice to all property owners located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots of the property where the proposed temporary use is to be located, advising them that an application for a temporary use permit or extension of a temporary use permit has been received and that the director intends to approve the application within not less than ten days. The notice will request that the property owner contact the director with any questions or concerns prior to the proposed date of approval so that such comments may be considered. The director's decision to approve or deny a permit application will be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the director's decision, unless an effective, timely, and complete appeal application is filed, or a city council review is ordered as provided in Section 19.61.080. 
F.  Temporary uses may be subject to conditions of approval as set forth in Section 19.61.050, additional permits, other city department approvals, licenses, and inspections as required by any applicable law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 3(Exh. A), 2-11-2015)  
19.61.040 - Findings. 
A.  The director may approve a temporary use permit application or a time extension for a temporary use permit, only when all of the following findings can be made: 
1.  The use may be permitted under the applicable subsection of Section 19.61.020 
2.  The operation of the requested use at the location proposed and within the time period specified will not jeopardize the public health, safety, or general welfare, or be injurious or detrimental to properties adjacent to or in the vicinity of the proposed location of the temporary use. 
3.  The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the temporary use without material detriment to the use and enjoyment of other properties located adjacent to and in the vicinity of the site. 
4.  The proposed site is adequately served by streets or highways having sufficient width and improvements to accommodate the kind and quantity of traffic that the temporary use will or could reasonably generate. 
5.  Adequate temporary parking to accommodate vehicular traffic to be generated by the use will be available either on-site or at alternate locations acceptable to the director. 
The director must prepare a written decision on the approval or denial of a temporary use permit application or time extension application within thirty calendar days after a complete application has been filed, which must contain the findings of fact upon which the decision is made. 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 3(Exh. A), 2-11-2015)  
19.61.050 - Conditions of approval. 
In approving an application for a temporary use permit, or the extension of a temporary use permit, the director may impose conditions that are deemed necessary to ensure that the use will be in accordance with the findings required by Section 19.61.040. These conditions may involve any factors affecting the operation of the temporary use or event and may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Provision of temporary parking facilities, including vehicular ingress and egress. 
2.  Regulation of nuisance factors such as prevention of glare or direct illumination of adjacent properties, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, and heat. 
3.  Regulation of temporary buildings, structures, and facilities, including placement, height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards. 
4.  Provision of sanitary facilities. 
5.  Provision of solid waste collection and disposal. 
6.  Provision of security and safety measures. 
7.  Regulation of signs. 
8.  Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the temporary use to a shorter time period than that requested. 
9.  Submission of a performance bond or other security to assure that any temporary facilities or structures used for the proposed temporary use will be removed from the site following the event and that the property will be restored to its former condition. 
10.  Submission of a site plan indicating any information required by this chapter. 
11.  A requirement that approval of the requested temporary use permit is contingent upon compliance with applicable provisions of other laws. 
12.  Other conditions that will ensure the operation of the proposed temporary use in an orderly and efficient manner and in accordance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 3(Exh. A), 2-11-2015)  
19.61.060 - Revocation. 
The director may revoke a temporary use permit, or if the permit was granted by either the planning commission or the city council, then the director may recommend to such body that the permit be revoked in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  A revocation hearing will be held by the director or the body that initially granted the permit. Notice of the hearing must be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and must be served either in person or by registered mail on the owner of the property and on the permit holder at least ten days prior to such hearing. The notice of hearing must contain a statement of the specific reasons for revocation. 
B.  After the hearing, the temporary use permit may be revoked by the director, or by the body that initially granted the permit, if any one of the following findings are made: 
1.  That the temporary use permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud. 
2.  That the conditions of the permit have not been met, or the permit granted is being or has recently been exercised contrary to the terms of the approval or in violation of a specific statute, ordinance, law or regulation. 
C.  A written determination of revocation of a temporary use permit will be mailed to the property owner and the permit holder within ten days of such determination. 
D.  The decision of the director or the planning commission to revoke a temporary use permit will be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal application is filed or a city council review is ordered as provided in Section 19.61.080. 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 3(Exh. A), 2-11-2015)  
19.61.070 - Notice. 
A.  Notice of any approved temporary use permit or extension of a temporary use permit must be filed with the city clerk and the secretary of the planning commission for immediate notice of the action. Notice must also be mailed to all property owners within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots of the subject property. 
B.  Notice of any denial or revocation of a temporary use permit must be filed with the city clerk and the secretary of the planning commission for immediate notice of the action. 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 3(Exh. A), 2-11-2015)  
19.61.080 - Appeal; city council review. 
Any person may appeal an action of the director to the planning commission, and an action of the planning commission to the city council, and the city council may issue an order of review of an action of the director or planning commission, as to the approval, conditions of approval, denial, or revocation of a temporary use permit in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  Form of Appeal. An appeal of a decision of the director or the planning commission of the approval, conditions of approval, denial, or revocation relating to a temporary use permit will not be valid or effective for any purpose unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Each such appeal must be in writing on a form provided by the director, and must identify the action to which the appeal relates; and 
2.  Each such appeal must be filed with the director prior to the decision to which the appeal relates becoming final; and 
3.  Each such appeal must be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council; and 
4.  Each such appeal is filed by or on behalf of any of the following: 
a.  The owner of any real property located within the city, or 
b.  A person who lawfully occupies or is entitled to lawfully occupy any real property which is located within five hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are the subject of the temporary use permit, or 
c.  Any interested person. 
B.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal will be deemed complete nor effective for any purpose unless it complies with all of the provisions of this section. 
C.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section to the contrary, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before the director's or planning commission's decision becomes final, may issue an order to review, de novo, the director's or planning commission's decision relating to the temporary use permit ("order of review"). 
D.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review will stay the decision of the director or planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates, pending planning commission action on an appeal or city council action on an appeal or order of review of the matter. 
E.  Action of the Secretary of the Planning Commission. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal of the director's decision, the secretary of the planning commission must: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the planning commission; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and each person or legal entity who owns real property located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are subject of the director's decision. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal of the planning commission's action, or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk must: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and each person or legal entity who owns real property located within five hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are subject of the planning commission decision. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council will conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons will be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant will have the burden of proof to show the existence of the facts which warrant the granting of the temporary use permit. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk will give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination will be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 3(Exh. A), 2-11-2015)  
Chapter 19.62 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT 
 
19.62.010 - Intent and purpose. 
A.  The conditional use permit is intended for those types of land uses which require special consideration in a particular zone or in the city as a whole due to: the size of the area needed for full development of such use; the unusual traffic, noise, vibration, smoke or other problems incidental to its operation; special locational requirements not related to zoning; or to the effect that such uses may have on property values, health, safety, and welfare in the neighborhood or in the community as a whole. It is also for uses whose approximate location is indicated on the general plan but whose exact location and arrangement must be carefully studied. In granting the permit, certain safeguards to protect the health, safety, and general welfare may be required as conditions of approval. 
B.  Uses existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which are listed as permitted subject to conditional use permit or special use permit in the zone in which they are located may continue without securing such a permit; however, any extension or expansion of such use shall require a conditional use permit. 
C.  Uses listed in the individual zones as "uses permitted by conditional use permit" may be permitted in such zones subject to the provisions of this section. The commission shall review and approve or disapprove the use. The commission's action shall be final unless appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602 (part).)  
19.62.020 - Uses permitted in all zones subject to conditional use permit. 
The following uses may be permitted pursuant to the issuance of a conditional use permit in accor dance with this section in any zone except where expressly prohibited: 
A.  Temporary construction office and yard on or adjacent to where a project has been approved; 
B.  Public utility structures and installations; 
C.  Radio or television transmitters. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(A).)  
19.62.030 - Conditional use permit findings and conditions. 
Before any conditional use permit is approved, the applicant shall show and the planning commission shall so find as follows: 
A.  That the use applied for at the location set forth in the application is properly one for which a conditional use permit is authorized by this title; 
B.  That the use is necessary or desirable for the development of the community, is in harmony with the various elements or objectives of the general plan, and is not detrimental to existing uses or to uses specifically permitted in the zone in which the proposed use is to be located; 
C.  That the site for the intended use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the use and all of the yards, setbacks, walls or fences, landscaping and other features required in order to adjust the use to those existing or permitted future uses on land in the neighborhood; 
D.  That the site for the proposed use relates to streets and highways properly designed and improved to carry the type and quantity of traffic generated or to be generated by the proposed use; 
E.  That the conditions set forth as part of the approval of the conditional use permit are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. Such conditions may include: 
1.  Regulation of use, 
2.  Special yards, spaces and buffers, 
3.  Fences and walls, 
4.  Surfacing of parking areas subject to city specifications, 
5.  Requiring street, service road or alley dedications and improvements or appropriate bonds, 
6.  Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress, 
7.  Regulation of signs, 
8.  Requiring landscaping and maintenance thereof, 
9.  Requiring maintenance of the grounds, 
10.  Regulation of noise, vibration, odors, etc., 
11.  Regulation of time for certain activities, 
12.  Time period within which the proposed use shall be developed, 
13.  Phasing of improvements, 
14.  Type of materials to be utilized in the construction, 
15.  Duration of use, and 
16.  Such other conditions as will make possible the development of the city in an orderly and efficient manner and in conformity with the intent and purposes set forth in this title. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(B).)  
19.62.040 - Procedure—Application. 
A.  Filing. Each application for conditional use permit shall be verified before a notary public by the owner of the land or building, or the lessee of the land or building having a leasehold interest of not less than twenty-five years. 
B.  Form and Contents. Applications shall be made to the planning commission on forms furnished by the planning department and shall be full and complete, including such data as an ownership list and map of all property owners within a three-hundred-foot radius of the subject property taken from the last equalized ownership list and additional information that may be prescribed by the commission to assist in determining the validity of the request. Incomplete applications shall not be accepted for filing. 
Development plans and elevations of the proposed development shall be submitted as a part of any application with sufficient number as determined by the planning director in accordance with the following: 
1.  An accurately dimensioned plot plan showing existing and proposed topography, all proposed building, parking, landscaping areas, walls and all existing or proposed streets within a three-hundred-foot radius of the property; 
2.  The dimension of all yards, setbacks, parking area, driveways and square footage of all building landscaping and building coverage; 
3.  The elevation of all buildings proposed with a notation of the type of material proposed in addition to a color and material sample. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(C)(1).)  
19.62.050 - Procedure—Filing fee. 
When the application for a conditional use permit is filed, a uniform fee as set forth by city council resolution shall be paid, for the purpose of defraying the costs incidental to the proceedings. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(C)(2).)  
19.62.060 - Procedure—Investigation. 
The planning department shall make an investigation of the facts bearing on the case to provide the information necessary for action consistent with the intent of this title and the general plan, and shall report the findings to the commission. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(C)(3).)  
19.62.070 - Procedure—Planning commission public hearing date and notice. 
A.  The hearing date will be set by the community development department following compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
B.  Notice of the public hearing will be provided in accordance with Chapter 19.84. 
(Ord. 712 § 5, 1990; Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(C)(4).) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(U), 5-25-2018)  
19.62.080 - Procedure—Planning commission public hearing, conduct recommendation, and notice thereof. 
A.  The commission shall, not less than ten nor more than thirty days after the publication of the legal notice of a public hearing on a conditional use permit petition, hold the public hearing unless continued by the planning commission. 
B.  At the hearing, the commission shall consider all relevant evidence, including but not limited to applicable staff reports and public testimony. The commission shall give any interested person a reasonable opportunity to present testimony in conjunction therewith. Based upon the evidence so presented, the commission shall determine their decision on the application. 
C.  The commission shall announce and record in writing its decision within thirty days after the conclusion of the public hearing. The decision shall set forth the findings of the commission and any conditions deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons in the neighborhood and in the city as a whole. The findings shall be based on substantial evidence in view of the whole record. 
D.  The decision and findings shall be filed with city council within ten days after its announcement, and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. The action of the commission shall be final unless appealed, pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 712 § 6, 1990: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(C)(5).)  
19.62.090 - Planning commission decisions—Appeals—Council reviews. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission granting, denying or conditionally granting an application for a conditional use permit ("CUP") shall be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed, or a city council review is ordered as provided in this Section 19.62.090. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a CUP shall not be valid or effective for any purpose unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Each such appeal shall be in writing on a form provided by the director of planning and community development of the city ("director"), and shall identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates; and 
2.  Each such appeal shall be filed with the director prior to the planning commission decision to which the appeal relates becoming final, as provided in subsection A of this section; and 
3.  Each such appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by the city council; and 
4.  Each such appeal is filed by or on behalf of any of the following: 
a.  The owner of any real property located within the city, or 
b.  A person who lawfully occupies or is entitled to lawfully occupy any real property which is located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are the subject of the CUP, or 
c.  Any interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal shall be deemed complete nor effective for any purpose unless it complies with all of the provisions of this Section 19.62.090. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Section 19.62,090 to the contrary, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before a planning commission decision becomes final pursuant to subsection A of this Section 19.62.090 may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission decision relating to a CUP ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review shall stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates pending the city council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council shall conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons shall be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show the existence of the facts which warrant the granting of the CUP. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk shall give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination shall be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 844 § 1, 1996: Ord. 712 § 7, 1990; Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(D).) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(V), 5-25-2018)  
19.62.100 - Time limit for development. 
Unless otherwise stated by the commission or council, the time limit for commencement of construction under a conditional use permit shall be one year from the effective date of approval. Extension of the time limit, not to exceed two years, may be approved by the director of planning and community development upon demonstration of cause by the applicant. The action of the director may be appealed by the applicant to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(E).)  
19.62.110 - Effective date. 
A conditional use permit shall become effective after an elapsed period of ten days from the date of the resolution of record authorizing the permit unless an appeal is filed. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(F).)  
19.62.120 - Revisions to site plan approved as part of a conditional use permit. 
A.  Minor revisions to a development plan approved as part of a conditional use permit may be made after review and approval by the planning director. Minor revisions as used in this chapter in no way violate the intent of any of the standards or conditions of the permit. 
B.  Revisions other than minor revisions, as defined above, shall be made pursuant to the regular conditional use permit procedure set forth in this chapter. 
C.  All copies of the approved revised development plan shall be dated and signed by the planning department and made a part of the record of the subject conditional use permit. One copy of the approved revised site plan shall be mailed to the applicant. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(G).)  
19.62.130 - Required conditions for specific conditional use permit uses. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the specific uses set forth in Sections 19.62.140 through 19.62.161 shall conform to the following specific conditions in addition to those set forth in each zone and such conditions approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 512 § 12, 1982: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602 (H) (part).)  
19.62.140 - Quarries, sand pits or gravel pits. 
A.  The application for a conditional use permit for a quarry, sand pit, or gravel pit shall include a contour map indicating operating sites, structures and all improvements including the extremities of the proposed quarry. The application shall further submit a report in detail indicating the method if quarry operation, which report shall include an outline of the sequence and pattern of mineral excavation. This shall include the number spacing, depth of drill holes, and amount of explosives to be used per hole. The maximum height of quarry face for mining and blasting purposes shall be twenty-five feet. The planning commission upon receipt of this plan may require at the operator's expense a geophysical survey to determine the seismic effects of the proposed blasting pattern, which may be the basis for limiting the size of blast. 
B.  Quarries, sand pits, and gravel pits shall comply with the following provisions in addition to zone provisions and conditions imposed in a conditional use permit: 
1.  No rock or mineral crushing or treatment of minerals shall be permitted. 
2.  Accessory building shall be used solely for the storage and maintenance of equipment and operating offices. 
3.  No building may be closer than one thousand feet from any approved public street or highway. 
4.  Quarry operations shall not be closer than one-half mile from any residential zone. 
5.  The hours of operation shall be limited from eight a.m. to six p.m. from Monday through Friday. 
6.  Removal of minerals pursuant to this section shall be conducted so as to limit the emanation of smoke and dust as provided by the standards set forth in chapters of this title. 
7.  All operations excepting blasting shall not exceed sixty-five decibels as measured from any approved public street or highway. 
8.  All drill holes shall be tamped to minimize the sonic effects of blasts. No charges may be exposed to the air during detonation. 
9.  All roads from the site to any public street or highway shall be paved with suitable asphaltic material on a prepared base as per specifications of the director of public works to a width of twenty-eight feet to prevent the emanation of dust. 
10.  Upon completion of all operations, or operations at any one point, all excavations as well as mounds of waste material shall be graded and the premises restored as near as possible to original conditions and contours or in accordance with the plan approved by the planning commission. 
C.  All operations shall be covered by public liability and property damage insurance as required by the city. 
D.  Upon cessation of operations for a period of six months, this permit shall terminate and all structures and equipment shall be removed. 
E.  To guarantee compliance with conditions set forth in this section and in the conditional use permit, the operator shall post and maintain with the city a performance bond of one hundred thousand dollars, conditioned that the city may enter and restore the premises and recover all its costs. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(H)(1).)  
19.62.145 - Arcades. 
A.  Arcades, as defined in Section 19.04.072, shall comply with the following provisions in addition to zone provisions and conditions imposed in a conditional use permit: 
1.  If any wall of the arcade is in common with a commercial, office or residential use, such wall shall have a sound transmission class rating of 54 unless the planning commission makes a specific finding that the use adjoining the wall would not be adversely affected by noise from the arcade. 
2.  A minimum of one bicycle rack space shall be provided for every two mechanical or electronic games operated in the arcade. The required bicycle racks shall be placed for convenient access and use by the arcade, but not in such a location as to create a public safety or nuisance problem in relation to adjoining businesses, nor shall they be placed in locations requiring the removal of required parking or required on-site landscaping. 
3.  A person shall not enter, be or remain in any part of an arcade while in possession of, consuming, using or under the influence of any drug or alcoholic beverage. Owners, operators, managers and employees of an arcade shall not permit any such person to enter or remain upon the arcade premises. Establishments holding a valid license from the alcoholic beverage control for on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages are exempted from the provisions of this subsection related to alcoholic beverages, provided that no persons under the age of twenty-one are permitted in the arcade area where alcoholic beverages are permitted. 
4.  At least one responsible adult shall be in attendance at all times that the arcade is open and shall provide adequate management and control over the activities at the arcade premises. 
5.  Public restroom facilities shall be provided on the arcade premises. 
6.  No arcade shall be located within five hundred feet of the property boundary of any public or private school having any grades of kindergarten through twelfth. 
7.  A minimum of two footcandle illumination must be maintained in all parts of the premises when the arcade is open. 
B.  No owner, operator, manager or employee of an arcade may violate or cause to be violated any of the provisions set forth in Section 19.62.145 or any conditions attached to the conditional use permit for an arcade. 
C.  In addition to any other provisions of law or this code: 
1.  Operation of a business in violation of the provisions of this section or the conditional use permit governing the arcade shall be grounds for revocation or non-renewal of any license, permit, or other entitlement authorizing the conduct of such business or any other business, if the business includes the operation of arcades. 
2.  Further, violation of the provisions of this section is a public nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Section 731 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state of California. 
D.  The conditional use permit issued to an arcade will be subject to review within six months from the date of approval. If the arcade is not being operated in accordance with the provisions of this code or chapter or the conditions attached to the conditional use permit, then the conditional use permit may be modified in accordance with this chapter or revoked in accordance with Section 19.62.170. 
If the arcade is not being operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and all conditions attached to the conditional use permit, then the director of planning and community development shall cause a public hearing to be held before the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Sections 19.62.070 and 19.62.080. The decision of the planning commission shall be subject to appeal in accordance with Section 19.62.090. 
E.  Any person operating an arcade as defined in Section 19.04.072 on the date this section becomes effective shall obtain a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of this section within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. 
(Ord. 740 § 1, 1991; Ord. 537 § 9, 1982.; Ord. No. 1114, §§ 4, 5, 9-9-2015)  
19.62.147 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Urgency Ord. No. 1108, § 6, adopted March 11, 2015 and Ord. No. 1109, § 6, adopted March 25, 2015, repealed § 19.62.147, which pertained to wireless telecommunications and derived from Ord. 911 § 4, 1999.  
19.62.150 - Open storage yards for junk, auto wrecking, and other waste products. 
Open storage yards for junk, auto wrecking, and other waste products shall comply with the following provisions in addition to zone provisions and conditions imposed in a conditional use permit: 
A.  Location. The minimum distance from the site to a residential zone, school, park, playground, church, museum or similar use shall be five hundred feet. 
B.  Screening. The site shall include at least an eight-foot high wall on all sides and storage shall not exceed the height of the wall. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(H)(2).)  
19.62.160 - Oil exploration and extraction. 
It is declared to be in the interest of the public health, safety, welfare and the purpose and intent of this section that the following conditions shall be imposed and made a part of any conditional use permit for oil and gas drilling and extraction hereafter issued: 
A.  Soundproofing. Whenever the drilling or redrilling of any oil or gas well is situated within five hundred feet of any dwelling not owned by the permittee, or if applicable, the lessor of the permittee, the derrick, portable rig and machinery or equipment used to operate in connection with drilling shall be enclosed with fire-resistant and soundproofing material unless the planning director is furnished written consent to waiver such condition by all owners and tenants of the dwellings. If a noise nuisance develops after written consent has been given and if inspection under supervision of the planning director sustains that the noise level constitutes a nuisance, the original provisions of soundproofing will prevail. 
B.  The exercise of any right granted by the permit shall conform in all respects to the regulations and requirements of the California State Regional Water Pollution Control Board No. 4 and the California Division of Oil and Gas; and that all water, mud, oil, or any other substances removed as waste material from the land for which the permit is issued shall be deposited in a disposal site approved by the planning commission and the California State Regional Water Pollution Control Board. 
C.  No earthen sump shall be constructed or maintained within five hundred feet, and no drilling shall be permitted within one hundred feet of any natural channel in which there is or may be flowing water. 
D.  Within ninety days after a well is producing, the derrick, all boilers and all other drilling equipment shall be removed from the premises unless permission to store them on the premises is obtained from the planning commission. 
E.  All sumps, or debris basins, or any depressions, ravines, gullies, barrancas or the like which are used for the impounding or depositing of water, mud, oil, or any other fluid, semifluid, or any combination thereof, shall be fenced. When any such place is located more than one-half mile away from any school, playground or dwelling, it shall be enclosed by a cattle fence with wood or steel posts not less than four feet above the ground with not less than three strands of barbed wire secured horizontally to posts. When any such place is located within one-half mile of any school, playground or dwelling, it shall be enclosed by a wire fence of a wire mesh type with a maximum of two inches by four inches opening, and the fence shall be secured to steel posts not less than five feet in height above the ground, and the posts shall have forty-five-degree arms attached to top of posts with three strands of barbed wire attached thereto. 
F.  No permanent buildings or structures shall be erected within one hundred feet of boundaries. 
G.  The permittee shall at all times comply with the provisions of the Public Resources Code of the state relating to the protection of underground water supply and in connection with oil and gas extraction. 
H.  Upon abandonment of any well or cessation of drilling operations, all earthen sumps or other depressions containing drilling mud, oil, or other waste products from the drilling operation shall be cleaned up by removing such waste products or by consolidating all mud, oil, or other waste products into the land by disking, harrowing, and leveling to restore the land to the condition existing prior to the issuance of this permit as nearly as practicable to do so. 
I.  Transfer of Permit. Unless otherwise provided in the terms of a permit, the permit shall expire no later than when the permittee's ownership, lease or other right to develop the property in the manner described in the application is terminated. A permit may be transferred to another person only with the approval of the planning commission. A transfer shall be null and void unless and until (1) the planning commission has approved the transfer, (2) the planning commission has been furnished satisfactory evidence of the transfer, (3) the transferee files with the planning commission a writing wherein he obligates himself to comply with every term and condition of the permit, and (4) the transferee has filed an approved bond. 
J.  No drilling or other uses for which this permit is granted shall be commenced or continued unless and until the permittee has filed, and the planning director has accepted, a bond in the penal amount of twenty-five thousand dollars for each well that is drilled or to be drilled. Any operator may, in lieu of filing such bond for each well drilled, redrilled, produced or maintained, file a bond in the penal amount of one hundred thousand dollars to cover all operations conducted in the city, a political subdivision of the state, conditioned upon the permittee's wilfully and truly obeying, fulfilling and performing each and every term and provision of the permit, and that in case of any failure by the permittee to perform or comply with any term or provision thereof, the planning commission may, by resolution, declare the bond forfeited and the sureties and principal will be jointly and severally obligated to pay forthwith the full amount of the bond to the city. The forfeiture of any bond shall not insulate the permittee from liability in excess of the sum of the bond for damages or injury or expense or liability suffered by the city from any breach by the permittee of any term or condition of the permit or any applicable ordinance or of this bond. The transfer of this permit, as provided for in this chapter, shall not be effective unless and until the transferee has also complied with this condition for posting an approved bond. 
K.  All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to eliminate, as far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling for and the production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances. Where economically feasible, generally accepted and used technological improvements for reducing factors of nuisance and annoyance shall be employed by the permittee. 
L.  A certificate of insurance for property damaged and public liability in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars and one million dollars for bodily injury shall be provided. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(H)(3).)  
19.62.161 - Agricultural stands, temporary. 
Temporary agricultural stands shall comply with the following conditions in addition to the general provisions and other conditions imposed for a conditional use permit: 
A.  There will be no more than one temporary agricultural stand per parcel, with a minimum of one acre in area, and there will exist a minimum separation of one thousand feet between stands except for legal existing stands. 
B.  The stand shall be located to provide appropriate setback from the existing or proposed right-of-way to insure adequate ingress or egress and parking area. 
C.  The stand shall be constructed of wood material and its floor area shall be approximately five hundred square feet. In addition, a trailer may be used for storage and include a refrigeration unit with location to be approved as part of the conditional use permit application. 
D.  There shall be no more than one sign on the stand in accordance with the sign provisions contained in Title 17. 
E.  The stand must be used for sale of produce or flowers grown on the parcel; in addition, it may be used for sale of produce or flowers grown in the city of Camarillo or Ventura County; however, in no case shall it be used for the sale of prepackaged products. 
F.  The parking area shall be graded to create a level condition with a surface consisting of either rock or another material approved by the planning director which prevents the generation of dust. 
G.  No vehicle, cart or wagon shall be located on or nearby the parcel for the purpose of attracting attention or traffic to the stand by the use of signs or otherwise except for those uses as permitted under this section. 
H.  The property owner or applicant shall post bond sufficient to guarantee removal of the stand and shall provide the city with written consent to remove it in the event the CUP is revoked and the stand is not removed within the time specified by the revocation decision. 
I.  The stand shall be licensed as a general retail use in accordance with the Camarillo business license provisions. 
J.  If the stand is not in use or the land is not in production for a one-hundred-eighty day period, the use shall be deemed voluntarily abandoned and the CUP shall be subject to revocation proceedings. 
(Ord. 535 § 1, 1982: Ord. 512 § 11 (part), 1982.)  
19.62.163 - Recycling facility—Intermediate. 
Recycling facilities—Intermediate shall comply with the following conditions in addition to the general provisions and other conditions imposed for a conditional use permit: 
A.  Location. A recycling facility shall be appurtenant to a primary use; 
B.  Construction. A recycling facility shall be constructed of durable, waterproof and rustproof material fixed on the site with the color, design and materials approved under the conditional use permit; 
C.  Parking. A recycling facility shall not block or obstruct parking required for the primary use of the property and shall provide parking as provided in Chapter 19.44; 
D.  Signage. A recycling facility shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if problems occur at the facility. The total sign area shall be in accordance with the sign ordinance; 
E.  Mechanical Equipment. A recycling facility shall not use any power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines; 
F.  Lighting. A recycling facility shall be illuminated to ensure safe and comfortable operation if hours are between dusk and dawn; 
G.  Hours of Use. A recycling facility's hours of use shall match those of the host use; 
H.  Siting. A recycling facility's location is subject to the review and approval of the conditional use permit; 
I.  Materials. A recycling facility may accept glass, aluminum and bi-metals, plastic containers, and include a deposit area for newspapers; 
J.  Storage. A recycling facility shall store all recyclable materials within recycling machines or containers which shall be screened from view with the location and screening approved under the conditional use permit; 
K.  Maintenance. A recycling facility shall be maintained free of litter; 
L.  Noise. A recycling facility shall comply with noise standards established by the noise ordinance; 
M.  Landscaping. A recycling facility shall not remove or impair on-site landscaping and may require additional landscaping to be provided depending on the location and design of the recycling facility. 
(Ord. 640 § 7, 1987.)  
19.62.164 - Recycling facility—Large. 
Recycling facility—large may be required to comply with the requirements for the recycling facility—intermediate and the following conditions in addition to the general provisions and other conditions imposed for a conditional use permit: 
A.  Location. A recycling facility—large shall not abut a property zoned or planned for residential use; 
B.  Screening. A recycling facility—large shall be screened by landscaping or by a six-foot high block wall or fence, as determined by the planning commission during review of application, unless the fence is used for screening of outside storage, then an eight-foot-high block wall or fence would be required; 
C.  Storage. All exterior storage of materials shall be in sturdy containers which are covered, secured and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of inflammable material. No storage will be visible above the height of the fencing; 
D.  Hours of Operation. Hours of operation may be limited by the planning commission through the conditions of project approval; 
E.  Parking. Spaces will be provided on site as set forth under Chapter 19.44; 
F.  Processing. Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, bailing, plastic shredding or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material may be approved at the discretion of the planning commission if noise and other conditions are met. 
(Ord. 777 §§ 2, 3, 1993; Ord. 640 § 8, 1987.)  
19.62.165 - Day care nurseries and day care nurseries, short-term. 
Day care nurseries and day care nurseries, short-term, shall comply with the following conditions in addition to the general provisions and other conditions imposed for a conditional use permit: 
A.  Day care nurseries and day care nurseries, short-term, are to provide thirty-five square feet of usable indoor area per child. 
B.  Day care nurseries are to provide seventy-five square feet of outdoor play area per child. Area is to be secured and screened with a six-foot-high wall or wrought iron fence. Location of outdoor areas is subject to approval of the conditional use permit. 
C.  Day care nurseries, short-term, do not need to provide outdoor play area. 
D.  Parking for day care nurseries and day care nurseries, short-term, is to be in conference with subsection G of Section 19.44.050. 
E.  A copy of the license from the state to operate the day care nurseries and day care nurseries, short-term, is to be submitted to the planning department within thirty days of occupancy. All state and/or county licenses to be attained prior to occupancy. 
F.  When the use occupies space in a multi-tenant building, methods will be employed as necessary to attenuate excess noise to the adjoining tenants. An acoustical analysis or other method as approved by the planning director may be required to satisfy this requirement. 
(Ord. 660 § 7, 1988.)  
19.62.166 - Emergency shelter and transitional housing. 
Emergency shelters, and transitional housing (in a zone where residential dwellings are not otherwise conditionally permitted), must comply with the following conditions in addition to the general provisions and other conditions imposed for a conditional use permit: 
A.  Management Plan. The emergency shelter and transitional housing provider must have a written management plan, including as applicable, provisions for staff training, neighborhood outreach, security, screening of residents to insure compatibility with services provided at the facility, and training, counseling, and treatment programs for residents. 
B.  General Property Development Standards. The facility must conform to all property development standards of the zoning district in which it is located, except as modified by this section. 
C.  Maximum Number of Persons/Beds. The facility may not contain more than forty beds or serve more than forty homeless persons at any one time. 
D.  Lighting. Adequate external lighting must be provided for security purposes. The lighting must be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity compatible with the neighborhood. 
E.  Laundry Facilities. The facility must provide laundry facilities adequate for the number of residents. 
F.  Common Facilities. The facility may provide one or more of the following specific common facilities for the exclusive use of the residents: 
1.  Central cooking and dining room; 
2.  Recreation room. 
G.  Security. Parking facilities must be designed to provide security for residents, visitors and employees. 
H.  On-site Parking. On-site parking is subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 19.44 of this code. 
I.  Outdoor Activity. Outdoor activities may only be conducted between the hours of eight a.m. to ten p.m. 
J.  Concentration of Uses. No more than one facility is permitted within a radius of one thousand feet from another emergency shelter or transitional housing facility. 
K.  Refuse. Facilities must provide a refuse storage area that is completely enclosed with masonry walls not less than five feet high with a solid-gated opening and that is large enough to accommodate a standard-sized trash bin adequate for the parcel. The refuse enclosure must be accessible to refuse collection vehicles. 
L.  Shelter Provider. The agency or organization operating the facility must comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Emergency shelters are to be available to residents for no more than sixty days. Extensions up to a total stay of one hundred eighty days may be provided, if no alternative housing is available. 
2.  Staff and services must be provided to assist residents to obtain permanent shelter and a steady source of income. These services must be available at no cost to all residents. 
3.  The provider may not discriminate in any services provided. 
(Ord. 977 § 4, 2005.) 
(Ord. No. 1077, § 4, 6-12-2013)  
19.62.167. - Agricultural plant nurseries, retail in the RE-40 AC Zone. 
Agricultural plant nurseries, retail in the RE-40 AC Zone shall comply with the following provisions in addition to zone provisions and conditions imposed in a conditional use permit: 
A.  The nursery shall be used for sale of plants, where the majority of the plants for sale are farmed and grown on the premises. A limited amount of planting supplies such as garden pots and compost may be sold. 
B.  The size and location of any commercial signage shall be determined by the Planning Commission, but in no case exceed one on-site sign with a maximum of forty square feet in area. 
C.  A paved parking area shall be provided in accordance with the standards contained in Section 19.44.270 (Parking area improvement). 
D.  Parking and setback areas shall contain permanent landscaping and irrigation in accordance with the standards contained in Section 19.44.260 (Landscaping of parking areas). 
E.  All buildings on the property shall be of a permanent type of construction, made of durable, high-quality materials that are compatible with the surrounding area. 
F.  Any fences or walls on the property shall comply with Section 19.12.100 (Fences and walls). Acceptable fencing materials may consist of masonry, wrought iron, durable vinyl, or other similar durable materials, as approved by the Director of Community Development. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 8, 10-8-2008)  
19.62.168. - Agricultural wineries in the RE-40 AC Zone. 
Agricultural wineries in the RE-40 AC Zone shall comply with the following provisions in addition to the development criteria of the zone and conditions imposed for the conditional use permit: 
A.  The minimum area devoted to a winery shall be four acres or larger in size on a parcel in the RE-40 AC Zone. 
B.  No restaurant shall be allowed. Only a limited amount of food service may be allowed in conjunction with wine tasting. Food service shall be limited to crackers, appetizers, and hors d'oeuvres; however no full meals shall be served on the premises unless otherwise approved through a Special Event Permit. 
C.  Wine tasting and sales shall include only wine which is produced or bottled on the premises, and may include wine which is produced for the winery and sold under a brand name owned by the winery. Not less than fifty percent of all wines for sale shall be produced on the premises, using grapes grown on the premises. 
D.  Wine tasting, public tours, and limited retail sales of wine and wine-related accessories, such as corkscrews and wine glasses may be permitted as accessory uses only. 
E.  Retail sales of wine and wine tasting are permitted only where grapes for wine production are grown on the premises. 
F.  The size and location of any commercial signage shall be determined by the Planning Commission, but in no case exceed one on-site sign with a maximum of forty square feet in area. 
G.  Any outdoor activity(ies) or event(s) shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission, during consideration of the Conditional Use Permit, or the Director of Community Development in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19.63 (Special Events). 
H.  The facility shall be limited to an Alcoholic Beverage Control license of a Type 02 (Winegrower). 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 9, 10-8-2008)  
19.62.169. - Bed and breakfast inns in the RE-40 AC Zone. 
Bed and breakfast inns in the RE-40 AC Zone shall comply with the following provisions in addition to zone provisions and conditions imposed in a conditional use permit: 
A.  The bed and breakfast inn shall be an architecturally- or historically-unique residential structure, which is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
B.  Any alterations to the structure shall be compatible with the architectural character of the structure. Any modifications to the property shall be compatible with the surrounding area. 
C.  The owner or manager of the bed and breakfast inn shall occupy his or her primary place of residence on the site of the bed and breakfast inn. 
D.  The number of guest rooms permitted will be determined based on the size of the existing building and site, compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, visitor access, and parking. The number of guest rooms shall not exceed five. 
E.  The maximum stay shall be limited to fourteen consecutive days or less. 
F.  Meals shall be limited to breakfast for overnight guests only. 
G.  No cooking facilities shall be provided in individual guest rooms. 
H.  Parking shall be provided at a rate of one off-street parking space per guest room, plus the required parking for the residential use. On-site parking shall be designed and located so as not to detract from the character of the neighborhood. Excessive amounts of paving to meet the parking requirements shall not be allowed. 
I.  Any commercial signage shall be limited to one on-site monument or wall identification sign not to exceed twenty-four square feet in area. Monument signs may not exceed six feet in height. 
J.  Any outdoor activities or events shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission during consideration of the Conditional Use Permit or the Director of Community Development in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19.63 (Special Events). 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 10, 10-8-2008)  
19.62.170 - Revocation of conditional use permits. 
A.  Upon recommendation by the director, the body which initially granted the conditional use permit, shall conduct a noticed public hearing to determine whether such conditional use permit should be revoked. If the granting body finds any one of the following facts to be present, it shall revoke the conditional use permit: 
1.  That the permit was obtained by fraud; 
2.  That the use for which such approval was granted has ceased to exist by reason of a voluntary abandonment; 
3.  That the permit or variance granted is being, or has been exercised contrary to any conditions of approval imposed upon such permit or variance, or in violation of any law; or 
4.  That the use for which the approval was granted is being exercised so as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or so as to constitute a public nuisance. 
B.  If the revocation hearing is conducted by the commission, its decision shall be subject to review on appeal, taken in the time and manner set forth in Section 19.62.090 et seq. hereof. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(I)(1).)  
19.62.180 - Expiration. 
Any conditional use permit shall be null and void if the use granted thereby is not commenced within the time specified in the resolution approving such conditional use permit, or, if no time is so specified, if commencement does not occur within one year from the date the permit is granted. The director of planning and community development or the granting body, upon good cause shown by the applicant, may extend the time limitations imposed pursuant to this section for a period not to exceed one year; provided, that if litigation is filed prior to the exercise of such rights, attacking the validity of such permit, the time for exercising such rights shall be automatically extended pending a final determination of such litigation. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(I)(2).)  
19.62.190 - Modification. 
Any condition imposed upon the granting of a conditional use permit, including a zoning device granted prior to the adoption of these regulations, may be modified or eliminated, or new conditions may be added; provided, that the body which granted the conditional use permit, which is the subject of the modification proceeding, shall first conduct a public hearing thereon, noticed in the same manner as is required for the initial granting of the same. No such modification shall be granted unless the granting body finds that such modification is necessary to protect the public peace, health and safety, or that such action is necessary to permit reasonable operation under the conditional use permit as granted. If the modification hearing is conducted by the commission, its decision shall be subject to review on appeal, taken in the time and manner set forth in Section 19.62.090 et seq. hereof. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9602(I)(3).)  
Chapter 19.63 - SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
19.63.010 - Purpose. 
The special event permit is one which is intended to allow for the short-term placement of activities in temporary facilities or in the out-of-doors, except as otherwise provided. It is primarily intended for activities of a charitable or philanthropic nature except as otherwise permitted by this chapter. All activities shall be regulated so as to avoid incompatibility between such uses and surrounding areas. 
(Ord. 628 § 9 (part), 1987.)  
19.63.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  No use listed in this section may be conducted on any city or private property, unless approval of a special event permit has been granted for that use. 
B.  The following is an exclusive listing of the special events that may be permitted, subject to the issuance of a special event permit in accordance with this chapter: 
1.  City property, including public rights-of-way, sidewalks, and parking lots: 
a.  Organized outdoor recreational activities, including any non-motorized race, walkathon, bike-a-thon or similar type event. 
b.  Parades and ancillary activities. 
c.  Street fairs, carnivals, and outdoor markets. 
d.  Outdoor concerts in public parks. 
e.  Similar special events to items a. thru d. listed in this subsection, which the Director determines to be compatible with the purposes of this chapter and with the applicable zone and surrounding land uses. 
f.  Temporary film production. 
g.  Certified farmers markets. 
2.  Residential Zones — RE (Rural Exclusive), R-1 (Single-Family Residential), RPD (Residential Planned Development), and MPHD (Mobile Home Park Development): 
a.  Outdoor concerts in public parks. 
b.  Community fairs. 
c.  Trade fairs/job fairs. 
d.  Youth, nonprofit, or charitable organization, projects, or events. 
e.  Similar special events to items a. thru d. listed in this subsection, which the director determines to be compatible with the purposes of this chapter and with the applicable zone and surrounding land uses. 
f.  Temporary film production. 
g.  Certified farmers markets. 
3.  Commercial Zones — CPD (Commercial Planned Development), SC (Service Commercial), COT (Camarillo Old Town), CMU (Village Commercial Mixed-Use), and CCM (Camarillo Commons Mixed-Use): 
a.  Auctions. 
b.  Christmas tree lots. 
c.  Certified farmers markets. 
d.  Outdoor carnivals, circuses, rodeos. 
e.  Outdoor concerts. 
f.  Temporary outdoor sales or promotional events in conjunction with a permanent retail facility. 
g.  Youth, nonprofit, or charitable organization, projects, or events. 
h.  Similar special events to items a. thru g. of this subsection, which the director determines to be compatible with the purposes of this chapter and with the zone and surrounding land uses. 
i.  Temporary film production. 
4.  Manufacturing Zones — M-1 (Light Manufacturing), M-2 (General Manufacturing), and L-M (Limited Manufacturing): 
a.  Auctions. 
b.  Promotional events in conjunction with a permanent commercial facility. 
c.  Outdoor concerts. 
d.  Carnivals, circuses, and rodeos. 
e.  Trade fairs/job fairs. 
f.  Youth, nonprofit, or charitable organization, projects, or events. 
g.  Similar special events to items a. thru f. of this subsection, which the director determines to be compatible with the purposes of this chapter and with the zone and surrounding land uses. 
h.  Temporary film production. 
i.  Certified farmers markets. 
5.  Open Space (OS) Zone: 
a.  Organized outdoor recreational activities, including any non-motorized race, walkathon, bike-a-thon or similar type of recreational event. 
b.  Youth, nonprofit, or charitable organization, projects, or events. 
c.  Similar special events to items a. thru b. of this subsection, which the director determines to be compatible with the purposes of this chapter and with the zone and surrounding land uses. 
d.  Temporary film production. 
6.  Agricultural Exclusive (AE) Zone: 
a.  Organized outdoor recreational activities, including any non-motorized race, walkathon, bike-a-thon or similar type of recreational event. 
b.  Outdoor concerts. 
c.  Carnivals, circuses, hayrides, and rodeos. 
d.  Youth, nonprofit, or charitable organization, projects, or events. 
e.  Similar special events to items a. thru d. of this subsection, which the director determines to be compatible with the purposes of this chapter and with the zone and surrounding land uses. 
f.  Temporary film production. 
7.  Professional Office (PO) Zone: 
a.  Trade fairs/job fairs. 
b.  Socials/mixers. 
c.  Similar special events to items a. thru b. of this subsection, which the director determines to be compatible with the purposes of this chapter and with the applicable zone and surrounding land uses. 
d.  Temporary film production. 
(Ord. 1013 § 3, 2007; Ord. 980 § 3, 2005; Ord. 917 § 1, 1999; Ord. 898 § 4, 1998; Ord. 767 § 11, 1992; Ord. 726 §§ 2—4, 1990; Ord. 628 § 9 (part), 1987.) 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 10-8-2014)  
19.63.022 - Film permits. 
A film permit shall be required for the production of a film within the city. 
A.  A written application for a film permit shall be in a form as provided in Section 14999.32 of the Government Code. Each application shall be filed for review with the director of planning and community development ("director") or his or her designated representative, in consultation with other affected city departments, in accordance with the following: 
1.  The director shall expeditiously complete the review process of an application for a film permit, including the coordinating of all other affected city departments; and 
2.  The permit application may be filed by fax or may be filed in person by the applicant. 
B.  The director shall make every reasonable effort to issue or refuse to issue a film permit, within the following time constraints: 
1.  Two working days after the filing of a completed film permit application; 
2.  Four working days after the filing of a completed application, if the application contemplates the interrupting of traffic on a public street for more than three minutes; or 
3.  Where such an application contemplates a street closure, the same shall be submitted to the city council, which body shall consider the same at the earliest lawfully scheduled meeting thereof after filing of the completed application. If approved by the city council or in the event the council is unable to act in the time required by law, by the city manager or his or her designee, the permit shall be issued on the next working day following the meeting of the body which has approved the permit. 
C.  Pursuant to subsection (c) of Section 14999.20 of the Government Code, minor additions, corrections or alterations may be made to a film permit by the director, if a written request for a "rider" therefor is made, and the director finds the public interest requires the same. 
D.  If other governmental agencies have geographical jurisdiction over the location described in the film permit application, the director shall notify such governmental jurisdictions of the pendency of the application; and shall inform the permittee in writing of the other governmental agencies having the jurisdiction. 
E.  The application fee which shall be paid contemporaneously with the filing of the film permit application shall be in an amount set by resolution of the city council, which fee shall not be greater than the actual costs incurred by the city for providing services occasioned by film production activities, including administrative, police, sanitation, traffic control, road closures, barricades and other necessary services. 
F.  The director shall accept from each applicant, the standard insurance coverage form approved by the Department of Commerce of State of California. 
G.  The director shall establish a cancellation fee which shall be a portion of the application fee which shall be applied if the applicant cancels the permit after three p.m. the last working day before the scheduled shoot. 
H.  The production company shall maintain a copy of the approved special event permit on site at all times for the length of the shoot. 
I.  The permit shall expire upon a date established by the director. 
(Ord. 726 § 5, 1990.)  
19.63.028 - Certified farmers markets—Permits. 
No person shall conduct, or permit the conduct, of a certified farmers market unless a permit therefor is first issued pursuant to this title. Applications for a permit for a certified farmers market shall be processed in the manner provided in this chapter. The following additional provisions shall apply to such an application: 
A.  A permit for a certified farmers market may only be issued to a nonprofit organization. 
B.  Each application for such a permit shall designate a person who is authorized by the applicant to be exclusively responsible for activities authorized pursuant to the permit. 
C.  Only foodstuff and merchandise may be offered for sale, or sold at a certified farmers market. 
"Merchandise" means prepared foods, nonalcoholic beverages, and materials prepared specifically for the permittee. Each permit shall contain a condition of approval approving specifically any items of merchandise allowed to be sold at the certified farmers market by the permittee. 
Only a permittee may sell or offer for sale merchandise at a certified farmers market. Foodstuff may be sold at a certified farmers market only by the person who has grown or produced such foodstuff and who holds a valid agricultural certificate. 
D.  Sale of baked goods may be authorized by the operator of the certified farmers market and sold in a location that is separate from the certified farmers' market vendors. The baked goods area shall be clearly marked that the baked goods are not a certified farmers' market product. The baked goods may only be prepared and displayed in a manner allowed by appropriate permits issued by the Ventura County environmental health department. 
E.  The location of each certified farmers market shall be approved by the director; the director shall approve a site only if the same will not adversely affect surrounding and/or adjacent uses of land. 
F.  The number of certified farmers markets and the sales frequency in any calendar year may be limited by the special event permit issued by the director. 
(Ord. 800 § 2, 1993; Ord. 726 § 6, 1990.)  
19.63.030 - Requirements. 
A.  A special event permit shall be approved prior to the commencement of any special event. Application for a special event permit shall be made on an approved application form secured from the department of planning and community development. Such application shall require the information necessary for review of the application by appropriate city departments. Information required shall include the name, address, telephone number and signature of both the applicant and property owner, a location map and plan for the proposed temporary use. 
B.  The director of planning and community development shall cause the application to be circulated to all concerned city and county departments for recommendations. The director of planning and community development shall review the recommendations of the concerned departments and shall notify the applicant of his or her special event approval, conditional approval or disapproval. 
C.  In reviewing an application for a special event permit, the director of planning and community development shall consider the potential effect of such a use on adjacent public and private property, traffic, and local aesthetic impacts, parking, setbacks, structural soundness, site orientation and arrangement, and hours of operation. The director of planning and community development may impose reasonable conditions necessary to mitigate potential adverse impacts. 
D.  Special events may be subject to additional permits, licenses or inspections as required by any applicable law, code or regulation. Special events shall be permitted in residential planned development, commercial planned development, and industrial planned development zones without the necessity of applying for a planned development permit. 
(Ord. 628 § 9 (part), 1987.)  
19.63.040 - General. 
A.  The siting of special events must, to the maximum extent practical, avoid significant reduction in the number of required on-site parking spaces or parking necessary to serve adjoining uses. 
B.  All unimproved areas utilized for the special event must be maintained in a manner to remove any nuisance impacts, which may include dampening of soil, addition of ground cover material, or other approved means. 
C.  Sanitary facilities may be required, either permanent or portable, for all employees, attendants, and participants of the special event during its operational hours as approved in accordance with public health standards. 
D.  Special events are limited to their specific zoning districts in which they are listed as permitted under this chapter. 
E.  The director may regulate the hours of operation and days, including limitation of the duration of the special event to a shorter time period than that requested. 
F.  No nonprofit organization may be issued more than one special event permit in a calendar year for use of the public right-of-way. Special events held in a public park may be limited as to number and frequency of events, excluding events which are sponsored or cosponsored by the city or park district. 
(Ord. 737 § 1, 1991; Ord. 628 § 9 (part), 1987.) 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 4, 10-8-2014)  
19.63.045 - Special Events Sign Program. 
The director may approve a Special Events Sign Program for a non-profit organization, as part of any community special event permit, subject to the following regulations: 
A.  On-Site Signage. 
1.  One on-site banner is permitted per approved event during the day of the event. If the on-site event involves a permitted street closure, one on-site banner is permitted to identify the event at each street closure. 
2.  The banner may not exceed 36 square feet in area and three feet in height. 
3.  When mounted on posts or a fence, the top of the banner may not exceed eight feet in height. If mounted on a building, the banner may not exceed the roofline of the building. 
B.  Off-Site Signage. A permittee may have the following off-site signs, as part of an approved event or events, once per calendar month: 
1.  Off-site banners. 
a.  Up to ten off-site banners are permitted. 
b.  Only two off-site banners may be displayed on a single parcel of two or more acres in size at one time. 
c.  An off-site banner may not exceed 36 square feet in area and three feet in height. 
d.  When mounted on posts, a fence, or a wall, the top of the off-site banner may not exceed eight feet in height. If mounted on a building, the off-site banner may not exceed the roofline of the building. 
e.  Off-site banners may be placed no more than 10 days prior to the event or events being advertised, and must be removed no later than two days after the event. No banner may be posted for longer than 14 consecutive days. 
f.  Each off-site banner must contain a phone number for a contact person associated with the permittee, who will be responsible for the removal of the banner. 
g.  Prior to posting the off-site banners, the permittee must also provide the director with proof of permission to post the banner from the property owner, or the owner's agent, including the phone number of the owner or agent. 
h.  No off-site banners may be placed within a public right-of-way. 
2.  Directional signs. 
a.  The director may approve up to six directional signs, each not to exceed six square feet in area and four feet in height. 
b.  The directional signs are permitted only on private property during the day of the event. 
C.  The terms, "banner," "directional sign," "off-site sign," and "on-site sign," used in this section have the meaning ascribed to such terms in Section 17.04.020 of this Code. 
D.  The director may approve a Special Events Sign Program for a non-profit organization, as part of a community special event held within the City, that does not require a City-approved special event permit, subject to the above regulations (without any required application fee). 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 3, 5-25-2016)  
19.63.050 - Expiration of use. 
A.  All uses permitted by special event permit shall be terminated on or before the expiration date indicated upon the permit. All materials or products used in connection with or resulting from the special event shall be removed at the conclusion of the event or as set forth in the permit. 
B.  A certificate of deposit, or other acceptable security, in an amount set by resolution by the city council to ensure removal of all materials, personal property and structures shall be filed with the director of planning and community development at the time of application for each of the following uses: 
1.  Outdoor carnivals, circuses and rodeos; 
2.  Outdoor concerts; 
3.  Christmas tree lots. 
C.  A certificate of deposit, or other acceptable security, in an amount set by resolution of the city council shall also be required for any other special event which the director of planning and community development finds should be bonded to ensure removal of all materials used in connection with, or resulting from, the use. 
D.  Upon the removal of all materials associated with the approved special event, the applicant shall request an inspection by the department of planning and community development which shall make a determination regarding the release, or other disposition of, the security deposit. 
(Ord. 628 § 9 (part), 1987.)  
19.63.060 - Permit denial; revocation; appeal; review. 
A.  Permit Denial. If, in the opinion of the director after consultation with any other affected city or county department, the impacts which may result from a proposed special event could be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare and the potential adverse impacts are not able to be sufficiently mitigated, or the proposed event does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, then the application for a permit may be denied. The applicant may appeal the denial as provided for in this section. 
B.  Permit Revocation. A special event permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may be revoked if the director finds that any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  That any condition of the special event permit or provision of this chapter or code has been violated. 
2.  That the special event has become detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or constitutes a nuisance as designated in Chapter 9.12 of this Code. 
3.  That the permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner. 
The director's decision may be appealed to the planning commission as provided in this section; provided, however, that the filing of such appeal will not stay the enforcement of the director's revocation order. 
C.  Appeal to Planning Commission. Appeals from any decision of the director must be made in writing and filed with the department of community development within ten days from the date of the issuance of the director's decision. The appeal must be made on the approved form available from the department of community development and must include the date of appeal, the grounds for the appeal, and the appeal processing fee established by the city council. The appeal will be final with the planning commission on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, absent a timely adopted order of review by the city council as provided in this section. 
D.  City Council Review. Before a planning commission decision under subsection C. becomes final, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership, may issue an order to review such decision. 
1.  The timely adoption by the city council of an order of review will stay the decision of the planning commission to which the order of review relates, pending the city council action on the matter. 
2.  If the city council timely adopts an order of review, the city clerk will: 
a.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
b.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the applicant. 
3.  At the time and place of the hearing on an order of review, the city council will conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons will be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The applicant will have the burden of proof to show the existence of the facts which warrant the granting of a special event permit. 
4.  The city clerk will give written notice of the city council's decision to the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination will be final, subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 628 § 9 (part), 1987.) 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 5, 10-8-2014)  
19.63.061 - Fees and insurance coverage. 
A.  The city may establish fees by resolution to cover the cost for processing the special event permit or the cost for special services provided by the city personnel and employees and equipment in addition to requiring appropriate insurance to indemnify the city for public liability and property damage for the day or days of the event. The insurance required shall be provided prior to the event. 
B.  As a condition of any special event permit, the applicant shall be required to sign an agreement approved by the city attorney, to indemnify and hold harmless the city from all activities undertaken pursuant to the permit. 
(Ord. 628 § 9 (part), 1987.)  
Chapter 19.64 - REGULATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*[] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior history: Prior code §§ 9604, 9604.1, 9604.2 and 9604.3. Ords. 403,493 and 824. 
 
19.64.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of the city council in enacting this chapter is to regulate sexually oriented businesses which, unless closely regulated, will have serious adverse secondary effects on the community, which include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Depreciation of property values and an increase in vacancies in residential and commercial areas located adjacent to sexually oriented businesses; and 
2.  Interference with the peaceful use and possession by property owners of their property when such properties are located in the vicinity of sexually oriented businesses; and 
3.  Increases in litter, noise and vandalism resulting from the operation of sexually oriented businesses; and 
4.  Higher crime rates in the vicinity of sexually oriented businesses; and 
5.  Great impacts upon city supplied public safety services; and 
6.  Blighting conditions, including lowered maintenance levels of buildings and structures located on a lot upon which a sexually oriented business is located. 
B.  The special regulation of sexually oriented businesses, as set forth in this chapter is necessary to prevent or mitigate adverse secondary effects arising out of the operation of sexually oriented businesses. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed or interpreted to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any constitutionally protected communicative activity or material, nor to restrict or deny access by adults to such activities or materials. 
D.  The provisions of this chapter shall not be interpreted to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building, structure, use or activity in violation of any applicable law. 
(Ord. 851 § 2 (part), 1996.)  
19.64.020 - Definitions. 
The definitions contained in Chapter 19.04 shall be applied to the provisions of this chapter, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended. 
(Ord. 851 § 2 (part), 1996.)  
19.64.030 - Location—Sexually oriented businesses location in L-M, M-1 and M-2 Zones. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, subject to compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the zoning regulations applicable to zones L-M, M-1 and M-2, sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted as uses on lots classified in the L-M, M-1 and M-2 zones. 
(Ord. 851 § 2 (part), 1996.)  
19.64.040 - Limitation on locations of sexually oriented businesses. 
A.  Sexually oriented businesses shall observe the following locational requirements: 
1.  A sexually oriented business shall not be located within five hundred feet of another sexually oriented business; and 
2.  A sexually oriented business shall not be located within five hundred feet of a lot which is zoned in any of the residential zones; and 
3.  A sexually oriented business shall not be located within one thousand feet of an educational institution; and 
4.  A sexually oriented business shall not be located within one thousand feet of a church; and 
5.  A sexually oriented business shall not be located within one thousand feet of a public park and/or recreation facility. 
B.  The distances set forth above shall be measured from the building which houses a sexually oriented business on a lot or is proposed to be located, to the closest point on a lot line of a lot upon which is located on educational institution, a church, a park, a residentially zoned and used lot, or a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. 851 § 2 (part), 1996.)  
19.64.050 - Regulations applicable to the conduct of sexually oriented businesses. 
A.  Fire Regulations. Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and utilized in accordance with the provisions of the code. 
B.  Observation Outside of Building. No sexually oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any location outside the building housing a sexually oriented business. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. 
C.  Lighting. Off-Street Parking. Lighting shall be required which is designed to illuminate all off-street parking areas serving a sexually oriented business for the purpose of increasing the personal safety of patrons and reducing the incidents of vandalism and theft. Said lighting shall be shown on a plot plan which shall be submitted to the director for review and approval. 
D.  Lighting Interior. Except as otherwise required by law for sexually oriented theaters, and sexually oriented arcades, with regard to sexually oriented businesses providing live entertainment, all areas of each sexually oriented business accessible to patrons shall be illuminated at least to the extent of twenty foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level. 
E.  Illumination. It shall be the duty of the owner(s) and/or operators and all employees of a sexually oriented business to ensure that the illumination of the interior of the building housing a sexually oriented business required pursuant to this chapter is maintained in compliance herewith at all times when such sexually oriented business is open for business. 
F.  Sound Equipment. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used by a sexually oriented business for the amplification of sound to a level discernible by any person outside of the building in which such use is conducted. 
G.  Minors. Signage. Each entrance to a building housing a sexually oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that minors are not allowed to enter or be on the premises. Said notice shall be constructed and posted at locations designated by the director. 
H.  Location in Buildings. Each sexually oriented business shall be located in a building. 
I.  Special Events. No sexually oriented business shall conduct or sponsor any special events, promotions, festivals, concerts or similar activities which would increase the demand for parking spaces beyond the approved number of spaces for such business. 
J.  Prohibited Activities. No sexually oriented business shall conduct or offer any massage, acupuncture, tattooing, acupressure or escort services and shall not allow such activities on the premises. 
K.  Security. Any sexually oriented business which allows customers to remain on the premises while viewing any live, filmed or recorded material shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  Security. At least one security guard who shall be on duty primarily outside the building(s) which house the sexually oriented business who shall patrol the grounds and parking areas, at all times while the business is open. The security guard shall also periodically patrol the interior of such building(s), and shall be available to assist the manager in controlling activities of patrons of the sexually oriented business. If the occupancy limit of the building which houses the sexually oriented business is greater than fifty persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty at all times when the sexually oriented business is open for business. The security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of this chapter, and notifying the city police department and code enforcement department of any violations of law observed. Any security guard required by this subsection shall be uniformed in such manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state and/or local law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a doorperson, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person or in any other activity which is not directly related to security activities while acting as a security guard hereunder. 
2.  Noise. The building housing a sexually oriented business shall provide sufficient sound absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside the building shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building. 
3.  Windows. No exterior door or window in a building housing a sexually oriented business shall be propped or kept open at any time while such sexually oriented business is open for business. All exterior windows in such a building shall be covered with opaque view obscuring material subject to approval of the director, at all times. 
4.  Interior Screening. Permanent barriers shall be installed and maintained to screen the interior of a building housing a sexually oriented business from public view at each door used as an entrance/exit to such building. 
L.  Interior Viewing Required. All indoor areas of a building housing a sexually oriented business where patrons are permitted, except for restrooms shall be open to view from within such building at all times. 
M.  Exterior Viewing Prohibited. No sexually oriented material shall be displayed in such a manner as to be visible outside of a building housing a sexually oriented business. 
N.  Minors Prohibited. No minor shall be permitted within a sexually oriented business at any time. 
O.  Restroom Facilities. Each sexually oriented business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees and for female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except for employees of such businesses while carrying out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. No sexually oriented material shall be displayed or stored in restrooms. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The provisions of this subsection requiring restroom facilities shall not be applicable to a sexually oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of sexually oriented material which is not used, viewed or consumed on the premises. 
P.  Hours of Operation. Sexually oriented businesses shall be open for business or operating only during the hours of eight a.m. through ten p.m. on Sundays through Thursdays; and from ten a.m. to midnight on Fridays and Saturdays. 
Q.  Plan. A diagram shall be submitted by the owner or operator of each sexually oriented business of the premises for approval by the director, which shall show thereon the specific location of at least one manager station; the location of all overhead lighting fixtures; and designating each portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight feet. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station(s) as shown on a plan as filed may be made without the prior approval of the director. No retail sales, or other nonoffice activities shall be permitted in a manager's station. 
R.  Presence of Employees. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of each sexually oriented arcade to ensure that at least one employee is physically present and on duty at each manager's station shown on the plan as approved, at all times during which the sexually oriented arcade is open for business. 
S.  Configuration of Interiors. The interior of each sexually oriented arcade shall be configured in such a manner so that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station to every area of the sexually oriented arcade to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. The unobstructed view requirement of this subsection will only be met by a direct line of sight from the manager's station to all such public accessible areas. 
T.  Individual Viewing Area. No individual viewing area may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. 
U.  Live Entertainment Regulations. Where live entertainment is permitted as an activity conducted by a sexually oriented business: 
1.  The live entertainment shall only be conducted upon a stage at least eighteen inches above the level of the floor which stage is separated by a distance of at least six feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and fixed rail(s) at least thirty inches in height shall be maintained at a sexually oriented business offering live entertainment establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons. No patron shall be permitted within six feet of a stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer; and 
2.  Each sexually oriented business permitted to provide live entertainment shall provide and maintain access for entertainers between the stage and dressing and restroom facilities which are completely separated from areas in which patrons are allowed, so as to prevent physical contact between patrons and entertainers; and 
3.  No entertainer at a sexually oriented business shall have any physical contact with any patron and no patron of a sexually oriented business shall have any physical contact with any entertainer while on the premises where the sexually oriented business is located; and 
4.  Each sexually oriented business which provides live entertainment, shall maintain separate dressing room and restroom facilities for entertainers in which members of the public shall not be permitted. 
V.  Sale of Alcoholic Beverages. It is unlawful to sell, serve or permit the consumption of any alcohol beverage in a building housing a sexually oriented business. 
W.  Persons under the Influence. It is unlawful for any person under the influence of alcohol or controlled substance to enter or remain on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time. A sign giving notice of this provision shall be prominently posted at each entrance to the premises of each sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. 851 § 2 (part), 1996.)  
19.64.060 - Other regulations. 
Compliance with the regulations set forth in this chapter shall not excuse noncompliance with any other applicable laws or regulations pertaining to the operation of sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, the zoning regulations applicable to the lot upon which the sexually oriented business is located. 
(Ord. 851 § 2 (part), 1996.)  
19.64.070 - Violations—Penalties. 
Any firm, corporation or person, whether principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter 19.64, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. 
(Ord. 851 § 2 (part), 1996.)  
19.64.080 - Public nuisance. 
In addition to the penalties set forth at Section 19.64.070 et seq., of this chapter, any sexually oriented business which is operating in violation of any provision of this chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation, by any lawful proceeding, administrative, or judicial in nature. 
(Ord. 851 § 2 (part), 1996.)  
19.64.090 - Compliance with applicable law. 
Each sexually oriented business shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, and every other applicable law, including, but not limited to, provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 851 § 2 (part), 1996.)  
19.64.100 - Regulation of sale of sexually oriented materials by a commercial enterprise which is not a sexually oriented business. 
A.  Application of Section. Any commercial enterprise located in the city which offers sexually oriented materials for sale shall not be deemed to be a sexually oriented business within the meaning of Chapter 19.64 of the official zoning ordinance of the city, if: 
1.  The area used for the display of sexually oriented materials offered for sale equals twenty-four percent or less of the total display area of the commercial establishment; and 
2.  Twenty-four percent or less of the gross receipts of the commercial establishment are derived from the sale of sexually oriented materials. 
B.  Covering Required. A commercial establishment described in subsection A of this Section 19.64.100, which offers for sale sexually oriented materials shall display such sexually oriented materials with a covering which conceals from the view of minors, the content, including the cover, of all such sexually oriented materials, provided that the trade name of the sexually oriented material may be printed on the covering. 
C.  Employee Assistance. Any person who owns, conducts, operates or manages any commercial establishment which offers sexually oriented materials for sale shall store or display such sexually oriented materials only in an area which is not accessible to members of the public without assistance of an employee of the commercial establishment. 
(Ord. 851 § 2 (part), 1996.)  
19.64.110 - Administrative and judicial appeals. 
A.  Application of Section. Any person who has made an application pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of conducting a sexually oriented business regulated by this chapter, whose application has been denied for any reason, or any interested person who is aggrieved by a decision granting or denying an application shall have the right to administrative and judicial appeals in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
B.  Action of Director. 
1.  The director of planning and community development of the city shall within a period of five working days after the filing of an application issue a decision approving or disapproving such application. The director shall disapprove an application if he finds that the same does not meet the requirements of this chapter. In such case, the director's decision shall contain a brief statement indicating how and in what manner the application and/or the proposed usage does not comply with this chapter. If the director finds that the application complies with the provisions of this chapter, he shall render a decision approving the application. 
2.  The director shall give notice of the decision not more than two business days after rendering the decision. Such notices shall be given to the applicant and to any person who has requested such notice. 
3.  The decision of the director shall become final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive day after the giving of notice by the director of the decision. The director's decision shall be stayed by the timely filing of an appeal pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
C.  Right to Administrative Appeal. Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the director with respect to an application shall have the right of administrative appeal pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
D.  Administrative Appeal to Planning Commission. Within ten consecutive days following the giving of a notice of the director's decision relating to an application, the applicant or any other interested person who is aggrieved by such decision, may file a written appeal with the secretary of the planning commission appealing the director's decision to the commission. Such an appeal shall include a statement of the grounds for such appeal and shall be accompanied by a filing and processing fee in an amount set by the resolution of the city council. 
E.  Action on Administrative Appeal. The secretary upon receipt of a timely filed appeal from director's decision and evidence of the payment of the filing and processing fee, shall, within five business days after the timely filing of an appeal, cause to be prepared and delivered to the commission, the appealing party and any person requesting the same, a complete transcript of the proceeding which led to the director's decision on the application. The secretary shall set the matter for a de novo appeal hearing before the commission, at its next most convenient meeting, not later than twenty (20) days following the filing of the appeal. The secretary shall give not less than ten days' written notice of the time and place of the de novo appeal hearing before the commission, to the applicant, the appealing party and any other party who requests such notice. 
F.  Action by Commission Hearing. 
1.  At the time and place of a hearing on an administrative appeal, the commission shall permit any interested person to present relevant reliable evidence relating to the issues involved in the de novo appeal hearing. The commission shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence applicable to a judicial action; provided that the commission shall follow the substance of such rules so that the matter is determined based upon reliable, competent, relevant evidence. The commission shall, based upon the evidence presented, within fifteen calendar days following the close of the hearing, determine the matter based the evidence so presented. The commission shall approve the application if the evidence demonstrates that the use proposed by the application, if permitted, would meet all of the requirements of the chapter. The commission shall deny the application if it finds that the use proposed by the application would not comply with the provisions of this chapter. The secretary within two working days following the commission's decision, shall give notice of the commission's decision to the applicant, the appealing party and other person who has requested such notice. 
2.  The commission's decision shall be final and conclusive in the absence of the filing of a timely appeal as provided in this section. 
G.  Administration Appeal to City Council. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission on an application, may file a written appeal, appealing its decision to the city council. No such appeal shall be accepted or be valid for any purpose unless it is filed with the city clerk within ten days following the giving of notice of the commission's decision, and is accompanied by the filing and processing fee in an amount set by a city council resolution. Any such appeal shall contain a brief statement of the grounds for such an appeal. The commission's decision shall be stayed upon the timely filing of an appeal. 
H.  Action by City Council. 
1.  Upon receipt of a written appeal, appealing the planning commission's decision to the city council, the city clerk shall, within two business days after the filing of such appeal set the matter for a hearing before the city council at its next most convenient meeting, not more than twenty consecutive calendar days from and after the filing of an appeal. The city clerk shall cause to be prepared the complete transcript of the proceedings before the director and the planning commission and shall transmit the same together with applicable staff reports to the city council prior to the time set for hearing. In addition, a copy of such transcript shall be made available to the applicant, the appealing party and any other interested person requesting the same. 
2.  At the time set for the hearing, the city council shall consider the appeal based exclusively upon the transcript. The applicant, the appealing party and/or any other interested person may submit to the city council written arguments in favor of, or in opposition to, the decision made by the planning commission. No additional evidence shall be accepted by the city council unless there is a showing by the person offering such evidence, that such evidence was not reasonably available at the time of the planning commission hearing in the exercise of due diligence by the person offering the same. Any interested person shall have the opportunity to point out, in writing to the city council any perceived defect or omission in the transcript as prepared. If warranted, the city council may direct the preparation of such additional material as may have been omitted or inaccurately stated in the transcript. The city council may, for that purpose only, continue the hearing to its next regular meeting. If the city council determines that the use proposed by the application would meet the requirements of this chapter, it shall approve the application. If it finds that the proposed use would not comply with the provisions of this chapter, it shall disapprove the application. The city council's decision concerning such an appeal shall be final and conclusive unless a written demand is made for judicial arbitration pursuant to this section. 
3.  The city clerk shall, within two calendar days following the council action, give notice of the city council's decision to the applicant, the appealing party and to any other person requesting such notice. 
I.  Judicial Arbitration. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council with respect to an application shall have the right to demand judicial arbitration as provided in this section. Any such demand for judicial arbitration shall be made within ten calendar days following the giving of notice of the city council's decision on an appeal. Any such demand for judicial arbitration shall contain a statement of reasons as to why the city council's action was not appropriate or was erroneous. Any such appeal shall be accompanied by a filing and processing fee in an amount set by city council resolution. The city clerk shall, within two consecutive working days following the filing of such a demand, shall give notice to the appealing party, the applicant and any other person requesting the same, of the time and place of the judicial arbitration. 
J.  Judicial Arbitration. 
1.  Upon receipt of a demand for judicial arbitration, the city manager of city shall prepare and submit to the party, demanding judicial arbitration, a list containing the names of three retired superior court judges. The names of the judges on the list shall be numbered consecutively. 
2.  The demanding party, within ten calendar days after service of the list, shall either: 
a.  Select one of the named retired judges to act as the judicial arbitrator, in which case that retired judge shall serve in that capacity; or 
b.  Strike one name from the list and return the list to the city manager. 
3.  Upon expiration of such ten-day period, if the demanding party does not strike a name, the judicial arbitrator shall be the retired judge on the list with the lowest number next to his or her name. 
4.  If the demanding party strikes a name from the list the city manager of city may strike the name of any retired judge whose name remains on the list. The retired judge whose name remains on the list shall be designated as the judicial arbitrator. If the city manager does not strike a name from the list, the city manager shall resubmit the list to the demanding party and that party may strike one name from the list. If the demanding party strikes a name from the list, the remaining named retired judge shall serve as the judicial arbitrator. If the demanding party does not strike a name from the list, then the retired judge whose name appears on the list with the lowest number next to his or her name shall act in the capacity as judicial arbitrator. 
5.  If, for any reason, the designated retired judge is unwilling or unable to serve as the judicial arbitrator, the judge on the list with the next lower number whose name was not stricken shall be the judicial arbitrator. In the event that none of the three retired judges named on a list are willing or able to serve as the judicial arbitrator, the city manager shall prepare and submit a new list containing the names of three different retired judges, and the above described procedure shall be followed until a judicial arbitrator is selected. 
6.  The demanding party and the city shall each pay one-half of the compensation to be paid to the judicial arbitrator, and except as otherwise expressly provided herein, each party shall bear its own costs and expenses of arbitration, including, but not limited to, attorneys' fees and related costs. 
7.  By way of illustration, if the list served by the city manager, upon the demanding party, has the names of three retired judges, A, B and C, numbered 1, 2 and 3, respectively; and numbers 1 and 2 are stricken, then C, number 3, shall be deemed, for all purposes, to be the designated judicial arbitrator. 
8.  The judicial arbitrator shall, in conducting the hearing, follow the rules of procedure applicable to a mandamus proceeding under Section 1085 or 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
9.  If the judicial arbitrator finds that the use proposed by the application would comply with the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall order city to approve the application. If the judicial arbitrator finds that the use proposed would not comply with provisions of this chapter, he or she shall order the city to disapprove the application. 
10.  The judicial arbitrator shall render a decision resolving all issues presented by the appeal within ten consecutive calendar days following the close of the hearing. The judicial arbitrator's decision shall include a statement of the relevant facts and the conclusion of the judicial arbitrator based upon the facts so adduced. 
11.  The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and conclusive. 
K.  Alternative Method of Judicial Review. Any person who has standing to seek judicial review of an action taken by the city with respect to the permitting process applicable to a sexually oriented business pursuant to this section may seek such review pursuant to the provisions of that section or, in the discretion of the person seeking such review, pursuant to the provisions of Section 1094.8 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. 930 § 1, 1999; Ord. 919 § 2, 1999.)  
Chapter 19.65 - HOME OCCUPATIONS 
 
19.65.010 - Purpose. 
Home occupations in residential zones are not a right but a privilege and are intended to provide, as a matter of convenience, certain types of business uses where the use is clearly ancillary to the residential use of the property. Under specific guidelines, these provisions establish a comprehensive set of regulations to determine if a business activity occurring in residential structures is appropriate. In order to minimize potential interference with the intended residential use of the property, businesses conducted as home occupations would be limited to certain types of uses with only those members of the residential family who reside at the residence being able to conduct or participate in the business. Home occupations will be reviewed on an individual basis to ensure compatibility with and avoid any impact on the residential quality of life and property values within the zone. Any use which has the significant potential to impact that quality of life or change the character of the area would not be permitted, and any use which does not conduct its operation within these guidelines would be subject to revocation. 
(Ord. 713 § 5 (part), 1990.)  
19.65.020 - Requirements. 
A.  A home occupation permit is required prior to commencing any business activity in a single residential detached unit except for a cottage food operation, which requires a special cottage food operation permit under Chapter 19.74 of this code. The application for a home occupation permit must be filed on an application form provided by the department of community development and accompanied by the applicable filing fee. 
B.  Upon filing a complete application, the director will cause to be conducted an inspection of the premises for which the application was filed and will provide written notification either approving or denying the application. 
C.  A home occupation permit may be issued if the director determines that such use complies with the following provisions: 
1.  No employment at the residence other than members of the resident family who reside in the dwelling, except in the case of large family day care facility; 
2.  No use of materials or mechanical equipment at the residence or stored at the residence except that maintained on a vehicle or not recognized as being part of a normal household or hobby use; 
3.  No direct sale of products from the premises; 
4.  The use may not create pedestrian or vehicular traffic other than normal to the single-family residential use of said premises except for certain instructional or tutorial uses; 
5.  The use may not involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises other than normal mail delivery services; 
6.  The use may not involve excessive or unsightly storage of materials or supplies indoors and outdoors; 
7.  The use may not involve any advertising or signs advertising the location of said residence; 
8.  Not more than one room in a dwelling may be employed by the home occupation except for small and large day care facilities; 
9.  No building or space outside the main building may be used for home occupational purposes other than limited storage of materials in any garage or accessory building; 
10.  The single-family residential character of the main building or of the premises may not be altered by the use or occupancy; 
11.  There is no use of utility or community facilities beyond that normal to the use of the property for residential purposes; 
12.  No refuse or trash may be generated in quantities or types not normally associated with a residential use; 
13.  A home occupation may not create a violation and no permit will be approved if any violations exist relating to the building code, municipal code or zoning ordinance relative to the subject property; 
14.  The residential unit must be maintained in keeping with the neighborhood as to upkeep, maintenance and appearance; 
15.  There may be no objectionable or offensive aspects of the home occupation which would provide quantities of the following not normal in the residential area in which the home occupation occurs: noise, light, vibration, smoke odor, humidity, radiation, heat, cold, glare, dust or dirt, electrical interference, abnormal pedestrian activity, abnormal vehicular traffic, television or radio interference or other objectionable or offensive conditions which would adversely affect the property value in the neighborhood or be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare as determined by the director; 
16.  The home occupation may not make use of explosives or highly combustible or toxic materials in accordance with the Uniform Building Code, the fire code, and any other applicable regulations beyond that normal to a single-family residence; 
17.  The use may not violate the city's sign code (Chapter 17.04) by displaying at any location on the premises, contrary to the sign code, any advertisement that a business is being conducted at the residence. No home occupation permit will be issued if any state or other licensing permit requires any signage as prohibited by the sign code; 
18.  In a cluster residential project with five units per acre or greater which have been developed on the property, the use may not involve or create the need for more than the parking which has been assigned to the individual unit or occupy more parking spaces than that assigned to that unit; 
19.  If the use is in a cluster housing project with a density greater than five units per acre, it may not generate sound or music for extended periods of time unless it can be shown that the use will not be an inconvenience or nuisance to adjoining uses; 
20.  If the use is in a cluster housing project with a density of five units per acre or greater, the applicant must submit written evidence from the apartment owner, manager or other controlling person or entity that such use is authorized at or in the project; 
21.  Large family day cares are also required to comply with Section 19.44.050(8) and the following: 
a.  There must be a minimum separation of three hundred feet between properties upon which a large day care use is located; provided, that this regulation applies only to a large family day care use that is commenced on or after March 22, 1993, 
b.  Vehicles picking up and dropping off children may not block existing drives or block circulation in the public street, 
c.  Outdoor activities must be controlled to maintain the noise level for a residential zone and must be primarily limited to an area in the rear yard or rear and side yards. 
D.  Personal service uses involving the instruction or tutoring of an individual may be allowed subject to approval by the director if the use is in keeping with the stated intent of the section and not determined to be potentially detrimental to adjoining uses. Special conditions may be attached including hours of operation to help minimize any potential problems. 
(Ord. 801 § 1, 1993; Ord. 773 § 15, 1993; Ord. 720 § 2, 1990: Ord. 713 § 5 (part), 1990.) 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 4(Exh. B), 9-25-2013)  
19.65.030 - Uses prohibited. 
The following uses are expressly prohibited as home occupations: 
A.  The repair, reconditioning, servicing or manufacture of any internal combustion or diesel engines or of any motor vehicle; 
B.  Repair, fix-it or plumbing shops; 
C.  Uses which entail the harboring, training, breeding, raising or grooming of dogs, cats or other animals on the premises; 
D.  Uses which entail food handling, processing or packing; 
E.  Any use which involves customers on the premises other than instructors or tutoring uses as described in Section 19.65.020(D); 
F.  Uses which require the storage or use of explosives or highly combustible or toxic materials beyond that permitted by the building code, fire code, Tanner Plan or other adopted restriction; 
G.  Uses which involve commercial vehicles (with a gross weight of ten thousand pounds or greater) within a residential area; 
H.  Uses which require a license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
(Ord. 1001 § 2, 2007: Ord. 1000 § 2, 2007: Ord. 821 § 10, 1994; Ord. 713 § 5 (part), 1990.)  
19.65.040 - Denial and revocation of permit. 
A home occupation permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may be revoked if the director of planning and community development finds that any of the following conditions exist. 
A.  That any condition of the home occupation permit has been violated; 
B.  That the use has become detrimental to the public health or safety, or constitutes a nuisance as designated in Chapter 9.12 of this code; 
C.  That the permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner; 
D.  That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased for a minimum of six consecutive months or longer; 
E.  That the condition of the premises or of the area of which it is a part has changed so that the use is no longer considered compatible under the meaning and intent of this section; 
F.  The business has not maintained a current business license; 
G.  That complaints received by persons affected by the operation of a home occupation permit have been substantiated by the department of planning and community development. 
(Ord. 713 § 5 (part), 1990.)  
19.65.050 - Permit nontransferable. 
A home occupation permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferred, assigned or used by any person other than the permittee, nor shall said use be at any location other than the one for which the permit is granted. 
(Ord. 713 § 5 (part), 1990.)  
19.65.060 - Fees required. 
The city has established by resolution a fee necessary to cover the cost of processing home occupation applications. 
(Ord. 713 § 5 (part), 1990.)  
Chapter 19.66 - VARIANCES 
 
19.66.010 - Intent and purpose. 
Where practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the general purposes of this title would occur from its strict literal interpretation and enforcement, a variance may be granted authorizing, upon such terms and conditions as are deemed necessary, such variances therefrom as may be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title, so that its spirit shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. A variance will not be granted to permit a use not permitted in the zone by this title. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9605 (part).)  
19.66.020 - Findings and conditions. 
A.  Before any variance is approved, the applicant shall show and the planning commission shall so find that all four of the following conditions exist in reference to the property being considered: 
1.  Because of special circumstances applicable to subject property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning regulations would deprive subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone classification. 
2.  Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which subject property is situated. 
3.  The granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience, or welfare or injurious to property and improvements in the same vicinity and zone in which subject property is situated. 
4.  The granting of such variance will not adversely affect the general plan for the city. 
5.  The commission, in approving a variance, may set forth in its decision reasonable conditions which shall assure the intent and purpose of this title. 
B.  A time limit of one hundred eighty days for occupancy or commencement of construction shall be assumed unless some other period is established. An extension of said time limit may be considered by the planning director and granted upon a written request by the applicant showing a demonstration of cause. The decision of the director may be appealed to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9605(A).)  
19.66.030 - Procedure—Application. 
A.  Filing. Application for a variance shall be filed by the owner of the property for which the variance is sought, by the lessee having a leasehold interest of not less than twenty-five years exclusive of an option to renew, or by the agent of any of the foregoing duly authorized in writing. 
B.  Form and Contents. Application shall be made to the commission on forms furnished by the planning department and shall set forth in detail the reasons for the requested variance, indicating how the conditions set forth in Section 19.66.020 are satisfied, and shall provide other information as may be prescribed by the commission to assist in determining the validity of the request. The application shall be verified before a notary public by the applicant and by the property owner, and the date of verification shall be noted on the application. In addition, a list of all property owners from the last equalized ownership roll within a three-hundred foot radius of the subject property and a map showing all adjoining parcels shall be provided. An incomplete application shall not be accepted for filing. 
C.  Development Plan. Development plans and elevations of the proposed development shall be submitted as a part of any application with sufficient number as determined by the planning director in accordance with the following: 
1.  An accurately dimensioned plot plan showing existing and proposed topography, all proposed building, parking, landscaping areas, walls and all existing or proposed streets within a three-hundred-foot radius of the property; 
2.  The dimension of all yards, setbacks, parking area, driveways and square footage of all building landscaping and building coverage; 
3.  The elevation of all buildings proposed with a notation of the type of material proposed in addition to a color and material sample. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9605(B)(1).)  
19.66.040 - Procedure—Filing fee. 
When the application for a variance is filed, a uniform fee shall be paid as set forth by city council resolution for the purpose of defraying the costs incidental to the proceedings. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9605(B)(2).)  
19.66.050 - Procedure—Investigation. 
The planning director shall make an investigation of the facts beating on each case to provide the information necessary for action consistent with the intent and purpose of this title, and shall report the findings to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9605(B)(3).)  
19.66.060 - Commission public hearing date and notice. 
A.  The hearing date will be set by the community development department for not less than ten nor more than thirty days after the filing of the verified application with the department. 
B.  Notice of the public hearing will be provided in accordance with Chapter 19.84. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9605(B) (4).) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(W), 5-25-2018)  
19.66.070 - Commission public hearing and decision. 
A.  The commission shall, not less than ten nor more than thirty days after the mailing of the legal notice of a public hearing on a variance application, hold the public hearing. Such hearings may be continued by the planning commission for good cause. 
B.  The planning commission shall announce and record its decision within thirty days after the conclusion of the hearing. Such decision shall be an approval with the stated conditions, if imposed; or shall be a disapproval of the application and shall set forth findings in support of that decision. Any approval of a variance shall include the findings and conditions in Section 19.66.020. 
(Ord. 856 § 18, 1996: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9605(B)(5).)  
19.66.080 - Planning commission decisions—Appeals—Council review. 
A.  Effective Date of Planning Commission Decision. Decisions of the planning commission approving, denying or conditionally approving, an application for a variance shall be final and conclusive on the tenth consecutive calendar day following the date of the planning commission's decision, unless an effective timely and complete appeal is filed, or a city council review is ordered as provided in this Section. 
B.  Form of Appeal. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, an appeal from a decision of the planning commission relating to a variance shall not be valid or effective for any purpose unless it meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Each such appeal shall be in writing on a form provided by the director of planning and community development of the city ("director"), and shall identify the planning commission's action to which the appeal relates; and 
2.  Each such appeal shall be filed with the director prior to the planning commission decision to which the appeal relates becoming final, as provided in subsection A of this section; and 
3.  Each such appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by the city council; and 
4.  Each such appeal is filed by or on behalf of any of the following: 
a.  The owner of any real property located within the city, or 
b.  A person who lawfully occupies or is entitled to lawfully occupy any real property which is located within three hundred feet of the lot lines of the lot or lots which are the subject of the variance, or 
c.  Any interested person. 
C.  Effectiveness of an Appeal. No appeal shall be deemed complete nor effective for any purpose unless it complies with all of the provisions of this Section. 
D.  Review by City Council. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section to the contrary, the city council, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before a planning commission decision becomes final pursuant to subsection A of this section, may issue an order to review, de novo, a planning commission decision relating to a variance ("order of review"). 
E.  Stay of Proceedings. The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the city council of an order of review shall stay the decision of the planning commission to which the appeal or order of review relates pending the city council action on the matter. 
F.  Action of City Clerk. Upon the timely filing of an effective appeal or the adoption of a timely order of review, the city clerk will: 
1.  Set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council; and 
2.  Give written mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and such other persons and entities in accordance with Section 19.84.030 of this code. 
G.  Action by the City Council. At the time and place of the hearing on an appeal or an order of review, the city council shall conduct a de novo hearing on the matter, at which time all interested persons shall be allowed to present relevant reliable evidence to the city council. The technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings need not be observed, provided that the matter is resolved by the city council based upon reliable relevant evidence. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show the existence of the facts which warrant the granting of the variance. 
H.  City Council Decision. The city clerk shall give written notice of the city council's decision to the appellant, the applicant and any other interested person who requests such notice. The city council's determination shall be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 844 § 19, 1996: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9605(C).) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(X), 5-25-2018)  
19.66.090 - Revocation of variances. 
A.  Upon recommendation by the director, the body which initially granted a zone variance shall conduct a noticed public hearing to determine whether such variance should be revoked. If the granting body finds any one of the following facts to be present, it shall revoke the variance: 
1.  That the variance was obtained by fraud; or 
2.  That the use for which such approval was granted has ceased to exist by reason of a voluntary abandonment; or 
3.  That the permit or variance granted is being, or has been exercised contrary to any conditions of approval imposed upon such permit or variance, or in violation of any law; or 
4.  That the use for which the approval was granted is being exercised so as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or so as to constitute a public nuisance. 
B.  If the revocation hearing is conducted by the commission, its decision shall be subject to review on appeal, taken in the time and manner set forth in Section 19.66.060 et seq. hereof. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9605(D)(1).)  
19.66.100 - Expiration of variances. 
Any zone variance shall be null and void if the use granted is not commenced within the time specified in the resolution approving the zone variance, or, if no time is so specified, if commencement does not occur within one year from the date the zone variance is granted. Upon the showing of good cause by the applicant, the director of community development or the planning commission may extend the zone variance for additional twelve-month periods. If any litigation is filed attacking the validity of the variance prior to the exercise of such rights, the time for exercising the zone shall be automatically extended pending a final determination of the litigation. 
(Ord. 856 § 20, 1996: Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9605(D)(2).)  
19.66.110 - Modification of variance. 
Any condition imposed upon the granting of a zone variance, including a zoning device granted prior to the adoption of these regulations, may be modified or eliminated, or new conditions may be added; provided, that the body which granted the zone variance, which is the subject of the modification proceeding, shall first conduct a public hearing thereon, noticed in the same manner as is required for the initial granting of the same. No such modification shall be granted unless the granting body finds that such modification is necessary to protect the public peace, health and safety, or, that such action is necessary to permit reasonable operation under the zone variance as granted. If the modification hearing is conducted by the commission, its decision shall be subject to review on appeal, taken in the time and manner set forth in Section 19.66.080. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9605(D)(3).)  
19.66.120 - Reapplication. 
No person except a new owner or lessee shall reapply for a similar variance on the same land, building or structure within a period of six months from the date of the final decision on such previous application unless such decision is a denial without prejudice. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9605(E).)  
19.66.130 - Existing variances. 
Any variance granted pursuant to any zoning ordinance enacted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be construed to be a variance under this title subject to all conditions imposed in such variance unless otherwise provided herein. Such variance may, however, be revoked or voided as provided in Sections 19.66.090 through 19.66.110. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9605(F).)  
Chapter 19.68 - MODIFICATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1104, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 25, 2015, amended Ch. 19.68 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 19.68, §§ 19.68.010, 19.68.020, pertained to administrative minor modifications, and derived from prior Code § 9606(A), (B); Ord. No. 403, § 1, adopted 1978. 
 
19.68.010 - Purpose. 
When in the public interest, the director or the planning commission may consider and approve modifications of previously approved permits as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1104, § 3(Exh. A), 2-25-2015)  
19.68.020 - Application and modification classifications. 
A request for a modification of an approved development permit or conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter may be filed by any property owner or agent acting on behalf of property owner. The request will be reviewed by the director and classified into one of the following categories: 
A.  Administrative Permit Adjustment. Any change which would not alter any of the findings pursuant to this title, nor any findings contained in the environmental documentation prepared for the permit, and would not have any adverse impact on surrounding properties, may be deemed an administrative permit adjustment subject to the issuance of a zoning clearance, with any conditions imposed by the director in the director's sole discretion, without a hearing. Such changes may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  A maximum increase or decrease of ten percent or five thousand square feet, whichever is less, in the floor area of a previously approved structure; 
2.  A maximum decrease of ten percent of the area of an approved landscaping plan. Reductions greater than ten percent may be approved as an administrative permit adjustment if the reduction is the result of an approval in an increase of floor area of a previously approved structure as provided in Section 19.68.020(A)(1); 
3.  The conversion of landscaping to artificial turf and drought tolerant themes in accordance with Section 19.38.060; 
4.  Minor exterior architectural changes or embellishments involving no change in basic architectural style; 
5.  The addition of ancillary mechanical equipment when it can be shown that noise from the equipment will not create a nuisance to the adjoining property. 
6.  Minor changes to an approved planned development or conditional use plan, including the addition of ancillary structures, not affecting the placement of the primary structure on the site or the number of parking spaces required. 
B.  Administrative Minor Modification. Any change which would not conflict with any of the required findings pursuant to this title, nor any analysis or mitigation measures contained in the original environmental documentation prepared for the permit and would not have any adverse impact on surrounding properties, but is determined by the director to rise to a level of increased or decreased use or intensity such that the requested modification cannot qualify for an administrative permit adjustment, may be deemed an administrative minor modification subject to the issuance or a minor modification permit, with any conditions imposed by the director in the director's sole discretion, without a hearing. Administrative minor modifications are limited to the following: 
1.  Yards. Reduction of yards and distance between buildings by not more than twenty percent of the requirement of the zone. 
2.  Parking Spaces. Reduction of number of required parking spaces by not more than ten percent, and modification of other parking design standards, as provided in Sections 19.44.130 through 19.44.280. 
3.  Slope and Hillside Areas. For areas with a grade of eight percent or more, modification of building height to a maximum of thirty feet and modification of front yard to a minimum of ten feet, upon approval of a site plan, elevations, and a grading map showing existing and finished contours. Approval must be based on the finding that such minor modification will not have a detrimental effect upon adjacent properties. 
4.  Modification of a landscaping plan approved under a planned development permit or conditional use permit for other than a reduction in landscape area as allowed under Section 18.68.020(A)(2) 
5.  Gates and Entrances. Height of entrance walls and gates may be modified to extend above that allowed in front and side-front setback areas when approved by the architectural advisory committee of the planning commission. The modification must be based on the findings that the limited height extension is architecturally acceptable and creates no interference with sight clearance or corner cutoff; and, in addition, no detrimental effects will be created by the modification to adjacent properties in the same vicinity and zone. Elevations, colors and materials are to be submitted as part of the application for an administrative minor modification. 
6.  Trash Enclosures. When hardship is created by the provisions of the trash enclosure regulations, minor modifications may be applied to reduce the requirements of Chapter 19.50. 
C.  Major Modifications. All requested modifications not classified by the director as administrative permit adjustments or administrative minor modifications are major modifications and must be approved by the body that originally approved the permit, subject to the same notice, hearing, review criteria and appeal procedures required by this title for consideration of the original permit. 
(Ord. No. 1104, § 3(Exh. A), 2-25-2015)  
19.68.030 - Applicable procedures. 
The following procedures apply to requests for modifications: 
A.  Once the director classifies a modification request, the requestor must either complete a zoning clearance form for the approval of an administrative permit adjustment, or a modification application for the approval of an administrative minor modification, or a major modification, and pay the appropriate fee, as established by city council resolution. 
B.  The director may refer any request for a modification of architectural design to the architectural review committee of the planning commission for review and determination of approval or denial of the modification request. 
C.  The director may refer any request for modification to the planning commission to advise the director as to the proper classification level of approval for the request; or, the director may refer the application to the planning commission for review and determination of approval or denial. 
D.  In approving a minor modification, the director must determine that the adjustments are necessary to make reasonable use of the land and that adequate protection has been provided to protect the public peace, health, safety and welfare and may include conditions of approval. The director will make a decision in writing within fourteen days after the acceptance of a complete application, unless the director has referred the decision to the architectural review committee of the planning commission or to the planning commission. One copy will be mailed to the applicant and one copy will be filed with the secretary of the planning commission. 
1.  If the director has referred the decision to either the architectural review committee of the planning commission or to the planning commission, the request for modification will generally be placed on the next available agenda of the respective body. 
2.  If the applicant is dissatisfied with a decision of the director, the applicant may appeal the decision to the planning commission, where the determination will be final. The applicant must pay the appropriate fee for the appeal of the director's decision to the planning commission as established by city council resolution. 
E.  If the applicant is dissatisfied with a decision of the architectural review committee of the planning commission, the applicant may appeal the decision to the planning commission, where the determination will be final. The applicant must pay the fee for the appeal of the architectural review committee's decision at the same fee rate as that of an appeal of a director's decision to the planning commission, as established by city council resolution. 
F.  Any person may appeal, and the city council may issue an order of review of, a decision of the planning commission for the approval, conditions of approval, or denial of a modification request. Such appeal and council order of review must be made in accordance with the city council appeal and order of review provisions of the zone in which the subject property is located, and must be filed with the director within ten days of the date the commission's decision is made. 
(Ord. No. 1104, § 3(Exh. A), 2-25-2015)  
Chapter 19.69 - COVENANTS FOR EASEMENTS 
 
19.69.010 - Establishment. 
Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65870 through 65875, easements can be created by a recorded covenant of easement made by an owner of real property to the city. Such a covenant may be for parking, ingress, egress, emergency access, light and air access, landscaping or open space purposes and shall be established as follows: 
A.  At the time of recording of the covenant, all the real property benefited or burdened by the covenant shall be in common ownership. The covenant shall be effective when recorded and shall act as an easement pursuant to Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 801) of Title 2 of Part 2 of Division 2 of the California Civil Code, except that it shall not merge into any other interest in the real property. Section 1104 of the Civil Code shall be applicable to conveyance of the affected real property. 
B.  The covenant upon recordation shall describe the real property to be subject to the easement and the real property to be benefited thereby. It shall also identify the approval, permit or designation granted which relied upon or required the covenant. 
C.  The successors of interest to the real property benefited by the covenant can enforce the covenant. 
D.  The covenant shall be recorded in the county where all or a portion of the restricted property is located and shall contain a legal description of the real property and be executed by the owner of the real property. 
E.  Upon recordation, the burdens of the covenant shall be binding upon, and the benefits of the covenant shall inure to, all successors in interest to the real property. 
(Ord. 609 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
19.69.020 - Release. 
The procedure for release of a covenant granted pursuant to Section 19.69.010, shall be as follows: 
A.  Upon application by any person whether or not that person is the real property owner, the city council shall hold a public hearing regarding the release of the covenant. 
B.  Upon a determination by the city council that the restriction of the property is no longer necessary to achieve the land use goals of the city, a release shall be recorded by the city in the county where the restricted property is located. 
C.  The city may recover the reasonable costs of processing the release from those persons requesting the release pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 609 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
19.69.030 - Standing. 
Nothing in this chapter shall create in any other person other than the city and the owner of the real property burdened or benefited by the covenant standing to enforce or to challenge the covenant or any amendment thereto or release therefrom. In addition, any other method for the creation of an easement, including through conveyance of real property or through express or implied dedication, is still valid. 
(Ord. 609 § 1 (part), 1986.)  
Chapter 19.70 - ZONING MAP AMENDMENT 
 
19.70.010 - Change of zone constitutes precise plan. 
An amendment to the zoning map changing any property from one zone to another shall be made according to the provisions of this chapter. An amendment to the zoning map constitutes a precise plan under the State Planning Law. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9608 (part).)  
19.70.020 - Criteria for granting a change of zone. 
The planning commission in recommending, and the city council in reviewing, a proposed change of zone shall make the following findings in reference to the proposed zoning of the subject property: 
A.  The proposed change of zone is in conformity with the general plan map and report; 
B.  The subject property is suitable for the uses permitted in the proposed zone, in terms of access, size of parcel, relationship to similar or related uses; 
C.  The proposed change of zone is necessary and proper and is not likely to be detrimental to the adjacent property or residents. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9608(A).)  
19.70.030 - Procedure—Initiation. 
A.  The planning commission may initiate proceedings by approval of resolution of intention and then hold public hearings. 
B.  The city council may initiate proceedings by approval of resolution of intention and then submit the matter to the commission for public hearings. 
C.  The property owner or his designated representative may make an application for a change of zone. The application shall be on forms provided by the planning department and shall be full and complete and shall include such data and information as may be prescribed by the commission to assist in determining the validity of the request and the manner in which it meets the considerations set forth in Section 19.70.020. The application shall be verified before a notary public by the applicant and by the property owner and the date of verification shall be noted on the petition. A complete application shall include the following: 
1.  The names of all property owners within a three-hundred-foot radius of the application; 
2.  Two maps showing all properties within three hundred feet of the requested zone change; 
3.  Legal description of parcel requested to be changed. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9608(B)(1).)  
19.70.040 - Filing fee. 
When a petition for a change of zone is filed, a uniform fee as determined by city council resolution shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the costs incidental to the proceedings. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9608(B)(2).)  
19.70.050 - Staff investigation. 
The planning department shall investigate the facts bearing on the proposed zone change to provide information necessary to assure action consistent with the intent of this title and the general plan and shall report the findings to the commission. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9608(B)(3).)  
19.70.060 - Notice of commission public hearing date and notice. 
A.  The hearing date will be set by the community development department following compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
B.  Notice of the public hearing will be provided in accordance with Chapter 19.84. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9608(B)(4).) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(Y), 5-25-2018)  
19.70.070 - Commission public hearing, recommendation, and notice thereof. 
A.  The commission shall, not less than ten nor more than thirty days after the publication of the legal notice of a public hearing on a zone change, hold the hearing unless continued by the planning commission. 
B.  The commission shall announce and record its decision within thirty days after the conclusion of the public hearing. Such decision shall recommend either approval or disapproval of the proposed zone change and shall set forth findings in support of the recommendation. The commission may, after the public hearing, recommend the designation to a less intense zone or reduce but not enlarge the area of the proposed zone change in any way unless the proper notice and publication of the enlarged area is made. 
C.  Such decision shall be filed with the council within fifteen days after its announcement and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the petitioner at the address shown on the petition. 
D.  If the application for the change of zone is denied by the commission, the action will stand unless appealed within fifteen days of the date of the action of the commission. 
E.  Appeal. The hearing date of the city council public hearing for an appeal shall be set by the city clerk for not more than thirty days after the filing of the appeal request to the city council. The setting of the hearing, giving notice and conducting the hearing shall be the same as hereinbefore prescribed for hearing by the planning commission in Section 19.70.060. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9608(B)(5).)  
19.70.080 - Council public hearing date and notice. 
The hearing date of the council public hearing shall be set by the city clerk for not more than thirty days after the filing of the commission's recommendation to the council. The council shall, not less than ten nor more than thirty days after publication of legal notice of a public hearing on a zone change, hold the public hearing. The notice of mailing and publication of public hearing shall be the same as that for the planning commission, as shown in Section 19.70.060. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9608(B)(6).)  
19.70.090 - Council decision and referral. 
After holding at least one public hearing, the city council may approve or disapprove the proposed zone change. The city council may modify or overrule the recommendation of the planning commission, provided the proposed modification has been referred back to the planning commission for a report pursuant to the following paragraph. 
The planning commission shall review the changes proposed and referred to it by the city council and shall report its recommendations back to the city council; said report shall be filed with the city council not more than forty days after the referral by the council. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9608(B)(7).)  
Chapter 19.72 - ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT AMENDMENT 
 
19.72.010 - Procedures to be followed. 
Any amendment to the text of this title which imposes any regulation not theretofore imposed or removes or modifies any such regulation theretofore imposed shall be made according to the procedure set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9609 (part).)  
19.72.020 - Initiation. 
A.  The planning commission may initiate proceedings by motion and then hold public hearings and make a recommendation as provided below. 
B.  The city council may initiate proceedings by motion and then submit the matter to the commission for public hearings. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9609(A)(1).)  
19.72.030 - Staff investigation. 
The planning department shall study the proposed ordinance amendment and shall provide information necessary to assure action consistent with the intent of this title and the general plan and shall report the findings to the commission. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9609(A)(2).)  
19.72.040 - Notice of commission public hearing. 
A.  The hearing date will be set by the community development department following compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
B.  Notice of the public hearing will be provided in accordance with Chapter 19.84. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9609(A)(3).) 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 4(Z), 5-25-2018)  
19.72.050 - Commission public hearing, recommendation and notice thereof. 
A.  The commission shall, not less than ten nor more than thirty days after the publication of the legal notice of a public hearing on an ordinance amendment, hold the public hearing. 
B.  Within forty days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the commission shall file its recommendation with the council, together with a report of findings, hearings and other supporting data. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9609(A)(4).)  
19.72.060 - Council public hearing date and notice. 
A.  The hearing date shall be set by the city clerk for not more than thirty days after the filing of the commission's recommendation. 
B.  The city council may adopt by ordinance the amendment recommended by the planning commission after holding at least one public hearing thereon. The city council may modify the amendment recommended by the planning commission, provided the proposed modification has been referred back to the planning commission for a report, pursuant to subsection C of this section. 
C.  The planning commission shall review the changes proposed and referred to it by the city council and shall report its recommendations back to the city council, such report to be filed with the city council not more than forty days after the referral by the city council. 
(Ord. 403 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 9609(A)(5).)  
Chapter 19.74 - COTTAGE FOOD OPERATIONS 
 
19.74.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
"Cottage food employee" has the meaning set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 113758(b). 
"Cottage food operation" has the meaning set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 113758(a). 
"Cottage food products" has the meaning set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 113758(b). 
"Permitted area" has the same meaning as "registered or permitted area" as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 113758(b). 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 3(Exh. A), 9-25-2013)  
19.74.020 - Permitted use. 
A cottage food operation is a permitted use in a residential dwelling subject to compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the issuance of a cottage food operation permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 3(Exh. A), 9-25-2013)  
19.74.030 - Permit process. 
A.  A cottage food operation permit is required prior to commencing any cottage food operation in a private residential dwelling, including an apartment or other leased space. 
B.  The application process for a cottage food operation permit is as follows: 
1.  The application must be made by the individual who proposes to conduct the cottage food operation from his or her private residential dwelling and is the owner of the cottage food operation. 
2.  The application must be filed on the application form provided by the department and accompanied by the applicable processing fee established by city council resolution. 
3.  If the applicant does not own the property in which he or she proposes to establish a cottage food operation, the property owner's written authorization must be provided. 
4.  If the property on or in which the cottage food operation will be conducted is part of an active homeowners association, the applicant must provide written authorization from the homeowners association to conduct the cottage food operation from the property. 
C.  Upon filing a complete application form with the department, the director will cause to be conducted an inspection of the premise for which the application was filed and will provide written notice either denying or issuing the permit. A cottage food operation permit may be issued if the director finds that such use complies with all applicable requirements set forth in Sections 19.74.040 and 19.74.050. 
D.  A cottage food operation does not require a home occupation permit under Chapter 19.65 of this code. However, if any business activity other than a cottage food operation occurs within a private residential dwelling, a home occupation permit is required prior to the commencement of such business activity. 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 3(Exh. A), 9-25-2013)  
19.74.040 - Operational requirements. 
The following operational requirements apply to cottage food operations: 
A.  All cottage food operations must comply with the requirements of the Ventura County Environmental Health Division and the California Department of Public Health. Applicants must first obtain a Cottage Food Operation Class A or Class B Permit from the county prior to submitting an application for a cottage food operation permit under this chapter. A copy of a valid county Class A or Class B permit must be furnished with the application to the department. 
B.  Permitted cottage food products that may be produced at the residential dwelling as part of the cottage food operation are limited to those cottage food products listed by the California Department of Public Health. 
C.  Cottage food functions including storage, preparation, mixing, assembling, packaging, labeling, or direct sales must occur only within the permitted area. 
D.  Residents of the dwelling unit and a maximum of one cottage food employee, not including a family or household member, are permitted in a cottage food operation at any one time. 
E.  Only cottage food products produced at the cottage food operation may be sold or sampled at the dwelling unit. 
F.  No sit down dining or meal service other than the brief sampling of the cottage food products produced on the premise is permitted. 
G.  The establishment of the cottage food operation may not change the principal residential character or use of the dwelling unit involved. 
H.  No exterior alterations may be made to the dwelling unit for the purposes of use by the cottage food operation that would change the residential character of the dwelling. 
I.  No signs identifying or advertising the cottage food operation are permitted on the premises, except those required by government agencies. 
J.  Cottage food operations may not be: 
1.  Located within three hundred feet of the property line of any single family home where another cottage food operation is located; or 
2.  Located within the same building of an apartment complex or other multi-family housing development (i.e. condominiums or townhomes) where another cottage food operation exists. 
K.  Visitation and deliveries incidental to the cottage food operation are limited to the hours of seven a.m. to seven p.m., Monday through Saturday, and are not permitted on Sundays or holidays. This subsection applies to deliveries made by commercial vehicles, as defined in Chapter 11.44 of this code, as well as deliveries made by non-commercial vehicles. 
L.  The cottage food operation must comply with all applicable inspection requirements. 
M.  Cottage food operations may not create noise levels in excess of those allowed by this code in the applicable zone in which the dwelling unit is located. 
N.  Cottage food operations are subject to all residential zoning requirements set forth in this code, so long as such zoning requirements are not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Cottage food operations may not engage in any activity that would result in a violation of this code or any local, state or federal law or regulation. 
O.  In addition to a cottage food operation permit, cottage food operations must obtain all applicable permits, licenses, and certificates required for the operation of a business under this code. 
P.  Cottage food operations must at all times comply with the restrictions on gross annual sales as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 113758. Cottage food operators must at all times maintain applicable tax returns or other proof of gross annual sales for the cottage food operation, and must promptly provide such documentation to city officials upon request. 
Q.  Additional conditions relating to concentration, traffic control, parking, and noise control may be imposed as deemed necessary by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 3(Exh. A), 9-25-2013)  
19.74.050 - Parking and traffic control. 
A.  No vehicles, trailers (including pick-up trucks and vans) or other equipment, except those normally incident to the residential use, may be kept on the site or in the near vicinity in a manner that obstructs the free flow of traffic, or violates the provisions of this code applicable to parking in residential zones, including but not limited to the provisions of Chapter 11.20 and Chapter 19.44 of this code. 
B.  Commercial vehicles, as defined in Chapter 11.44, may not be kept permanently on the site or in the near vicinity to the cottage food operation unless engaged in the delivery of goods or services to the cottage food operation. 
C.  For single family homes, parking spaces in the property's garage or carport (if present) and driveway must be available for the actual parking demand created by the use, including parking spaces for the applicant's and applicant's family members' vehicles, and a parking space for an employee if an employee is present. Parking spaces must comply with the size requirements listed in Chapter 19.44 of this code. 
D.  For multi-family developments, the cottage food operator's designated space(s) must be available for the actual parking demand created by the use, including parking spaces for the applicant's and applicant's family members' vehicles, and a parking space for an employee if an employee is present. On-site parking in an apartment complex or other multi-family residence requires written consent from the property owner, landlord, homeowners association or property manager. 
E.  All applicants must demonstrate reasonable on-street parking within a three hundred foot radius of the residential dwelling. On-street parking spaces may be used for persons picking-up and/or delivering materials for the operation, third party retailers, and customers if direct sales on the property are proposed. On-street parking must comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 11.20 of this code. 
F.  Deliveries and customer visitations to the cottage food operation may not unreasonably interfere with the free flow of traffic in the residential zone. 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 3(Exh. A), 9-25-2013)  
19.74.060 - Revocation of permit. 
A cottage food operation permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may be revoked if the director finds that any of the following conditions exist: 
A.  That any condition of the cottage food operation permit or provision of this chapter has been violated. 
B.  That the cottage food operation has become detrimental to the public health or safety, or constitutes a nuisance as designated in Chapter 9.12 of this code. 
C.  That the permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner. 
D.  That the cottage food operation no longer maintains a valid Class A or Class B Permit from the Ventura County Environmental Health Division. 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 3(Exh. A), 9-25-2013)  
19.74.070 - Permit nontransferable. 
A cottage food operation permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may not be transferred, assigned or used by any person other than the permittee, used at any location other than the one for which the permit is granted, or used for any other type of food sales or distribution activity than the type for which the permit is granted. 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 3(Exh. A), 9-25-2013)  
Chapter 19.76 - WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES 
 
19.76.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the development and operation of wireless communication facilities within the city to the extent permitted by state and federal law with the intent to: 
1.  Allow for the provision of wireless communication services at levels adequate to serve the city's businesses, residents, and general public. 
2.  Establish fair and efficient processes for the review and approval of applications for new and modified wireless communication facilities that assure the comprehensive review of the potential impacts of such facilities, while enabling the providers of wireless communication services to effectively and efficiently provide services within the city. 
3.  Provide uniform and comprehensive standards for the siting, development, installation, and operation of wireless communication facilities in order to minimize negative aesthetic impacts and other potential public health and safety impacts related to such facilities, and to protect property values. 
4.  Encourage the location of wireless communication facilities in those areas of the city where the adverse aesthetic impacts on the community are minimal. 
5.  Encourage the collocation of wireless communication facilities, particularly in the public right-of-way due to the limited number of existing support structures and limited space available for new facilities in such areas. 
6.  Regulate wireless communication facilities within the public right-of-way consistently with the rights conferred on telephone corporations and municipalities under California Public Utilities Code sections 7901 and 7901.1, while addressing the aesthetic and safety concerns unique to such facilities due to their location in the public right-of-way, which is an area that is both highly visible and is shared with pedestrians, motorists, municipal facilities, and other utility infrastructure. 
B.  The regulations in this chapter are not intended to, and may not be interpreted or applied to: 
1.  Prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services; 
2.  Unreasonably discriminate among functionally equivalent wireless communication service providers; or 
3.  Regulate wireless communications facilities and transmission equipment on the basis of the environmental or public health effects of radio frequency exposure to the extent that such emissions comply with the standards established by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 7(Exh. A), 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 7(Exh. A), 3-25-2015)  
19.76.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings set forth in this section: 
"Antenna" means the physical device through which electromagnetic, wireless communication signals authorized by the FCC are transmitted or received. 
"Base station" means the transmission equipment and non-tower support structure at a fixed location that enable FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. A "non-tower support structure" means any structure (whether built for wireless purposes or not) that supports wireless transmission equipment under a valid permit at the time the applicant submits its application. 
"Building mounted" means a wireless communication facility that is mounted to a building. 
"Camouflaged wireless communication facility" means a wireless communication facility that is designed to mask or blend with the surrounding environment in such a manner to render it generally unnoticeable to the casual observer. These types of facilities may include antennas located on light poles and power poles, ground mounted or building mounted antennas that blend with the surroundings, and base station equipment screened by landscaping. 
"Collocation" means the placement or installation of wireless communication facilities, including antennas and related transmission equipment, on an existing and permitted support structure for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes. 
"CPUC" means the California Public Utilities Commission. 
"Director" means the city's community development director or designee. 
"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission. 
"Ground mounted" means a wireless communication facility with its support structure placed directly on the ground. 
"Least intrusive means" means the location and design of a wireless communication facility that, in light of all the facts and circumstances, most closely conforms to the development standards articulated in this chapter while at the same time reasonably accomplishes the applicant's or permittee's technical objectives. 
"Monopole" means a support structure constructed of a single, self-supporting pole securely anchored to a foundation constructed for the sole purpose of supporting transmission equipment. 
"Observable wireless communication facility" means a wireless communication facility that is neither a fully camouflaged wireless communication facility nor a fully stealth wireless communication facility. 
"Personal wireless services" means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services. The term "unlicensed wireless service" means the offering of wireless communications services using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses. 
"Public right-of-way" means any public highway, street, alley, sidewalk, or parkway that is owned, operated, or controlled by the city. 
"Right-of-way agreement" means the city's standard form of right-of-way agreement, as approved by the city attorney's office, setting forth the terms and conditions of the use of the public right-of-way by public or private utilities for their facilities. 
"Roof mounted" means a wireless communication facility that is mounted to a rooftop. 
"Stealth wireless communication facility" means a wireless communication facility that is architecturally integrated into a building or other concealing structure, or located such that no portion of any transmission equipment or base station, or any other apparatus associated with the function of the facility is visible from publicly accessible spaces. 
"Substantial change" means any of the following as applied to an existing wireless communication facility: 
1.  Wireless tower (outside of the public right-of-way): 
a.  Height. The proposed collocation or modification would increase the height more than 10%, or the height of one additional antenna array would be more than 20 feet above the height of the nearest existing antenna (whichever is greater). 
b.  Width. The proposed collocation or modification would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance (whichever is greater). 
2.  Wireless tower (in the public right-of-way): 
a.  Height. The proposed collocation or modification would increase the height more than 10% or 10 feet (whichever is greater) above the originally approved height. 
b.  Width. The proposed collocation or modification would protrude from the edge of the originally approved structure by more than six feet. 
3.  Base station (wherever located): 
a.  Height. The proposed collocation or modification would increase the height more than 10% or 10 feet (whichever is greater) above the originally approved height. 
b.  Width. The proposed collocation or modification would protrude from the edge of the originally approved structure by more than six feet. 
4.  The proposed collocation or modification would involve adding more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but in no event may exceed four new equipment cabinets. 
5.  A proposal that includes excavation or deployment of equipment outside the current wireless communication facility site. For the purposes of this provision, "outside of the current wireless communication facility site" means: 
a.  outside the boundaries of the controlled, leased or owned property surrounding the wireless tower and base station and any access or utility easements related to the site as shown on the approved plans with respect to a facility outside of a public right-of-way; and 
b.  outside the proximity of the footprint of the existing ground mounted transmission equipment with respect to a facility within a public right-of-way. 
6.  A proposal to alter or expand the exterior of any wireless communication facility or base station that was originally approved as stealth or camouflaged that defeats the originally approved stealth or camouflaged design elements. For the purposes of this provision, the term "defeat" means to change a stealth or camouflaged wireless communication facility in such a manner so that it may no longer be considered stealth or camouflaged. 
7.  The proposed collocation or modification would violate an existing condition of approval, unless the non-compliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, addition of cabinets, new excavation, or aesthetic change that does not exceed the corresponding "substantial change" thresholds identified in 1-6 above with respect to a wireless tower or base station. 
8.  Any proposed collocation or modification that would constitute a "substantial change" under Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, as it may be amended, as such term is defined or interpreted by any rule, order, ruling, or other decision of the FCC or decision of a court with jurisdiction over the area of the city. 
9.  A proposal that would prevent or obstruct full implementation of the city's standard street or parkway sections. 
10.  A proposal that would alter required access, parking, or landscaping from that shown on the approved site plans. 
11.  A proposal to replace the wireless tower or foundation. 
12.  A proposal to alter the width, bulk, or arrangement of a wireless communication facility that may violate any law, rule, regulation, or other requirement intended to protect public health and safety. 
"Transmission equipment" means any equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas and other relevant equipment associated with and necessary to their operation, including coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. 
"Wireless communication facility" or "facility" means all equipment and other improvements installed for the purpose of providing wireless transmission of voice, data, images, or other information including, but not limited to, cellular phone service, personal wireless services, and paging services, consisting of equipment and network components such as towers, utility poles, transmitters, base stations, and emergency power systems. A wireless communication facility does not include on-site radio or television broadcast facilities. 
"Wireless communication services" means the transmission of information by wireless communication facilities for hire, sale, or resale to the general public. This definition excludes the over-the-air transmission of broadcast television or broadcast radio signals. 
"Wireless tower" means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting FCC-licensed antennas and their associated facilities. This does not include structures that were installed to replace or collocate upon existing power poles, light poles, energy transmission towers, and buildings. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 7(Exh. A), 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 7(Exh. A), 3-25-2015)  
19.76.030 - Applicable facilities. 
A.  The requirements of this chapter apply to all wireless communication facilities within the jurisdiction of the city, except those exempted in subsection (B). 
B.  The following facilities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  Any ground or building mounted antenna that receives broadcast radio or television signals for use only by owners or occupants of the property or development on which the antenna is located and that does not exceed the maximum allowable building height for the zone in which the antenna is located. 
2.  Any ground or building mounted dish antenna that receives broadcast radio or television signals for use only by owners or occupants of the property or the development on which the dish antenna is located, and that does not exceed one meter in diameter. 
3.  Any antenna, including its support structure, used by an authorized amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC that does not exceed the maximum allowable height for such use in the zone in which it is located. For the purpose of this chapter, amateur radio means the licensed non-commercial, non-professional, private use of designated radio bands for purposes of private recreation including the non-commercial exchange of messages and emergency communication. This includes HAM radio and citizens band antenna. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 7(Exh. A), 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 7(Exh. A), 3-25-2015)  
19.76.040 - Designated zones and locations for facilities; and general permit application process. 
A.  New wireless communication facilities are permitted as follows: 
1.  Stealth wireless communication facilities that meet the requirements of this chapter are permitted in all zones subject to the approval of a conditional use permit under Chapter 19.62 of this code. 
2.  Camouflaged wireless communication facilities that meet the requirements of this chapter are permitted in the Open Space (OS), Rural Exclusive (RE) and Single Family Residential (R-1) zones subject to the approval of a conditional use permit under Chapter 19.62 of this code. 
3.  Observable wireless communication facilities are not permitted in any zone; provided, however, that legal non-conforming facilities may be modified as long as such alterations do not constitute a substantial change. 
4.  Stealth wireless communication facilities and camouflaged wireless communication facilities where the non-antenna transmission equipment is also stealth are permitted in the public right-of-way subject to the approval of an administrative permit under this chapter. 
B.  Existing wireless communication facilities may be expanded or modified as follows: 
1.  Facilities not in Public Right-of-Way - No Substantial Change. Collocations on or modifications to existing, approved wireless communication facilities not in the public right-of-way that do not constitute a substantial change and that meet the requirements of this chapter are permitted subject to the approval of an application for an administrative modification to the existing conditional use permit under Section 19.76.080 of this chapter and Chapter 19.62 of this code. 
2.  Facilities not in Public Right-of-Way - Substantial Change. Collocations on or modifications to existing, approved wireless communication facilities not in the public right-of-way that constitute a substantial change and that meet the requirements of this chapter are permitted subject to the approval of an application for a modification to the existing conditional use permit under Chapter 19.62 of this code. 
3.  Facilities in Public Right-of-Way. Collocations on or modifications to existing approved wireless communication facilities in the public right-of-way and that meet the requirements of this chapter are permitted subject to the approval of an application for the modification to the existing administrative permit under Section 19.76.080 of this chapter. 
C.  Wireless communication facilities are prohibited on any property where the primary use of the property is residential. 
D.  In addition to any conditional use permit or administrative permit or modification to such permit required under this chapter, an applicant for any proposed new, collocated or modified wireless communication facilities must also apply for and obtain any separate permit or approval for such facility required under the city's municipal code, including the city's building, electrical, and safety codes. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 7(Exh. A), 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 7(Exh. A), 3-25-2015)  
19.76.050 - Application requirements. 
A.  General Application Requirements for New Facilities. Applicants for a new wireless communication facility must submit the items listed in this subsection. These submittal requirements are in addition to those required under Chapter 19.62 for a conditional use permit application, as applicable. 
1.  Application Fee. The applicable wireless communication facility application fee established by city council resolution. 
2.  Legal Authority. Evidence that the applicant has all current licenses and registrations from the FCC, the CPUC, and any other applicable regulatory bodies necessary to provide wireless communication services utilizing the proposed wireless communication facility. 
3.  Property Owner Consent. A copy of the fully executed lease, license, or other instrument granting the right to use the proposed location or a letter from the record owner of the property consenting to the application. 
4.  Statement of Purpose. A written statement that includes: (a) a description of the technical objectives to be achieved; (b) an annotated topographical map that identifies the targeted service area to be benefitted; (c) the estimated number of users in the targeted service area; and (d) full-color signal propagation maps with objective units of signal strength measurement that show the applicant's current service coverage levels from all adjacent sites without the proposed site, predicted service coverage levels from all adjacent sites with the proposed site, and predicted service coverage levels from the proposed site without all adjacent sites. 
5.  Alternative Sites Analysis. A map that indicates existing, identifiable wireless communication facilities within a one mile radius of the proposed location of the new wireless communication facility, and an explanation of why collocation on these existing facilities, if any, is not feasible. This explanation must include such technical information and other factual justifications as are necessary to document the reasons why collocation is not a viable option. The applicant must provide a list of all existing structures considered as alternatives to the proposed location, together with a general description of the site design considered at each location. The applicant must also provide a written explanation for why the alternatives considered were unacceptable or infeasible, unavailable, or not as aesthetically desirable as the proposed location. This explanation must include such technical information and other factual justification as are necessary to document the reasons why each alternative is unacceptable, infeasible, unavailable, or not as aesthetically desirable as the proposed location. If an existing wireless communication facility is listed among the alternatives, the applicant must specifically address why the modification of such wireless communication facility is not a viable option. The written explanation must also state the radio frequency coverage and capacity needs and objectives of the applicant, and must include maps of existing coverage and predicted new coverage with the proposed facility. 
6.  Collocation Statement. A statement that the proposed wireless communication facility is available for collocations, or an explanation of why future collocation is not technically feasible or potentially available. 
7.  Site Plans. A fully dimensioned site plan and elevation drawings prepared by a licensed engineer showing any existing wireless communication facilities with all existing transmission equipment and other improvements and the proposed facility with all proposed transmission equipment and other improvements and the legal boundaries of the property surrounding the proposed facility and any access or utility easements related to the site. 
8.  Height Certification. A certification prepared by a licensed engineer that provides technical data sufficient to justify the proposed height of any new monopole or building mounted facility. 
9.  Color samples and materials of any visible portion of the facility, including any stealth or camouflage concealing structure. 
10.  Photo-Simulations. Photo-simulations showing the proposed facility in context of the site from reasonable line-of-sight locations from public streets or other adjacent viewpoints, together with a map that shows the location of each view angle. 
11.  Installation Explanation. A detailed explanation of the manner of installation of the proposed facility. 
12.  Radio Frequency Exposure Compliance Report. A radio frequency (RF) report prepared and certified by an RF engineer acceptable to the city that certifies that the proposed facility, as well as any collocated facilities, will comply with applicable federal RF exposure standards and exposure limits. The RF report must include the frequency and power levels (in watts ERP) for all existing and proposed transmitters at the site and exhibits that show the location and orientation of all transmitters and the boundaries of areas with exposures in excess of the uncontrolled/general population limit and the controlled/occupational limit. 
13.  Noise Study. A noise study prepared and certified by an engineer for the proposed facility and all associated equipment including all environmental control units, sump pumps, temporary backup power generators, and permanent backup power generators demonstrating compliance with the city's noise regulations. The noise study must also include an analysis of the manufacturers' specifications for all noise-emitting equipment and a depiction of the proposed equipment relative to all adjacent property lines. 
14.  Landscape Plans. Conceptual landscape plans (for any ground mounted facilities). 
15.  Deposit. A cash or other sufficient deposit for any third party peer review determined by the director to be necessary to ensure compliance with the technical requirements of this chapter. 
16.  Such other information as may be reasonably required by the director in order to demonstrate that the proposed facility will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
B.  Application Requirements for Collocations and Modifications not in the Public Right-Of-Way. Applicants seeking to expand or modify an existing wireless communication facility not in the public right-of-way or to collocate on an existing wireless communication facility not in the public right-of-way need only submit the following items from subsection (A) above, as applicable: application items 1, 2, 3, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16. 
C.  Additional Application Requirements for New Facilities or Modifications to or Collocations on Existing Facilities in the Public Right-Of-Way. Applicants for a new wireless communication facility proposed to be located in a public right-of-way or modifications to or collocations on an existing facility in the public right-of-way must submit the following items in addition to those set forth in subsection (A) above, as applicable: 
1.  A written justification for the applicant's claimed right to permanently install a facility in the public right-of-way. In cases where the applicant claims a right based on a franchise or a certificate of public convenience and necessity (CPCN) issued by the CPUC, a copy of the franchise agreement or CPCN must be provided, including a copy of the certified environmental document from the CPUC covering the applicant's proposed wireless communication facilities within the city, including all mitigation measures as required by the CPUC pursuant to the required environmental analysis. Any applicant that, prior to 1996, provided communication service under administratively equivalent documentation issued by the CPUC may submit copies of that documentation in lieu of a CPCN. 
2.  A complete application for an encroachment permit under Chapter 13.04 of this code, if any proposed facility may impact traffic. 
3.  An executed right-of-way agreement or proof that the applicant has previously entered into such right-of-way agreement with the city and that such agreement remains valid. 
4.  Written authorization from the appropriate utility company for the collocation on a streetlight pole, utility pole, or other utility apparatus. 
5.  A fully dimensioned and scaled site plan that illustrates the following information within 150 feet of the proposed wireless communication facility: 
a.  The distances between all proposed and existing wireless communication facilities and all other infrastructure within the public right-of-way such as other existing transmission equipment, utility poles, light poles, fire hydrants, bus stops, traffic signals and above and below ground utility equipment vaults. 
b.  The distance and location of adjoining property lines and easement boundaries abutting the public right-of-way, curbs, driveway approaches, easements, walls, existing utility substructures, and parkway trees from the wireless communication facility. 
c.  The immediate adjacent land uses and building locations. 
d.  The dedicated width of the public right-of-way. 
e.  The location of all existing sidewalks and parkway landscape planters. 
6.  All conduit locations between the proposed wireless communication antennas and the infrastructure necessary to operate the antennas. 
7.  Conceptual landscape and irrigation plans. 
8.  An approved long-term landscape maintenance agreement with the private property owner. 
9.  An analysis demonstrating that the proposed equipment location and landscaping will not impede vehicular visibility at any adjacent intersection or driveway. 
10.  Such other information as may be reasonably required by the director or public works director in order to demonstrate that the proposed facility will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 7(Exh. A), 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 7(Exh. A), 3-25-2015)  
19.76.060 - Design and development standards. 
A.  Location Preferences. To minimize aesthetic and visual impacts, new wireless communication facilities not within the public right-of-way should be located according to the following preferences, ordered from most preferred to least preferred, to the maximum extent feasible: 
1.  Existing structures in industrial zones; 
2.  Existing structures in commercial zones; 
3.  Existing structures in open space zones; 
4.  New structures in industrial zones; 
5.  New structures in commercial zones; 
6.  New structures in open space zones; 
7.  Existing structures in residential zones; 
8.  New structures in residential zones. 
B.  General Standards. The following design and development standards apply to wireless communication facilities in all zones: 
1.  Stealth wireless facilities are preferred over camouflage wireless facilities in zones where camouflage wireless facilities are permitted, particularly where existing structures are available or new structures could be constructed to accommodate a stealth wireless facility. 
2.  The overall development footprint of each wireless communication facility must be as small as technically feasible, and accessory buildings, shelters, cabinets, underground vaults and other ground mounted equipment must be grouped together to the maximum extent feasible. 
3.  There may be no net loss of required parking or landscaping when siting a wireless communication facility. 
4.  Paint colors must be selected to minimize visual impacts by blending with the surrounding environment and buildings. 
5.  The exterior surfaces must be constructed of nonreflective materials. 
6.  Wireless communication facilities may not be lighted or marked unless required by the FCC or the Federal Aviation Administration. 
7.  No signs, flags, banners, or any form of advertising may be attached to a wireless communication facility except for government-required certifications, warnings, or other required seals or signs, or except as expressly provided by other provisions of this code. 
8.  The height may not exceed the maximum building height in the applicable zone unless supported by a technical study that clearly demonstrates the need to exceed such height limitation. 
9.  A facility may not encroach into any applicable setback for structures in the applicable zone. 
C.  Building and Roof Mounted Standards. The following design and development standards apply to building and roof mounted wireless communication facilities in all zones: 
1.  Facilities must be architecturally integrated into the applicable building design so that it matches the proportion, style and quality of exterior design of the building and surrounding visual environment and is otherwise as unobtrusive as possible. 
2.  Roof mounted wireless communication facilities must be screened from public view using screening devices that are compatible with the existing architecture, color, texture, and materials of the building. 
3.  Cable trays and runs on a roof deck must be mounted below or otherwise screened by the parapet wall or other screening device. 
D.  Ground Mounted Standards. The following additional design and development standards apply to ground mounted wireless communication facilities: 
1.  Facilities must be designed and situated in a manner that utilizes existing natural or man-made features including, but not limited to, topography, vegetation, buildings, or other structures to visually screen the wireless communication facility to the greatest extent feasible. 
2.  Attempts to replicate trees or other natural objects may be used where permitted if deemed compatible to existing trees or natural objects in the immediate vicinity. 
3.  No guy wires or other diagonal or horizontal support structures may be utilized. 
4.  Cable trays and runs must be located inside the pole and underground. 
5.  A facility must be set back a distance of at least 150 percent of the height of the facility from the nearest property line of any residentially zoned or occupied lot. 
E.  Public Right-Of-Way Standards. The following additional design and development standards for wireless communication facilities apply to facilities in the public right-of-way: 
1.  To minimize aesthetic and visual impacts, wireless communication facilities in the public right-of-way should be designed and located according to the following preferences, ordered from most preferred to least preferred, to the maximum extent feasible: 
a.  Collocation on an existing stealth facility; 
b.  Collocation on an existing camouflaged wireless tower or base station; 
c.  Location or collocation on an existing utility or light pole with a camouflaged facility; 
d.  A new stealth facility; and 
e.  A new utility pole or light pole with a camouflaged facility. 
2.  Wireless communication facilities are prohibited in all center street medians. 
3.  No wireless communication facility may be located or constructed in a manner that would unreasonably interfere with the use of city property or the public right-of-way by the city, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public right-of-way. Unreasonable interference includes disruption to vehicular or pedestrian traffic or parking on city property or within the public right-of-way, interference with public utilities, interference with visibility along the public right-of-way, and any such other activities that would present a hazard to public health, safety or welfare when alternative locations or methods of construction would result in less disruption. 
4.  All wireless communication facilities must be built in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), including but not limited to the provision of adequate surface access and pedestrian traffic movement in and around wireless towers and base stations. 
5.  All facilities may only have subdued colors and non-reflective materials that blend with the surrounding area. 
6.  Conduits must be concealed within the support pole to the maximum extent feasible. 
7.  Utility and light poles: 
a.  Pole-mounted transmission equipment or any portion of a wireless communication facility may not exceed six feet above the pole tip height unless supported by a technical study that clearly demonstrates the need to exceed such height limitation. 
b.  No portion of the antenna or transmission equipment mounted on a pole may be less than 16 feet above any road surface. 
c.  Pole-mounted equipment, other than the antenna, may not exceed 8.5 cubic feet in area and must be compatible in structure, scale, and proportion to the existing streetlight or utility pole equipment. 
d.  No new poles may be installed on a public right-of-way except as replacements for existing poles or where there are presently no overheard utility facilities unless the CPUC has authorized the applicant to install such facilities and the applicant demonstrates that no other feasible options exist. 
e.  All wireless communication facilities mounted on a utility pole must comply with CPUC General Order 95, as it may be amended. 
8.  Non-antenna transmission equipment: 
a.  Non-antenna transmission equipment, including electric meter pedestals, must be placed underground to the maximum extent feasible. 
b.  Non-antenna transmission equipment must be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the right-of-way, or create safety hazards to pedestrians or motorists. 
c.  Non-antenna transmission equipment and underground vaults require an excavation permit under Chapter 13.04 of this code and a valid right-of-way agreement. 
d.  All ground-mounted non-antenna transmission equipment installed above ground must be screened from public view with landscaping or other decorative features. 
F.  Collocation and Modification Standards. The following additional development and design standards apply to collocations and modifications to existing wireless communication facilities: 
1.  The collocated or modified facility must comply with all applicable approvals and conditions of the permit for the host wireless communication facility. 
2.  Related equipment for collocated facilities must be located within the lease-hold or existing equipment enclosure, or if not possible, then such equipment must be located as close as possible to the existing equipment enclosure. 
3.  The stealth or camouflage techniques approved and used for the existing wireless communication facility must be extended to all proposed new transmission equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 7(Exh. A), 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 7(Exh. A), 3-25-2015)  
19.76.070 - Independent technical review. 
The director is authorized to retain on behalf of the city an independent technical expert to peer review any application for a wireless communication facility if reasonably necessary, as determined by the director. The applicant must pay for the cost of such review and must provide a reasonable advance deposit of the estimated cost of such review with the city prior to the commencement of any work by the technical consultant. The review is intended to be an analysis of technical aspects of the proposed wireless communication facility and may address any of the following: 
1.  Compliance with applicable radio frequency exposure standards. 
2.  Whether any facility is necessary to mitigate a significant gap in coverage, increase network capacity, or maintain service quality and is the least intrusive means of doing so. 
3.  The accuracy and completeness of submissions. 
4.  Technical demonstration of the infeasibility or potential unavailability of alternative sites or configurations or coverage analysis. 
5.  The applicability of analysis techniques and methodologies. 
6.  The validity of conclusions reached. 
7.  Technical data submitted by the applicant to justify the proposed height of any new installation including monopoles or building mounted sites. 
8.  Any specific technical issues designated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 7(Exh. A), 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 7(Exh. A), 3-25-2015)  
19.76.080 - Administrative permit and administrative modification process. 
A.  Where an administrative permit, administrative modification to an administrative permit, or an administrative modification to a conditional use permit is required under this chapter such review and approval or denial will be performed by the director to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Action on an administrative permit may be done without publishing, posting, or mailing of notice and without a public hearing. 
B.  The director may approve the permit or modification, deny the permit or modification, or approve the permit or modification subject to conditions necessary for the proposed new facility or modifications to an existing facility to comply with this chapter, the municipal code, and any other applicable regulations. 
C.  The director will provide written notice to the applicant of the director's decision on the permit application. 
D.  An administrative permit or administrative modification issued under this chapter may be revoked or rescinded if the director finds that any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  That any condition of the administrative permit or administrative modification has been violated; 
2.  That the subject use has become detrimental to the public health or safety, or constitutes a nuisance as designated in Chapter 9.12 of this code; 
3.  That the permit or modification was obtained in a fraudulent manner; 
4.  That the use for which the permit or modification was granted has ceased for a minimum of six consecutive months or longer; or 
5.  That the permit holder has notified the city that the use has been voluntarily abandoned and the director confirms such recession in writing. 
E.  The director must provide notice of a decision to revoke a permit, including the grounds for such decision, to the permit holder by certified mail. The director's decision may be appealed to the planning commission as provided subsection (F). 
F.  Any person may appeal a decision of the director on an administrative permit or administrative modification to a permit or conditional use permit under this chapter. The appeal must be made in writing and filed with the department of community development within ten days from the date of the issuance of the director's decision. The appeal must be made on the approved form available from the department of community development and must include the grounds for the appeal, and the applicable appeal processing fee established by the city council. The planning commission will conduct a de novo review of the director's decision, and the decision of the planning commission will be final. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 7(Exh. A), 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 7(Exh. A), 3-25-2015)  
19.76.090 - Special findings. 
A conditional use permit for a new wireless communication facility or administrative permit or administrative modification to a permit or conditional use permit may be granted only if the following findings are made by the designated reviewing body or person, in addition to any findings applicable under chapter 19.62 (Conditional Use Permit): 
1.  The proposed wireless communication facility has been designed to achieve compatibility with the surrounding community to the maximum extent reasonably feasible in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  The proposed wireless communication facility constitutes the least intrusive means to reasonably achieve the applicant's stated technical objectives in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 7(Exh. A), 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 7(Exh. A), 3-25-2015)  
19.76.100 - Compliance with other code and permit requirements. 
In addition to any conditional use permit or administrative permit or modification to any such permit required under this chapter, an applicant for any proposed new, collocated or modified wireless communication facility must also apply for and obtain any separate permit or approval for such facility required under the city's municipal code, including the city's building, electrical, and safety codes. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 7(Exh. A), 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 7(Exh. A), 3-25-2015)  
19.76.110 - Maintenance and operation of facilities. 
A.  Within 60 days of commencement of operations, the permittee of a new wireless communication facility must provide the community development department with a report, prepared by a qualified engineer acceptable to the city, indicating that the actual radio frequency (RF) emissions of the facility, measured at the property line or nearest point of public access and in the direction of maximum radiation from each antenna, is in compliance with all applicable FCC safety standards. This report must include RF emissions from all collocation facilities, if any, at the site. The permittee must also provide an updated report to the city within 60 days after completion of any change in design, number of antennas, operation, or other significant change in circumstances, or when such a report is otherwise required by the FCC, to the satisfaction of the director. 
B.  All wireless communication facilities must comply with all standards and regulations of the FCC, and any other state or federal government agency with the authority to regulate wireless communication facilities. 
C.  The site and the wireless communication facility, including all landscaping, fencing, and related transmission equipment must be maintained in a neat and clean manner and in accordance with all approved plans. 
D.  All graffiti on wireless communication facilities must be removed at the sole expense of the permittee within 48 hours of notification. 
E.  No transmission equipment or any other associated equipment (including but not limited to heating and air conditioning units) at any wireless communication facility may emit noise that exceeds the applicable limits established in Chapter 10.34 of this code. 
F.  A wireless communication facility located in the public right-of-way may not unreasonably interfere with the use of any city property or the public right-of-way by the city, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public right-of-way. Unreasonable interference includes disruption to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and interference with any other city or public utilities. 
G.  If any FCC, CPUC or other required license or approval to provide communication services is ever revoked, the permittee must inform the director of the revocation within ten days of receiving notice of such revocation. 
H.  A wireless communication facility and all equipment associated with the use must be removed in its entirety by the permittee, at the permittee's sole expense, within 180 days of a FCC or CPUC license or registration revocation, or if any applicable city permit or approval is revoked, and the permittee must immediately cease all transmitting and receiving operations at the applicable facility or facilities. Following the removal of a facility, the site must be restored to its reasonable pre-installation condition and, where necessary, revegetated to blend in with the surrounding area. In the case of building mounted facilities, all antennas, equipment, screening devices, support structures, cable runs, and other appurtenant equipment must be removed. Restoration and revegetation of the site must be completed within two months of removal of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 7(Exh. A), 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 7(Exh. A), 3-25-2015)  
19.76.120 - Transfer of ownership. 
Upon transfer of an approved wireless communication facility or any rights under the applicable permit or approval, the permittee of the facility must within 30 days of such transfer provide written notification to the director of the date of the transfer and the identity of the transferee. The director may require submission of any supporting materials or documentation necessary to determine that the facility is in compliance with the existing permit or approval and all of its conditions including, but not limited to, statements, photographs, plans, drawings, and analysis by a qualified engineer demonstrating compliance with all applicable regulations and standards of the city, FCC, and CPUC. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 7(Exh. A), 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 7(Exh. A), 3-25-2015)  
19.76.130 - Exceptions. 
An exception to the standards or requirements of this chapter may be granted if an applicable standard or requirement would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of wireless communication services by the applicant. The city may grant an exception on such terms as the city may deem appropriate in cases where the city determines that the grant of the exception is necessary to comply with any state or federal law or regulation and where the applicant shows by clear and convincing evidence that no other location or combination of locations or type of facility in compliance with this chapter can provide comparable wireless communication services. An applicant seeking an exception must submit to the director a written explanation setting forth clear and convincing evidence that the location or locations and the design of the proposed facility is necessary to close a significant gap in service coverage, that there is no feasible alternate location or locations, or design, that would close a significant gap or to reduce it to less than significant, and that the proposed facility is the least intrusive means to close a significant gap in service coverage or to reduce the gap to less than significant. All exceptions are subject to the review and approval of the planning commission. The burden is on the applicant to prove a significant gap in service coverage and that the exception sought for the proposed facility is the least intrusive means to close the significant gap in service coverage or to reduce the gap to less than significant. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 7(Exh. A), 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 1109, § 7(Exh. A), 3-25-2015)  
Chapter 19.84 - Public Hearing Notice Procedures 
Sections: 
 
19.84.010 - Contents. 
The notice of a public hearing must contain the time and place of the hearing, a summary of the proposed action and use, and the location of the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 3, 5-25-2018)  
19.84.020 - Publication and posting. 
A.  The notice must be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten days before the hearing date. 
B.  The notice must be posted on the city's website not less than ten days before the hearing date. 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 3, 5-25-2018)  
19.84.030 - Mailing. 
A.  As part of the application process, the applicant must provide the city with a list of property owners and their addresses within a radius of six hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property, including properties outside of the city limits ("mailing list"). The mailing list must be certified as being from the most recent county equalized assessment roll. 
B.  The city will mail the notice, postage prepaid, to the applicant and all property owners on the mailing list not less than ten days before the hearing date. 
C.  The city will also mail the notice, postage prepaid, not less than ten days before the hearing date to all property owners associations and home owners associations on record with the city as having an interest in the subject property, as well as those associations that have an interest in properties that are within a radius of six hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property to the extent such interests can be readily identified in existing city records, including any property located outside of the city limits. 
D.  The city will also mail notice to any person who has filed a written request for such notices with the community development department. Such a request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and will apply for the balance of such calendar year. The city may impose a reasonable fee on persons requesting such notice for the purpose of recovering the cost of such mailing. 
E.  The date of mailing is the date of notice. The failure of any person to receive the mailed notice provided under this section will not affect or invalidate any action taken by the city on the application. 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 3, 5-25-2018)  
19.84.040 - On-site public notice sign. 
A sign providing notice of the public hearing must be posted on the subject project site not less than ten days before the hearing date. The sign must conform to the city's public hearing notice administrative procedures prepared by and available at the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 3, 5-25-2018)  
Title 20 - DEVELOPMENT CONTROL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 20.01 - DEVELOPMENT CONTROL*[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1118, § 2, adopted Nov. 18, 2015, amended Ch. 20.01 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 20.01, §§ 20.01.010—20.01.090, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 984 § 2 (part), 2005. 
* Prior history: Ords. 497, 526, 531, 533, 573, 575, 586, 599, 607, 619, 623, 624 and 839. 
 
20.01.010 - Applicability of the development control system. 
The residential development control system set out in this chapter applies to all residential development, including mobile homes, in the city with the exception of the following: 
A.  Projects of not more than four residential dwellings, limited to only one such project per developer per calendar year. 
B.  Fourplexes or lesser-numbered multiple dwellings on a single existing lot. 
C.  Single-family residential units on a single existing lot. 
D.  Rehabilitation or remodeling of an existing dwelling, or conversion of apartments to condominiums, so long as no additional dwelling units are created. 
E.  Those specific units which are formally dedicated for occupancy by and affordable to low-income households within a project which is funded or subsidized as a low-income project pursuant to applicable federal, state or local laws or programs, or which receives a density bonus or other incentives under Chapter 19.49 of this code. For the purposes of this chapter, a project is funded or subsidized pursuant to applicable federal, state or local laws or programs if it receives a loan, grant or continuing financial subsidy for the purpose of developing low-income housing. 
F.  Model Home Complexes. The construction of model home complexes may be authorized by the director when a development allotment has been approved for the project and units within the model home complex will not be occupied, transferred or sold for individual occupancy until a development allocation has been received for such units, or, the units qualify under an exception provision pursuant to this section at the time occupancy is requested. The developer must sign an agreement to be recorded providing for these limitations prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 11-18-2015; Ord. No. 1137, § 3, 1-25-2017)  
20.01.020 - Establishment of residential development evaluation board. 
A.  In order to administer the development control system set forth in this chapter, and to make the evaluations set forth in Section 20.01.050, a residential development evaluation board ("board") is established, consisting of the duly appointed members of the planning commission of the city. 
B.  The procedures and bylaws of the board will be developed by the board subject to the approval of the city council. The staff of the department of community development will serve as the staff of the board. 
(Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 11-18-2015; Ord. No. 1137, § 3, 1-25-2017)  
20.01.030 - Establishment of annual residential development allotments designated. 
The maximum number of dwelling units that may be constructed each year in the city (except for dwelling units exempted in accordance with the provisions of Section 20.01.010) is 400 dwelling units (referred to as the "annual allotment," and as allocated to an individual project a "development allotment"). 
(Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 11-18-2015; Ord. No. 1137, § 3, 1-25-2017)  
20.01.040 - Development allotment application. 
No building permit for any nonexempt project may be issued unless a "development allotment" for such project has been granted. At any time prior to obtaining a building permit, the developer of a proposed project not exempted from the development allotment requirement must obtain a development allotment under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 11-18-2015; Ord. No. 1137, § 3, 1-25-2017)  
20.01.050 - Development allocation evaluation. 
The board will consider annually all applications for development allotments properly submitted and must make recommendations to the city council based on the criteria set forth below: 
A.  Availability of Public Facilities and Services. The board will examine each application for its relation to or impact upon local public facilities and services, and will rate each development by the assignment of from 0 to ten points (with 0 indicating very poor and ten indicating excellent) on each of the following attributes: 
1.  The capacity of the water infrastructure to provide for the needs of the proposed development without system extensions beyond those normally installed by the developer and the impact the project will have on water supply. 
2.  The capacity of the sanitary sewers to dispose of the waste of the proposed development without system extensions beyond those normally installed by the developer. 
3.  The capacity of the drainage facilities to adequately dispose of and treat surface runoff from the proposed development without system extensions beyond those normally installed by the developer. 
4.  The ability of the fire department to provide fire protection according to the established response standards of the city without the necessity of establishing a new station or requiring the addition of major equipment or housing facilities to an existing station. 
5.  The capacity of the applicable public schools to absorb the children expected to inhabit a proposed development without necessitating or adding to double sessions or other unusual scheduling or classroom overcrowding. 
6.  The capacity of surface streets to provide for the needs of the proposed development without substantially altering existing traffic patterns or overloading the existing street system, impact to Highway 101, and provision of complete streets. 
7.  The availability of parks, playgrounds, and other recreational facilities. 
8.  Developments which have received tentative map or other city entitlements for a project will receive five points for the first year of approval, eight points for the second year after approval, and ten points for the third year after approval. 
B.  Quality of Design and Contribution of Public Welfare and Amenity. The board will examine each application which has not been withdrawn by the applicant for failure to meet the requirements of subsection (A), and will rate each development by the assignment of from 0 to ten points (with 0 indicating very poor and ten indicating excellent) on each of the following attributes: 
1.  Architectural design quality of buildings, which may be assessed in terms of consistency with the General Plan Community Design Element in its attention to detail in terms of size, height, scale, massing, building materials, architectural details, and color; and compatibility with existing neighboring development. 
2.  The amount and character of open space and slope landscaping. 
3.  Site plan design quality, which may be assessed in terms of consistency with the General Plan Community Design Element, incorporation of natural features such as topography and open space, compliance with site development standards, the arrangement of the site for efficiency of circulation, on and off site traffic safety, and privacy. 
4.  The provision of public and/or private usable open space. 
5.  Contributions to and extensions of existing multi-use trails and facilities and/or greenbelts. 
6.  The provision of needed public facilities such as a connecting link in the Circulation Element of an arterial or collector street, stormwater drainage and treatment facilities, parks, or other vital public facilities. 
7.  Grading and modification of the topography, including quantity of grading, extent of natural slopes cut and/or filled and impact on ridgelines. 
8.  Impact on trees and cultural resources. 
9.  The provisions of water conservation features. 
10.  The provision of energy generation and conservation features, such as house siting and design and renewable energy generation features. 
11.  Impacts on the physical and aesthetic environment, including agriculture and other open spaces. 
12.  Projects which contain affordable housing units in accordance with the criteria under Section 20.01.010(E) will be entitled to up to 15 additional bonus points. If the project does not include affordable housing units, this criteria will not be subtracted or figured into the total percentage points. 
C.  The board will meet to assign evaluation points for each development allotment application. After assigning evaluation points, the board will prepare two lists, one documenting points awarded from subsection (A) and the other from subsection (B) of this section, arranging the developments in each list in order from greatest to lowest number of points. In addition to listing the number of actual points awarded in each subcategory, the total will then be expressed as a percentage of the maximum number of points awardable. 
D.  Following its preliminary evaluation as provided in subsection (C), the rating given to each development will be published and a public hearing will be scheduled on the preliminary point assignments made by the board. 
1.  Any applicant may request the board, at the public hearing, to reevaluate the point assignment made on any of the criterion. In order for the board to alter its point assignment on a particular development, the applicant must demonstrate that there exists pertinent information or a project redesign which the board was not aware of at the time of the original evaluation. 
2.  Any applicant who is dissatisfied with the board's reevaluation may submit written notification of such dissatisfaction, which will be furnished to the city council prior to its awarding of development allotments. 
E.  After evaluating each development and clarifying all point assignments to the applicants, the board will present its evaluations, along with the decisions reached on any requests for reevaluations, to the city council for the awarding of development allotments. 
F.  The schedule for the submission and consideration of applications will be established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 11-18-2015; Ord. No. 1137, § 3, 1-25-2017)  
20.01.060 - Development allotment awards. 
A.  The city council will make the annual allotment of development allotments by the date established by city council resolution. 
B.  At a noticed public hearing, the city council will consider the board's recommendations and rankings of the proposed developments, along with any action taken by the board concerning any requests for reevaluation. 
C.  The city council will eliminate from consideration any development which has not been assigned a minimum of 49 points under section 20.01.050(A) or a minimum of 70 points under Section 20.01.050(B). 
D.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the council will compile a list ranking each of the proposed developments, and will award the development allotments from that list. 
E.  Development allotments awarded to a project will remain in effect as long as the underlying project entitlement is valid. In the event the underlying project approval expires or otherwise terminates, any development allotment that had been granted to such a project will be deemed rescinded. 
(Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 11-18-2015; Ord. No. 1137, § 3, 1-25-2017)  
20.01.065 - Modifications and reallocation of development allotments. 
A.  The point assignments for any proposed modification to project entitlements will be reviewed and evaluated by staff for compliance with the points previously assigned to the project. If the modification would result in substantial compliance with the number of points assigned or greater, no further action with respect to the development allotment is required. 
B.  Where a proposed modification to project entitlements results in a reduction of point assignments from the original development allotment, the developer must submit a new development allotment application for consideration under this chapter. However, if there were no other projects eligible to receive allotments and that were not awarded development allotments for the same year, no change in the development allotment will be required for such modified project. 
(Ord. No. 1137, § 3, 1-25-2017)  
20.01.070 - Additional regulations. 
Should the evaluation of projects under Section 20.01.050 produce a situation in which two projects have equal evaluation points scores, but only one project can be permitted within the quota, the city council may offer those applicants a pro rata share of the number of development allotments available within the annual allotment, or may resolve such a tie in any other manner deemed equitable by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 11-18-2015; Ord. No. 1137, § 3, 1-25-2017)  
Chapter 20.20 - CONDITIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPROVAL 
Sections: 
 
20.20.010 - Limitation on issuance of city entitlements. 
No grading permit, building permit or other city entitlement will be issued for land within a subdivision or residential development subject to the provisions of Title 20 of this code unless and until development allotment is first awarded. The city council may grant an exception to the terms of this section if it finds: 
A.  The exception is not contrary to the purpose and intent of this title; and 
B.  The requirements for a variance are satisfied by the applicant. 
(Ord. 504 § 1 (part), 1981.)  
20.20.020 - Condition on development permits. 
All permits for residential development, including but not limited to RPD permits and MPPD conditional use permits, which are governed by the residential development control system and are approved by the city during the term of Title 20 of this code shall be subject to a condition providing that permit approval is complete but no further rights for development will accrue and no grading permit, building permit or other city entitlement will be issued for the land within the permit area until and unless a development allotment is first awarded. 
(Ord. 504 § 1 (part), 1981.)  
20.20.030 - Subdivision maps. 
All tentative maps for subdivisions of five or more residential dwelling units which are governed by the residential development controls system and are approved by the city during the term of Title 20 of this code, shall be subject to a condition providing that the final map may be approved and the final map may be recorded prior to the awarding of a development allotment, provided that no grading permit, building permit, or other city entitlement will be issued for the land within the subdivision until and unless a development allotment is first awarded. Where a tentative tract map on a subdivision of five or more units are governed by the residential development control system was approved prior to the effective date of Chapter 20.01, the final map may be approved and recorded prior to the awarding of a development allotment for land within the subdivision, provided that no grading permit, building permit or other city entitlement will be issued for the land within the subdivision until and unless a development allotment is first awarded. 
(Ord. 532 § 1, 1982: Ord. 504 § 1 (part), 1981.) 
