CITY OF CALABASAS MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
Calabasas, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 22 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
PREFACE 
The Calabasas, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1995, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Robin Parker, City Clerk, Charles Vose, City Attorney, and Steven Quintanilla, Deputy City Attorney. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 22, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 2019-378 , passed August 28, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title , then chapter , and ending with section . Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 21 a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 22, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 22 this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 22, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. This guide will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, this code was numbered with consecutive page numbers. As it is amended, new material may require the insertion of new pages that are numbered with hyphens. (Example: 31, 32, 32-1.) Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
There is adopted the "Calabasas Municipal Code," as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 95-98 § 1, 1995)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the "Calabasas Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "Calabasas Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Calabasas Municipal Code. References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsection of the Calabasas Municipal Code and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. 
(Ord. 95-98 § 2, 1995)  
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "Calabasas Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 95-98 § 3, 1995)  
1.01.040 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this Code. 
(Ord. 95-98 § 4, 1995)  
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
(Ord. 95-98 § 5, 1995)  
1.01.060 - Ordinance passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in this Code was Ordinance No. 95-92, passed March 15, 1995. The following ordinance, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 95-92 but prior to adoption of this Code, is hereby adopted and made a part of this Code: Ordinance No. 95-94. 
(Ord. 95-98 § 6, 1995)  
1.01.070 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
The adoption of this Code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this Code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this Code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed for deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 95-98 § 7, 1995)  
1.01.080 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. 
(Ord. 95-98 § 8, 1995)  
1.01.090 - References to prior code. 
References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
(Ord. 95-98 § 9, 1995)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTION SCHEDULE 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Election date. 
General municipal elections shall be conducted on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of even-numbered years. 
(Ord. 94-70 § 2, 1994) 
( Ord. No. 2014-312, § 1 , 3-12-2014; Ord. No. 2016-339 , § 1, 9-28-2016) 
Note— The Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors officially approved Ord. No. 2014-312 on April 8, 2014.  
1.04.020 - Effect on existing terms of office. 
A.  No term of office shall be increased or decreased by more than twelve (12) months as the result of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  Twelve (12) months means the period between the day upon which the term of office otherwise would have commenced and the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of the even-numbered year in which the election is held, inclusive. 
(Ord. 94-70 § 3, 1994) 
( Ord. No. 2015-320, § 1 , 2-11-2015; Ord. No. 2016-339 , § 2, 9-28-2016)  
1.04.030 - Notice of change in election date. 
A.  Within thirty (30) days after adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city clerk shall cause notice to be mailed to all registered voters informing the voters of the change in election date. 
B.  The notice shall also inform the voters that as a result of the change in election date, elected city officeholders' terms in office will be changed. 
(Ord. 94-70 § 4, 1994)  
1.04.040 - Holidays. 
No election under this chapter shall be held on the date before, the day of, or the day after a state holiday. 
(Ord. 94-70 § 5, 1994)  
1.04.050 - Initiatives, referendum and recall elections. 
This chapter shall not apply to initiatives, referendum and recall elections. 
(Ord. 94-70 § 6, 1994)  
Chapter 1.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - Rules of construction. 
A.  In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed and the following definitions shall apply unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body. 
B.  The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes expressed therein or implied from the expression thereof. Words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to their common and usual meaning unless the contrary is clearly indicated. Technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.08.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the City of Calabasas, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
"Business day" means a day when Calabasas City Hall is open for business. 
"City" means the City of Calabasas, or the area within the territorial limits of the city, and such territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
"City manager" means the duly appointed and acting city manager of the city. 
"Council" means the city council of the city. "All its members" or "all council-members" mean the total number of councilmembers holding office. 
"County" means the county of Los Angeles. 
"Day" means calendar day, unless otherwise expressly stated. 
"Highway" means any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
"Law" means applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
"May" is permissive. 
"May not" means a mandatory negative effect and states a prohibition. 
"Month" means a calendar month. 
"Must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
"Oath" means affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
"Owner," applied to a building, land, or real property, means any part owner, joint owner, occupant, person exercising control of real property or a portion thereof, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
"Person" means a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, trustees, receivers, other entity, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them and any combination of any of the foregoing. 
"Personal property" means money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
"Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
"Property" means real and personal property. 
"Real property" means lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
"Roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
"Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"Street" means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereinafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
"Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, mean any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
"Week" means seven days; but publication in a newspaper of any notice or other matter indicated to be for a stated number of weeks shall be construed to mean one insertion in each week, unless specifically stated to be for each day of the week or for more than one day in each week. 
"Written" means printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
"Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2005-201 §§ 1, 2, 2005; Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.08.030 - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
A.  Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.08.040 - Acts by agents. 
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.08.050 - Prohibited acts include causing and permitting. 
Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.08.060 - Computation of time. 
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.08.070 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.08.080 - Provisions considered as continuances of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing as the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuances thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.08.090 - Applicability of references to amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this Code, or to any ordinance of this city, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.08.100 - Scope of references to acts or omissions. 
This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.08.110 - Acts by deputy. 
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, a public officer, or employee, the power may be exercised, or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.08.120 - Writing. 
Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.08.130 - Cash deposits. 
Wherever this Code requires a cash deposit for any purpose, a valid and sufficient corporate surety bond may be deposited in lieu thereof, if approved by the city manager and city attorney. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.08.140 - Surety bonds. 
Wherever this Code requires a corporate surety bond for any purpose, a cash deposit in lieu thereof may be made with the city treasurer. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.08.150 - Notices. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Code, unless a contrary provision is specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail, in a sealed envelope, or postal card, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at his or her last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the postal service. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 1.12 - CITY SEAL 
Sections: 
 
1.12.010 - Adoption. 
The city council shall, by resolution, adopt a city seal. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.12.020 - Use. 
The impression of the seal shall be made and used upon all official documents executed by the city or its duly authorized officials. No person shall make, reproduce, manufacture, display or use the seal, or its design or any design so closely resembling the same as to be apt to deceive or be reasonably mistaken for, in any way without the express prior approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.12.030 - Custodian. 
The city clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 1.16 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
1.16.010 - Violation—Deemed misdemeanor. 
Except as otherwise provided, every person who violates any provision or who fails to comply with any of the requirements of this Code or any other ordinance of the city is guilty of a misdemeanor unless the offense is specifically classified in the code or by state law as an infraction, or the city prosecutor reduces the charge to an infraction in the interests of justice, in which case the person shall be guilty of an infraction. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of said code or ordinance is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. 2005-201 § 3, 2005: Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.16.020 - Violation—Misdemeanor and infraction penalty. 
A.  Violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, unless otherwise provided in such ordinance, is punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided any other provision of any ordinance of this city, a violation of an ordinance which is defined to be an infraction is punishable by: 
1.  A fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; 
2.  A fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same provision of code or ordinance within one year; 
3.  A fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same provision of code or ordinance within one year; 
4.  A fourth violation of the same provision of code or ordinance, regardless of time of occurrence, shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in subsection (A) of this section. 
(Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
1.16.030 - Civil remedies available. 
In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, the violation of any of the provisions of this Code or of any other ordinance of the city shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law. In addition to any other relief, the city may recover: reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred in any enforcement or legal action commenced to abate any nuisance pursuant to any provision of this Code, declared nuisances as described in Section 8.20.040 of this Code, any other described nuisance elsewhere in the code, by other ordinance of the city, or by other law. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 1, 2006: Ord. 95-100 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 1.17 - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
1.17.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council has determined that the enforcement of this Code, any uniform or other code it adopts by reference, and any other ordinance of the city is an important public service and is vital to the protection of the public's health, safety and quality of life. The city council has determined that there is a need for alternative methods of code enforcement and that a comprehensive code enforcement system includes criminal, civil and administrative remedies. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.020 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter it's most reasonable application. 
"Administrative citation" means a notice issued pursuant to Section 1.17.080 of this chapter. 
"Appellant" means a person who seeks an administrative hearing on an administrative citation in the manner required by this chapter. 
"City manager" means the city manager or his or her designee. 
"Code violation" means any violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, including any codes adopted by reference as permitted by law and any violation of any condition imposed upon the issuance of any permit, license, or other approval (e.g., subdivision map, use permit, variance, zoning clearance) pursuant to this Code or any other ordinance of the city. 
"Enforcement officer" means an individual designated by the city manager to act under this chapter. 
"Hearing authority" means the city manager or his or her designee. 
"Issue" means to provide a notice of violation, an administrative citation, a notice of hearing, a notice of the continuance of a hearing, or a notice of decision by: (1) personally serving it on a responsible person; (2) mailing it to a responsible person by first class mail; or (3) posting it in a conspicuous place on the property to which it relates and mailing a copy of it to a responsible person at the address where the violation occurred. 
"Notice of decision" is defined in Section 1.17.150(H) of this chapter. 
"Notice of violation" means any notice that informs a person that a code violation has occurred whether or not given in compliance with Section 1.17.040 of this chapter. 
"Preliminary reviewing authority" means the community development director or his or her designee. 
"Responsible person" means any of the following: 
1.  A person who, by action or inaction, causes, maintains, permits or allows a code violation; 
2.  A person whose agent, employee, or independent contractor, by action or inaction, causes, maintains, permits or allows a code violation; 
3.  An owner of real property on which a code violation occurs; 
4.  A lessee or sublessee with the current right of possession of real property on which a code violation occurs; 
5.  A person that uses real property on which a code violation occurs; 
6.  An on-site manager who regularly works on real property on which a violation occurs and who is responsible for the business or other activities on that real property; 
7.  The owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers, trustees, general partners and any other person with the authority to act for a legal entity that is a responsible person under subsections (1) through (6) above; 
8.  If any of the above persons are minors or incompetent, the parents or guardians of such persons shall be deemed responsible persons. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.030 - General enforcement authority. 
Enforcement officers may issue notices of violation and administrative citations, inspect public and private property, and use whatever judicial and administrative remedies are available under this Code and other law to enforce the ordinances of the city. More specific provisions regarding administrative or other enforcement authority and procedures for particular violations may exist in this Code and shall, to the fullest extent permissible, be construed to complement rather than contradict this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.040 - Notice of violation. 
Whenever an enforcement officer determines that a violation exists, the enforcement officer may issue a notice of violation to any responsible persons. The notice of violation must include the following information: 
A.  The code section(s) or other ordinances violated; 
B.  A description of the condition creating or constituting the violation(s); 
C.  The address where the violation(s) occurs; 
D.  The name of the responsible person and any other involved persons known to the enforcement officer; 
E.  The date and, if relevant, time at which the violation was observed; 
F.  If applicable, a list of any corrections necessary to bring the property into compliance; 
G.  A deadline by which to correct the violation(s); 
H.  The signature of the enforcement officer issuing the notice of violation; 
I.  The date the notice of violation is issued. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.050 - Authority to inspect. 
Enforcement officers are authorized to enter upon any property or premises within the city to ascertain whether the ordinances of the city are being obeyed, and to make any examination and surveys as may be necessary in the performance of their enforcement duties, in accordance with Fourth Amendment of United States Constitution and the related protections of the California Constitution. These inspections may include the taking of photographs, samples, or other physical evidence. All inspections, entries, examinations and surveys shall be performed reasonably and in accordance with law. If an owner or occupant of property or his or her agent refuses to consent to entry and inspection, an enforcement officer may seek an administrative inspection's warrant pursuant to law. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.060 - Notice of pending administrative enforcement. 
An enforcement officer may record with the Los Angeles County Registrar Recorder a notice against a property which is the subject of an administrative enforcement action to give notice to potential transferees of the property of code violations thereon. A notice of pending administration action shall be on a form approved by the city manager and shall describe the nature of the administrative action and refer to the code provision governing the pending administrative action. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.070 - Administrative fines and penalties. 
A.  Any responsible person may be subject to an administrative fine pursuant to this chapter for any code violation. 
B.  Each and every responsible person is jointly and severally liable, in accordance with notice and procedures of this chapter, for all fines, penalties and interest imposed for the code violation(s) as to which he or she is a responsible person. 
C.  A violation constitutes a separate and distinct violation for each day that it exists and each such violation may be subject to the maximum fine permitted under this chapter. 
D.  An administrative citation may charge: (i) a code violation for one or more days on which a violation exists; and (ii) violation of one or more code sections. 
E.  The administrative fines delineated in this chapter are in addition to, and do not preclude imposition of, any other remedies, criminal, civil, or administrative, available to the city. Imposition of administrative fines shall be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.080 - Administrative citations. 
If a responsible person(s) fails to correct a code violation within the time prescribed in a notice of violation, an enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to each and every responsible party who knew or reasonably should have known of that notice of violation of whom the enforcement officer has knowledge. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.090 - Contents of administrative citation. 
An administrative citation shall include the following: 
A.  The code section(s) or other ordinances violated; 
B.  A description of the condition creating or constituting the violation(s); 
C.  The address where the violation(s) occurs; 
D.  The name of the responsible person(s) and any other involved persons known to the enforcement officer; 
E.  The date and, if relevant, time at which the violation was observed; 
F.  If applicable, a list of any corrections necessary to correct the code violations; 
G.  The signature of the enforcement officer issuing the administrative citation; 
H.  The date the administrative citation is issued; 
I.  The amount and due date of the fine; 
J.  A description of the procedure to pay the fine; 
K.  A description of the procedure for requesting a preliminary review, waiver of fine deposit and hearing to contest the administrative citation; 
L.  A statement that a lien may be imposed against the property on which a violation occurs in the amount of any unpaid fines and any penalties and interest thereon; 
M.  Any other information deemed necessary for enforcement or collection of the administrative fines. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.100 - Consideration in other proceedings. 
The city council, planning commission, any other board or commission of the city, and city staff may consider the fact that a person has been issued an administrative citation when determining whether to grant, suspend, revoke, or deny any permit, license, or other approval, regarding a matter related to the condition causing a code violation, and may consider such administrative citation to be evidence that the person has committed acts that threaten the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.110 - Amount of administrative fines and penalties. 
A.  The fines for a code violation shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The schedule of fines may include escalating fine amounts for repeated code violations within specific periods of time. 
B.  If a responsible person does not pay an administrative fine on or before the due date, he or she shall also incur a penalty and interest for every day of delinquency, as the city council shall establish from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.120 - Payment of fines. 
A.  All fines are due on the day specified in the administrative citation. 
B.  Fines shall be paid to the city manager. Payment may be made by mailing the fine amount paid by check or money order. Cash payments may be made only at City Hall. 
C.  Payment of a fine pursuant to this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continued or repeated violation of this Code. 
D.  Pending a hearing by the hearing authority, payment of a fine may be stayed if the preliminary reviewing authority determines, pursuant to Section 1.17.130 of this chapter that a responsible person is unable to pay the fine. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.130 - Preliminary review. 
A.  A person to whom an administrative citation is issued may request a preliminary review within ten (10) days of the date the administrative citation is issued. Failure to request a preliminary review within that time waives any preliminary review. 
B.  A request for a preliminary review shall be made in writing and filed with the city and shall include all information that the person requesting the review desires the preliminary reviewing authority to consider. A request for preliminary review may include a request for waiver of the fine deposit. A person requesting a waiver of fine deposit bears the burden to establish by substantial evidence, including a sworn affidavit, that he or she is unable to pay the fine imposed by the administrative citation. 
C.  The preliminary review authority shall review the administrative citation, the written request for a preliminary review, and any evidence the person requesting the review may submit and make the determination required by subsection (F) of this section. 
D.  The cited person shall be notified of the results of the preliminary review within ten (10) business days of the filing of a request for preliminary review. The decision on a preliminary review is not a final disposition of an administrative citation and therefore is not, in and of itself, subject to judicial review. 
E.  A request for preliminary review shall not extend any time period for correction of a code violation, the date that any fine is due, or the time in which to request an administrative hearing. 
F.  If the preliminary reviewing authority concludes that the code violation(s) stated in the administrative citation did not occur or that the person to whom the administrative citation issued is not a responsible person with respect to the code violation(s), then he or she shall dismiss the administrative citation in its entirety, if all cited violations are disproved, or as to the cited violations which are disproved, without prejudice to the issuance of a further administrative citation should additional evidence be developed. Otherwise, the preliminary reviewing authority shall confirm the administrative citation. The preliminary reviewing authority shall also determine whether the responsible person qualifies for waiver of the fine deposit, if a waiver is requested. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.140 - Administrative hearing. 
A.  A person to whom an administrative citation is issued may request an administrative hearing within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the administrative citation whether or not he or she requested a preliminary review of that citation and whether or not a preliminary review occurred. Failure to timely request an administrative hearing in the manner required by this chapter constitutes a waiver of the hearing and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
B.  A request for an administrative hearing shall be made in writing and filed with the city, and shall state any grounds which the appellant wishes the city to consider. Unless waived upon preliminary review, the request shall be accompanied by a deposit of the fine imposed by the administrative citation, in the event the fine has not yet been paid. 
C.  An appellant may request one continuance of a hearing provided he or she does so in writing before the date of the hearing and states a reasonable basis for the request. Unless the city issues a written notice of continuance, the hearing shall take place on the date, time and location specified in a notice of hearing issued to the appellant. An appellant's failure to attend a hearing shall constitute an abandonment of the request for the hearing and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.150 - Hearing procedures. 
A.  The hearing shall be conducted by the hearing authority on the date, time and location specified in a notice of hearing issued to the appellant. 
B.  An administrative citation and other reports prepared by an enforcement officer concerning a code violation shall be accepted by the hearing authority as prima facie evidence of the facts stated in such documents. 
C.  The hearing authority shall allow the appellant an opportunity to testify at the hearing and to present evidence about any code violation(s) specified in the administrative citation. 
D.  The enforcement officer and other representatives of the city may, but need not, attend the hearing. 
E.  The hearing authority may continue a hearing from time to time and allow an appellant or other responsible person additional time to remedy a violation. In addition, the hearing authority may request additional information or evidence from the appellant. 
F.  All hearings shall be recorded on a video or audio device, unless the city elects to use a court reporter. If a court reporter is not used, the city need not provide transcriptions of any hearings, but, within fifteen (15) calendar days after payment of reasonable duplication fee, shall make a copy of the video and audio recordings available to any responsible person with respect to the code violations which were the subject of the hearing. If a court reporter is used, such a responsible person may obtain a copy of the transcript upon payment of any fees or costs incurred by the city in providing the transcript. 
G.  A hearing need not be conducted in accordance with the technical rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might consider such admission improper in a civil action. The hearing officer may exclude irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence. 
H.  After considering all testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing authority shall issue a written decision to affirm, modify or dismiss the administrative citation in all or part. The decision shall include the hearing authority's findings, as well as information regarding the cited person's right to seek judicial review of the decision and the time in which to do so. The city shall issue the hearing authority's written decision (the "notice of decision") to the appellant. The decision of the hearing authority shall be final. 
I.  If the hearing authority determines that the administrative citation should be affirmed in all or part, the city shall retain any funds on deposit as payment of the fine for any code violation affirmed and any penalty or interest whether or not with respect to an affirmed code violation. The city shall refund to the person who paid them the fine for any code violation which is not affirmed, and if an administrative citation is overturned in its entirety, any penalties and interest imposed on account of that administrative citation, as well. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.160 - Judicial review. 
An appellant may seek judicial review of the hearing authority's decision by filing a petition for review with the superior court, pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4, within twenty (20) days after the notice of decision is issued to him or her. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
1.17.170 - Collection of delinquent fines and penalties and other remedies. 
A.  The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of fines, interest and penalties; resort to any one remedy shall not foreclose subsequent or simultaneous resort to any other. 
B.  Delinquent fines, interest and penalties may be recorded as a lien or special assessment against a property on which a code violation occurred. Prior to recording a lien or special assessment, the city shall prepare a cost report itemizing the amount owed by the responsible persons and give known responsible parties reasonable opportunity to be heard with respect to that cost report. The city shall comply with any other law applicable to the recording of any delinquent fines, interest and penalties as a lien on the property, or as a special assessment. 
C.  The administrative citation process described in this chapter does not preclude the city from recovering any code violation abatement costs incurred by the city in performing its code enforcement efforts. 
(Ord. 2005-213 § 2 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 1.18 - RECORDATION OF NOTICES; RECOVERY OF ATTORNEY'S FEES 
Sections: 
 
1.18.010 - Recordation of notices. 
A.  If the city determines that any property, building or structure, or any part thereof, is in violation of any provision of the Calabasas Municipal Code and said violation has not been fully abated or corrected, as determined by the city, in the manner and time provided in a written notice to a responsible person, then the city, in its sole discretion, may record a "Declaration of Substandard Property" with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office against said premises. As used herein, "fully abated or corrected" includes the procurement of all required city and/or county approvals, permits, licenses and the passage of all required inspections. This subsection shall supersede any provision of the Calabasas Municipal Code that conflicts with it. 
B.  All activities, conditions and uses on real property that violate the Calabasas Municipal Code, or that violate any approval, entitlement, license or permit issued pursuant thereto, as well as a responsible person's failure to complete actions in connection with real property that are required by the Calabasas Municipal Code or by a public official in implementing a regulation or other provision in the Calabasas Municipal, are public nuisances by definition and declaration. If the city determines that a public nuisance is being committed or maintained on real property and said public nuisance has not been fully abated or corrected, as determined by the city, in the manner and time provided in a written notice to a responsible person, then the city, in its sole discretion, may record a "Declaration of Public Nuisance." The definition of "public nuisance" in this subsection shall supersede any provision of the Calabasas Municipal Code that conflicts with it. 
C.  The notices concerning violations or public nuisances under the Calabasas Municipal Code that the city issues pursuant to Subsections A. or B. above shall contain the following provisions: 
1.  A statement advising responsible person(s) that a "Declaration of Substandard Property" or a "Declaration of Public Nuisance" may be recorded against a property if the violations or public nuisances are not fully abated or corrected in the manner and time stated in said notice." 
2.  A statement advising that a "Declaration of Substandard Property" or a "Declaration of Public Nuisance" is being recorded to give notice to persons who subsequently acquire a legal interest in the affected real property of the property's non-compliance with the requirements of the Calabasas Municipal Code, but this declaration is not intended to, and does not, alter the requirements of this Code. Failure, however, to include such this statement will not invalidate a notice. 
D.  The forms constituting a "Declaration of Substandard Property" and a "Declaration of Public Nuisance" shall be approved by the city attorney or the city prosecutor. 
E.  The city shall record a "Rescission of Declaration of Substandard Property" or a "Rescission of Declaration of Public Nuisance" with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office within ten (10) business days of its determination that a violation or a public nuisance has been fully abated or corrected. 
F.  The city shall cause copies of notices that are issued and recorded pursuant to this section to be served on all persons having an ownership interest in the subject real property as shown in the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office. Notwithstanding any provision of the Calabasas Municipal Code, service thereof shall be by first class mail. Failure of any person to receive such notices shall not invalidate any action or proceeding that is initiated pursuant to the Calabasas Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-277, § 1, 6-9-2010)  
1.18.020 - Attorney's fees. 
A.  A prevailing party in any administrative, civil or equitable judicial action to abate, or cause the abatement of, a violation or public nuisance under this Code, or in any appeal or other judicial action arising therefrom, may recover reasonable attorney's fees in accordance with the following subsections: 
1.  Attorney's fees are not recoverable by any person as a prevailing party unless the city manager, or a designee thereof, or an attorney for, and on behalf of, the city, elects in writing to seek recovery of the city's attorney's fees at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding. Failure to make such an election precludes any entitlement to, or award of, attorney's fees in favor of any person or the city. 
2.  The city is the prevailing party when an administrative or judicial determination is made or affirmed by which a person is found to be responsible for one or more activities, conditions or uses that constitute a violation or a public nuisance. A person is the prevailing party only when a final administrative or judicial determination completely absolves that person of responsibility for all activities, conditions or uses that were alleged, in that action or proceeding, to constitute a violation or a public nuisance. An administrative or judicial determination that results in mixed findings of both a person's responsibility and non-responsibility for activities, conditions or uses that were alleged in that action or proceeding to constitute a violation or public nuisance, shall nevertheless result in the city being the prevailing party. 
B.  Provided that the city has made an election to seek attorney's fees, an award of such fees to a person shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in that action or proceeding. 
C.  Unpaid attorney's fees shall constitute a debt that is collectible in any manner allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-277, § 1, 6-9-2010)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - Meetings. 
A.  Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the second and fourth Wednesday of each month at an hour specified by resolution of the city council unless the same shall be a legal holiday, in which event such regular meeting shall be held on the next succeeding calendar day which is not a holiday. The city council may change the date of its regular meetings by resolution. 
B.  The city council may adjourn any regular or adjourned meeting to a date specified in the order of adjournment. 
(Ord. 2008-243 § 1, 2008; Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2009-261, § 1, 6-24-2009)  
2.04.020 - Meeting place. 
A.  The council chambers in the city hall located at 100 Civic Center Way, Calabasas, is designated as the official meeting place of the city council. 
B.  If the regular meeting place is unable to accommodate the number of persons in attendance, the council may recess the meeting to another place. If the council anticipates that the regular meeting place will be inadequate, the council, or mayor in the event of an emergency, may order that the meeting be held in another place. 
(Ord. 2008-243 § 2, 2008; Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.04.030 - Quorum—Adjournment. 
A.  A majority of the city council constitutes a quorum for transaction of business. Less than a quorum may adjourn from time to time, and compel attendance of absent members in the manner and under the penalties prescribed by ordinance. 
B.  If all councilmembers are absent from any regular meeting, the city clerk shall declare the meeting adjourned to a stated day and hour. The clerk shall cause a written notice of the adjournment to be delivered personally to each councilmember. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.04.040 - Organization—Selection of mayor. 
A.  The city council shall appoint annually at a November meeting, from their membership, a mayor and mayor pro tempore. The mayor shall assume the duties of the presiding officer immediately following appointment. 
B.  The mayor shall preside at the meetings of the city council. If the mayor is absent or unable to act, the mayor pro tempore shall serve until the mayor returns or is able to act. The mayor pro tempore has all of the powers and duties of the mayor. 
C.  If both the mayor and mayor pro tempore are absent or unable to act, the majority of the city council shall appoint a temporary chair to exercise the powers and authority of the chair. Such appointment shall not continue beyond adjournment. 
D.  The mayor may make or second any motion and present and discuss any matter as a member of the city council. 
E.  The mayor shall preserve order and decorum at all meetings of the city council and confine members in debates to the question under discussion. 
F.  The mayor shall sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city council. 
G.  The mayor shall sign: 
1.  All warrants drawn on the city treasurer; 
2.  All written contracts and conveyances made or entered into by the city; 
3.  All instruments requiring the city seal. 
H.  The legislative body may provide by ordinance that the instruments described above be signed by an officer other than the mayor. 
I.  The mayor may administer oaths and affirmations, take affidavits, and certify them under his or her hand. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995) 
( Ord. No. 2015-320, § 2 , 2-11-2015)  
2.04.050 - Rules for conduct of proceedings. 
A.  The city council may establish rules for the conduct of its proceedings. It may punish a member or other person for disorderly behavior at a meeting. 
B.  A majority of the city council may designate a sergeant at arms who shall carry out all orders given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the city council meetings. Any city council member may move to require the presiding officer to enforce the rules and the affirmative vote of a majority of the city council shall require the mayor to do so. 
C.  While the city council is in session, the councilmembers must preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the city council or disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the city council or its presiding officer, except as otherwise herein provided. 
D.  Any person making personal, impertinent, or slanderous remarks or who shall become boisterous while addressing the city council shall be forthwith, by the presiding officer, barred from further audience before the city council, unless permission to continue be granted by a majority vote of the city council. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.04.060 - Councilmember—Eligibility to hold office. 
A.  City Council Candidate Residency. No person shall be eligible to hold office as a member of the city council unless: 
1.  He or she is a registered voter and a resident of the city at the time nomination papers are issued; and 
2.  He or she is a registered voter and a resident of the city at the time of election or appointment. 
B.  If, during the term of his or her term of office, he or she moves his or her place of residence outside of the city limits or ceases to be an elector of the city, he or she is no longer eligible to hold office and his or her office shall immediately become vacant. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. 2019-374 , § 1, 2-27-2019)  
2.04.070 - Councilmember—Termination of office. 
A.  A written resignation filed with the city clerk shall constitute an effective resignation which may not be withdrawn thereafter. 
B.  If, during a councilmember's term of office, he or she moves his or her legal residency outside of the city limits or ceases to be an elector of the city, his or her office shall immediately become vacant. For purposes of this chapter, "legal residency" shall mean physical presence combined with an intent to remain. 
C.  If a councilmember, through words or conduct, clearly indicates that he or she clearly intends to absolutely relinquish his or her office, his or her office shall immediately become vacant. 
D.  If a councilmember accepts a second office determined by the city council by resolution to be incompatible with the office of the respective councilmember, his or her councilmember office shall immediately become vacant. 
E.  A councilmember's acceptance of a free or discounted transportation pass from a transportation company shall result in an immediate forfeiture of the respective councilmember's office. 
F.  When a recall petition is filed and certified, and a majority of the voters approve the recall of the councilmember, the councilmember's term terminates and the office becomes vacant. 
G.  If the city council conducts regular council meetings more than once a month and a councilmember is absent without permission from all regular city council meetings for sixty (60) consecutive days from the last regular meeting he or she attended, his or her office shall become vacant. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.04.080 - Councilmember—Filling of vacancy. 
A person appointed to fill a vacancy on the council shall hold office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent and shall receive the same compensation as that payable to the member whose office was vacated. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.04.090 - Councilmember—Salary. 
Each member of the city council shall receive as salary the sum of nine hundred seventy-six dollars ($976.00) per month, as prescribed in Section 36516 of the California Government Code for cities up to and including thirty-five thousand (35,000) in population. 
(Ord. 2004-196 § 1, 2004: Ord. 2001-160 § 2, 2001: Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995; Ord. No. 2014-318, § 1 , 9-10-2014) 
(Ord. No. 2018-359 , § 1, 1-24-2018) 
Editor's note— Pursuant to Government Code Section 36516.5, this [section] shall take effect on the first day of the month following the date a councilmember begins a new term of office following the 2018 general municipal election.  
2.04.100 - Councilmember—Reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses. 
Each member of the city council shall be eligible for reimbursement of actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his or her official duties for the city. Each member of the city council shall be eligible to request the purchase of actual and necessary supplies and materials for the performance of his or her official duties for the city. Claims for such expenses or purchase orders for such supplies and materials shall be filed with the city manager and shall be subject to audit and approval by the city council. 
(Ord. 2001-160 § 1, 2001: Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 2.08 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - Office created. 
The office of the city manager of the city is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.08.020 - Residence. 
Residence in the city shall not be required as a condition of employment. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.08.030 - Eligibility. 
No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such city council member shall have ceased to be a member of the city council. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.08.040 - Bond. 
The city manager and assistant city manager, if any, shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager and assistant city manager as herein prescribed. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.08.050 - Acting city manager. 
The assistant city manager shall serve as acting city manager during the temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In the event there is no assistant city manager, the city manager, by filing a written notice with the city clerk, shall designate a qualified city employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during his or her temporary absence or disability. In the event the city manager's absence or disability extends over a two-month period, the city council may, after the two-month period, appoint an acting city manager. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.08.060 - Compensation. 
A.  The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time determine. 
B.  In addition, the city manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties. Claims for such expenses shall be filed with the city council and subject to audit and approval. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.08.070 - Powers and duties. 
A.  The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He/she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his/her control. In addition to the general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his/her duty and he/she shall have the powers set forth herewith: 
1.  Law Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed. 
2.  Authority Over Employees. It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he/she shall have the authority, to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his/her jurisdiction through their department heads; provided, however, that: 
a.  During such time as the city council is the appointing authority with respect to the chief financial officer, then the chief financial officer shall report directly to the city council and the city manager shall not have the authority to control, order or give directions to the chief financial officer; and 
b.  The city council is the appointing authority with respect to the city attorney and the city attorney shall report directly to the city council and the city manager shall not have the authority to control, order or give directions to the city attorney. 
3.  Power of Appointment and Removal. It shall be the duty of the city manager to, and he/she shall, appoint, remove, promote, demote and discipline any and all officers and employees of the city, except (a) the city attorney and, (b) the chief financial officer during such time as the city council is the appointing authority with respect to the chief financial officer. 
4.  Administrative Reorganization of Offices. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and effect such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under his/her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city's business. 
5.  Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he/she shall recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he/she deems necessary. 
6.  Attendance at City Council Meetings. It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless at his/her request he/she is excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the city council, except when his/her removal is under consideration. 
7.  Financial Reports. It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
8.  Budget. It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval. 
9.  Expenditure Control and Purchasing. It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on approval of the city manager or his/her authorized representative. The city manager, or his/her authorized representative, shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments or divisions of the city. 
10.  Investigations and Complaints. It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligation to the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regards to the service maintained by public utilities in said city. 
11.  Public Buildings. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he/she shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, and all other public property which are under control and jurisdiction of the city council. 
12.  Hours of Employment. It shall be the duty of the city manager to devote his/her entire time to the duties of his/her office and in furthering the interest of the city. 
B.  Additional Duties. It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him/her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council. 
(Ord. 2003-186 §§ 2, 3 2003; Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.08.080 - Internal relations. 
A.  Council-Manager Relations. The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his/her orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council and no individual councilmember shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. 
B.  Departmental Cooperation. It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously. 
C.  Attendance at Commission Meetings. The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission and any other commissions, boards or committees created by the city council, upon his/her own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he/she shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he/she wishes to address the members thereof, and he/she shall inform said members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he/she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.08.090 - Removal procedure. 
A.  Removal of City Manager. The removal of the city manager may be effected with or without cause, but only by a majority vote of the whole city council as then constituted, convened in a regular city council meeting. The city manager shall be afforded at least thirty (30) days' written notice of the effective date of his/her termination. 
B.  Limitation on Removal. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the city manager shall not be removed from office, during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected or when a new city council member is appointed. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the city council or a recognized city council to observe the actions and abilities of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his/her office. After the expiration of said ninety-day period, the provisions of subsection (A) of this section as to the removal of said city manager shall apply and be effective. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.08.100 - Agreements on employment. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 2.12 - CITY CLERK 
Sections: 
 
2.12.010 - Office created. 
The city clerk of the city shall be appointed by the city manager, with city council approval and such individual shall be qualified by training and experience to perform the duties of the office. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.12.020 - Powers and duties. 
The city clerk shall: 
A.  Keep record of proceedings. Maintain and preserve the minutes and records of the proceedings of the city council and of all council committees, boards and commissions in accordance with the general laws of the state of California; 
B.  Record ordinances and resolutions. Record in full, uniformly and permanently, all ordinances and resolutions of the city and be the legal custodian of the same. This shall include the vote thereon and the notice of publication or posting; 
C.  Publish all legal notices. The city clerk shall publish all legal notices as required by law or ordinance; 
D.  Attend city council meetings. Attend in person or by designee all city council meetings in their entirety for the purpose of making and keeping an accurate record of the proceedings; 
E.  Conduct local elections and keep election records. The city clerk shall keep and maintain all election records and have custody of all property used in connection with elections; 
F.  Maintain city seal. The city clerk shall have custody of the seal of the city and affix it to such documents as may be required and authorized pursuant to law; 
G.  Publication of list of appointments of all ongoing boards, commissions and committees. The city council requires that the city clerk make the annual publication by December 31st of each year of the local appointment list ("Maddy Act"). The city council designates the public library to receive a copy of the list; 
H.  Oaths, affidavits, depositions and acknowledgments. The city clerk and his/her deputies may administer oaths or affirmations and take and certify affidavits and depositions pertaining to city affairs and business which may be used in any court or proceedings in the state. The acknowledgment of an instrument may be made before a city clerk and his/her deputies within the city in which they were elected or appointed; 
I.  Receipt of claims against public entity. The city clerk shall receive all claims, amendments thereto, or applications for leave to present late claims against the city; 
J.  Additional duties. The city clerk shall perform such additional duties as are prescribed by ordinance. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.12.030 - Appointment. 
The position of city clerk was designated appointed in the petition for incorporation of the city. The city manager shall designate the city clerk and the city council appoints such officer by resolution. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.12.040 - Deputies. 
The city clerk may appoint deputies, for whose acts his/her bondsmen are responsible and may delegate such duties and responsibilities as are deemed appropriate to any deputy appointed thereby, subject to approval, by minute action, of the city council. The deputies shall hold office at the pleasure of the city clerk and receive such compensation as is provided by the city council. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.12.050 - Transfer of duties—Financial and accounting. 
The financial and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805, inclusive, of the Government Code are transferred to the director of finance as such office has been created and established and the powers and duties thereof defined by ordinance. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.12.060 - Transfer of duties—Assessment and collection of taxes. 
The duties imposed upon the city clerk pursuant to Government Code Section 40810 as the ex officio assessor for the assessment and collection of city taxes shall be transferred to the director of finance. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.12.070 - Compensation. 
The city clerk shall receive, at stated times, a compensation fixed by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.12.080 - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the city clerk shall execute a surety bond to the city. Except as otherwise provided, the bond shall conform to the provisions of the Government Code relating to bonds of public officers. The penal sum of the bond shall be in a reasonable amount recommended by the city attorney and fixed by the city council, by resolution, and may be changed during their term of office. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 2.16 - CITY TREASURER 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - Office created. 
The city treasurer of the city shall be appointed by the city manager, with city council approval and such individual shall be qualified by training and experience to perform the duties of the office. The office of city treasurer may be combined with any other office or position not inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.16.020 - Powers and duties. 
A.  Receipt and Custody of Money. The city treasurer shall receive and safely keep all money coming into his/her hands as treasurer. 
B.  Compliance with Laws Governing Deposit and Securing of Public Funds. The city treasurer shall comply with all laws governing the deposit and securing of public funds and the handling of trust funds in his/her possession. 
C.  Payment on Warrants. The city treasurer shall pay out money only on warrants signed by legally designated persons. 
D.  Monthly Report and Accounting. Regularly, at least once each month, the city treasurer shall submit to the city clerk a written report and accounting of all receipts, disbursements and fund balances. A copy shall be filed with the legislative body. 
E.  Taxes and License Fees. The city treasurer shall perform such duties relative to the collection of city taxes and license fees as are prescribed by ordinance. 
F.  Drawing of Warrants. Upon allowing a demand or approving a register of audited demands, the mayor shall draw a warrant or warrants upon the city treasurer specifying the purpose for which drawn and the fund from which payment is to be made. The city clerk shall countersign the warrant. The city council, by ordinance or resolution, may prescribe an alternative method of drawing warrants and checks. 
G.  Treasurer's Departmental Trust Fund. By ordinance or resolution, the city council may provide for a treasurer's departmental trust fund into which collections of the police department and other officers authorized to make collections may be deposited at frequent intervals during each month. Officers or employees shall advise the city treasurer upon making each deposit. 
H.  Withdrawals From the Fund. The city treasurer shall make withdrawals from such fund only on order signed by the proper department head and for the following purposes: 
1.  Making a refund of bail, which has been exonerated, or other refundable deposits; 
2.  Revolving fund advances authorized by the city council; 
3.  Correction of clerical or ministerial errors in the receipt of payments to the city; 
4.  Making settlements with city funds at the end of each calendar month for collections accumulated during the month. 
I.  Investments and Cash Management. Investments and cash management will be the responsibility of the city treasurer, under the general direction of the city manager. 
J.  Surplus Funds and Investment Policy. The city treasurer, under the general direction of the city manager, shall invest surplus funds of the city in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 53600, et seq. and of the investment policy. Said investment policy shall be presented and approved by the city council on an annual basis. 
K.  Additional Duties. The city treasurer shall perform such additional duties as are prescribed by ordinance. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.16.030 - Appointment. 
The position of city treasurer was designated appointed in the petition for incorporation of the city. The city manager designates the city treasurer and the city council appoints such officer by resolution. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.16.040 - Deputies. 
The city treasurer may appoint deputies, for whose acts his/her bondsmen are responsible and may delegate such duties and responsibilities as are deemed appropriate to any deputy appointed thereby, subject to approval, by minute action, of the city council. The deputies shall hold office at the pleasure of the city treasurer and receive such compensation as is provided by the city council. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.16.050 - Compensation. 
The city treasurer shall receive, at stated times, a compensation fixed by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.16.060 - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the city treasurer shall execute a surety bond to the city. Except as otherwise provided, the bond shall conform to the provisions of the Government Code relating to bonds of public officers. The penal sum of the bond shall be in a reasonable amount recommended by the city attorney and fixed by the city council, by resolution, and may be changed during their term of office. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 2.20 - CITY ATTORNEY[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-342 , §§ 3—6, adopted Nov. 9, 2016, amended Ch. 2.20 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 2.20, §§ 2.20.010—2.20.040 pertained respectively to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 95-92, § 2(part), adopted in 1995; and Ord. 2006-218, § 1, adopted in 2006. 
 
2.20.010 - City attorney. 
The city council may contract with a law firm or individual admitted to practice law before the Supreme Court of the State of California to provide city attorney services. The duties and powers of the city attorney shall be as specified in Government Code Sections 41801 through 41805. 
(Ord. No. 2016-342 , § 3, 11-9-2016)  
Chapter 2.24 - CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER 
Sections: 
 
2.24.010 - Office created. 
The office of the chief financial officer is created and established. Although the chief financial officer shall be deemed the director of finance within the meaning of Government Code section 40805.5, which authorizes the transfer of certain duties of the city clerk to the director of finance, this position may be known as the chief financial officer within the city at the option of the appointing authority. 
(Ord. 2003-186 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.24.020 - Powers and duties. 
A.  The chief financial officer shall be the head of the finance department of the city, and shall have the power and shall be required to: 
1.  Have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city; 
2.  Compile the budget expense and income estimates; 
3.  Maintain a general accounting system for the city and each of its officers, departments and agencies; 
4.  Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and audit of all expenditures to insure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; 
5.  Audit all purchase orders before issuance to insure that sufficient funds are appropriated and available; 
6.  Audit and approve before payment of bills, invoices, payrolls, demands or charges against the city and with advice of the city attorney, when necessary, determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges; 
7.  Prepare and submit to the city council periodically a register of audited demands with his/her affidavit attached thereto as provided in the Government Code; 
8.  Submit to the city council periodic statements of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city; 
9.  At of the end of each fiscal year, submit a complete financial statement and report; 
10.  Supervise the keeping of current in-ventories of all property of the city by all city departments, offices and agencies; 
11.  Perform all the financial and accounting duties which would be imposed upon the city clerk in the absence of this chapter, and the city clerk shall be relieved of such duties, including all such duties imposed upon the city clerk by Government Code sections 40802 to 40805; 
12.  Perform all duties that are imposed upon the director of finance by this Code or by other law; and 
13.  Perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him/her by this Code, other law, or the appointing authority acting in a manner authorized by this Code or other law. 
B.  No duty, power, or responsibility imposed upon the chief financial officer by this Code or other law may be altered or modified in any way, unless pursuant to a resolution or other written approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 2003-186 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.24.030 - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the chief financial officer shall execute a surety bond to the city. Except as otherwise provided, the bond shall conform to the provisions of the Government Code relating to bonds of public officers. The penal sum of the bond shall be set by the city manager. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. 
(Ord. 2003-186 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.24.040 - Appointment of chief financial officer. 
A.  Unless the city council adopts a resolution vesting such power in itself, the chief financial officer shall report to the city manager and it shall be the duty of the city manager to appoint, remove, promote, demote, and discipline the chief financial officer. 
B.  If the city council adopts a resolution vesting the power to appoint the chief financial officer in the city council, then the chief financial officer shall report directly to the city council and only the city council shall have the power to remove, appoint, promote, demote, and discipline the chief financial officer. 
C.  The city council reserves the right to change the appointing authority with respect to the chief financial officer, without notice to the chief financial officer. The chief financial officer shall have no property interest in reporting to either the council or the city manager. 
(Ord. 2003-186 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 2.27 - COMMISSION APPOINTMENTS, REMOVAL AND ABSENCES 
 
2.27.010 - Appointments. 
Unless a different procedure is expressly stated elsewhere in Title 2 of this Code, each city councilmember shall nominate one (1) commissioner, which nomination shall be subject to city council confirmation. The city council may reappoint a commissioner to an unlimited number of terms. 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 1 , 4-8-2015)  
2.27.020 - Removals. 
The city council, by a majority vote of the entire council, may remove a commissioner from office with or without cause. In addition and as a separate basis for removal, the nominating councilmember may also remove his/her commissioner whom he/she nominated by written notice to the city council and may thereafter nominate a new person who shall serve for the balance of the term upon council approval. 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 1 , 4-8-2015)  
2.27.030 - Absence from meetings. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, any commissioner or alternate who absents himself or herself from three (3), consecutive, regular meetings of the commission, unless excused by the commission by action recorded in its minutes, or who is absent without a recorded excuse, from a total of five (5) regular meetings of the commission in any six-month period, shall thereby automatically forfeit his or her position. The chair or vice chair of the commission shall thereupon promptly notify the city council, and the former commissioner or alternate, of the fact of the vacancy. 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 1 , 4-8-2015)  
Chapter 2.28 - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 92-26, 95-92, 95-101 and 2002-174. 
 
2.28.010 - Creation. 
The planning commission of the City of Calabasas is established in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 65100, et seq. 
(Ord. 2005-207 § 1 (part), 2005) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 2 , 4-8-2015)  
2.28.020 - Membership. 
A.  The commission shall consist of five (5) members and one (1) alternate, who shall be lawful residents of the city and electors during their respective terms of office. The city council shall appoint the alternate. The city council may reappoint the alternate to an unlimited number of terms. 
B.  Commissioners nominated by individual councilmembers shall have a term lasting for the lesser of two (2) years or until the expiration of the term of the councilmember who nominated him or her. The alternate shall have a term lasting two (2) years. Notwithstanding the expiration of a term, a commissioner or alternate shall continue until his or her successor has been appointed. 
C.  If a vacancy shall occur other than by expiration of a term, a new commissioner shall be appointed in the manner as set forth above and shall serve the unexpired portion of the term. 
D.  The alternate may participate in deliberations, but shall not vote unless at least one (1) commissioner is absent or abstains from a matter due to an actual or potential conflict of interest. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2005-207 § 1 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 2010-274, § 1, 4-28-2010; Ord. No. 2015-320, § 3 , 2-11-2015; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 2 , 4-8-2015))  
2.28.030 - Organization. 
A.  The commission shall elect a chair and a vice chair from among its members, each for a term of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting of each year. No person shall serve more than two (2) successive terms in either office. The chair, or in the absence of the chair, the vice chair, shall preside over the meetings of the commission. 
B.  The commission may appoint standing or ad hoc subcommittees from its membership and, with the consent of city council, may appoint advisory committees comprised of noncommissioners. 
C.  With the consent of the city council, the commission may adopt rules and regulations for the transactions of its business. 
D.  The community development director, or such other person as is designated by the city manager to do so, shall serve as secretary of the commission. 
(Ord. 2005-207 § 1 (part), 2005) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 2 , 4-8-2015)  
2.28.040 - Duties. 
The commission shall have the power and duty, except as otherwise provided by law, to: 
A.  Prepare and recommend to the city council a comprehensive long-term general plan and amendments to that plan for the physical development of the city and of any land outside its boundaries which in the commission's judgment bears relation to the city's planning; 
B.  Investigate and make recommendations to the city council regarding reasonable and practical means for effectuating the General Plan to guide the orderly growth and development of the city, and as a basis for the efficient expenditure of capital improvement funds relating to the subjects of the General Plan; 
C.  Render an annual report to the city council on the status of the General Plan and progress in its application consistently with Government Code Section 65400; 
D.  Review proposals for acquisition of property for street, park or other public purposes and report to the city council regarding the conformity of such acquisitions with the General Plan as required by Government Code Section 65402; 
E.  Make recommendations to the city council regarding the adoption and amendment of specific plans; 
F.  Hold public hearings on any proposed amendment to the city's zoning ordinance and render written recommendations to the city council; 
G.  Hear and approve, conditionally approve or deny applications for conditional use, variances, subdivisions or other permits and approvals provided by the zoning and subdivision ordinances of the city, subject to appeal to the city council if and as authorized by this Code; and 
H.  Perform other functions as provided by state law, this Code, or city council direction. 
(Ord. 2005-207 § 1 (part), 2005) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 2 , 4-8-2015)  
2.28.050 - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the commission shall be held on the second and fourth Thursday of each month, or the next succeeding day which is not a holiday, at seven p.m., or at such other time as the commission may recommend and the city council may establish by resolution. 
(Ord. 2005-207 § 1 (part), 2005) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 2 , 4-8-2015)  
2.28.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-321 , § 2 adopted April 8, 2015, repealed § 2.28.060, which pertained to absence from meetings and derived from Ord. No. 2005-207, § 1(part), adopted in 2005.  
2.28.070 - Compensation and expenses. 
Each commissioner shall receive compensation in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each commission meeting attended or such other amount as may be established by resolution of the city council. No additional compensation shall be paid to commissioners, but commissioners may receive reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their duties. No expense of any kind shall be incurred by the commission or any commissioner, unless first authorized and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 2005-207 § 1 (part), 2005) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 2 , 4-8-2015)  
2.28.080 - Appeal from commission decision. 
A.  Commission decisions from which an appeal may be taken under this Code become final at five p.m. on the tenth business day after the decision unless, prior to that time, an appeal or call for review by the city council is filed in writing in the office of the city clerk, as provided for in this Chapter 2.28 and by Chapter 17.74. Nonappealable decisions are final when rendered. 
B.  Appeals. Appeals may be initiated by: 
1.  The applicant; 
2.  An owner of real property, any part of which is located within five hundred (500) feet of the external boundaries of the subject property; or 
3.  An individual who or organization that presented written or oral testimony to the commission at a public hearing on the matter from which the appeal is taken. 
C.  Call for Review. As an additional safeguard to avoid results inconsistent with the purposes of this Code, any order, requirement, decision, determination, interpretation or ruling of the planning commission may be called up for city council review upon the written request of any two (2) members of the city council. A call for review for the purpose of waiving or reducing a fee is not an appropriate basis for making or granting a call for review. 
D.  A timely appeal or call for review shall stay the decision and no permit may issue with respect to that decision until the city council has acted on the matter. 
E.  The fee for an appeal of a commission decision shall be established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 2005-207 § 1 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 1, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 2 , 4-8-2015; Ord. No. 2016-334, § 1 , 4-13-2016)  
Chapter 2.30 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.30.010 - Creation. 
An historic preservation commission is established in accordance with the provisions of this Code and may be known and referred to as the "Calabasas Historic Preservation Commission," the "historic preservation commission," or the "commission." 
(Ord. 2008-241 § 4 (part), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 3 , 4-8-2015)  
2.30.020 - Membership. 
A.  The commission shall consist of six (6) members. The five (5) voting members shall be lawful residents of the city and electors during their respective terms of office. The sixth member shall be an ex-officio, nonvoting member and a member of the Calabasas-Las Virgenes Historical Society and is not required to be a resident of the city. The Board of Directors of the Calabasas-Las Virgenes Historical Society shall nominate the nonvoting member, which nomination shall be subject to city council confirmation. 
B.  Commissioners nominated by individual city councilmembers shall have terms lasting for the lesser of two (2) years or until the expiration of the term of the councilmember who nominated him or her. The ex-officio, non-voting member shall have a term lasting two (2) years. Notwithstanding the expiration of a term, a commissioner or alternate shall continue until his or her successor has been appointed. 
C.  If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term, a new commissioner shall be appointed in the manner set forth above and shall serve the unexpired portion of the term. 
D.  Required Qualifications. All members should have a demonstrated interest in Calabasas' historical, architectural and cultural heritage and have special interest, knowledge, or training in fields closely related to historic preservation. Such fields include architecture, history, landscape architecture, architectural history, planning, archaeology, urban design, geography, real estate, law, finance, building trades or related areas. 
E.  Desired Qualifications. 
1.  If possible, the city council shall appoint at least two (2) members to the commission who are professionals in the fields or disciplines of architecture, landscape architecture, history, architectural history, urban planning, American studies, geography, archaeology, or other historic preservation-related disciplines to the extent that such professionals are available in the community. 
(Ord. 2008-241 § 4 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2010-274, § 2, 4-28-2010; Ord. No. 2014-309, § 1 , 2-12-2014; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 3 , 4-8-2015)  
2.30.040 - Organization. 
A.  The commission shall elect a chair and a vice chair from among its members, each for a term of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting of each year. No person shall serve more than two (2) successive terms. The chair, or in the absence of the chair, the vice chair, shall preside over the meetings of the commission. 
B.  With the consent of the city council, the commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. 
C.  The commission may appoint committees from its membership and, with the consent of the city council, appoint advisory committees from other interested public and private groups. 
D.  The commission may adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of its business. The commission is subject to the Ralph M. Brown Act, Section 54950, et seq., of the Government Code. 
E.  The city's historic preservation officer shall serve as secretary of the commission. 
(Ord. 2008-241 § 4 (part), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 2015-320, § 4 , 2-11-2015; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 3 , 4-8-2015)  
2.30.050 - Powers and duties. 
The historic preservation commission shall have the following powers and duties as specified in Chapter 17.36 of this Code. 
A.  Recommend for adoption by the city council criteria for, and upon appropriation of necessary funds by the council, conduct or cause to be conducted, a comprehensive survey in conformance with state and federal survey standards, policies and guidelines of historical resources within the boundaries of the city, and to publicize and periodically update the survey results. 
B.  The authority to hear and decide the following. 
1.  Applications for certificates of appropriateness; 
2.  Applications for certificates of economic hardship. 
C.  The authority to hear and make recommendations to the city council regarding the following: 
1.  Applications for designations of historic landmarks, landscapes and districts; 
2.  Applications for placement of landmarks or districts on the National Register of Historical Places or the California Register of Historical Resources; 
3.  Applications for Mills Act contracts. 
D.  Authority to act upon an appeal of any order, requirement, permit, decision, or determination of the city's historic preservation officer concerning historical resources under this development code. 
E.  Maintain a local register of designated historic landmarks, landscapes and districts consistent with those criteria contained in the National Register of Historic Places and the California Register of Historical Resources, including all information required for each designation. 
F.  The authority to review and make recommendations to the appropriate approval body regarding all projects within the Commercial Old Town (CT) Zone. 
G.  Undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to implement its powers or duties to fulfill the objectives of the historic preservation program. 
(Ord. 2008-241 § 4 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2010-276, § 4, 6-23-2010; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 3 , 4-8-2015)  
2.30.060 - Meetings. 
Regular meetings of the historic preservation commission shall be held quarterly, on the second Wednesday of the month, in the months of January, April, July and October, at the hour of seven p.m.; or the next succeeding day which is not a holiday; or at such other times as may be established by resolution of the city council. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specified date, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. Special meetings may be called as provided in the Ralph M. Brown Act and shall be convened as necessary to ensure that actions required of the commission under this Code are consistent with the requirements of the Permit Streamlining Act, Government Code Section 65950, et seq., and that projects which require approval from both the historic preservation commission and the planning commission are considered consistently with the deadlines established in that Act. 
(Ord. 2008-241 § 4 (part), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 3 , 4-8-2015)  
2.30.070 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-321, § 3 , adopted April 8, 2015, repealed § 2.30.070, which pertained to absence from meetings and derived from Ord. 2008-241, § 4(part), adopted in 2008.  
2.30.080 - Records. 
The secretary of the historic preservation commission shall cause proper records to be kept of all the commission's official acts, proceedings and resolutions, which shall be public records. The commission shall make reports to the city council as provided for in the state planning law (Government Code Section 65400), and as provided by the council. 
(Ord. 2008-241 § 4 (part), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 3 , 4-8-2015)  
2.30.090 - City historic preservation officer (CHPO). 
The community development director, or his or her designee, shall serve as the city's historic preservation officer (CHPO) and as secretary to the historic preservation commission. The historic preservation officer shall maintain a record of all commission resolutions, proceedings and actions, in addition to the other duties specified herein. 
(Ord. 2008-241 § 4 (part), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 3 , 4-8-2015)  
2.30.100 - Appeal from commission decision. 
A.  Historic preservation commission decisions shall become final at five p.m. on the tenth day next succeeding the date of the decision unless, prior to that hour, an appeal is filed in accordance with Chapter 17.74. 
B.  In addition to the requirements of Chapter 17.74, the following requirements shall apply to appeals of commission decisions. 
1.  The filing of an appeal within the time limit herein specified shall stay the order of the commission and the issuance of any permits predicated thereon until the city council has acted on the appeal. 
2.  Appeals shall be heard and decided by the planning commission. 
3.  The fee for an appeal of the commission's decision shall be established by city council resolution, as amended. 
4.  In meeting the requirements of Section 17.74.030, the grounds for an appeal shall be based upon a claim that the commission erred in its decision, and the appeal shall state the reasons the commission errored. 
(Ord. 2008-241 § 4 (part), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 3 , 4-8-2015)  
Chapter 2.36 - TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION* 
Sections: 
 
2.36.010 - Creation. 
The traffic and transportation commission of the City of Calabasas is established. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 2 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 4 , 4-8-2015)  
2.36.020 - Membership. 
A.  The commission shall consist of five (5) members who shall be lawful residents of the city and electors during their respective terms of office. 
B.  Commissioners nominated by individual councilmembers shall have a term lasting for the lesser of two (2) years or until the expiration of the term of the councilmember who nominated that commissioner. Notwithstanding the expiration of a term, a commissioner shall continue until his or her successor has been appointed. 
C.  If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term, a new commissioner shall be appointed in the manner as set forth in this section and shall serve the unexpired portion of the term. 
D.  The commission may appoint or reappoint a high school student lawfully resident in the city as a nonvoting commissioner for a one-year term. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 2 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 2010-274, § 3, 4-28-2010; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 4 , 4-8-2015)  
2.36.030 - Organization. 
A.  The commission shall elect a chair and vice chair from among its members, each for a term of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting of each year. No person shall serve more than two (2) successive one-year terms in either office. The chair, or in the absence of the chair, the vice chair, shall preside over the meetings of the commission. 
B.  The commission may appoint standing or ad hoc subcommittees from its membership and, with the consent of the city council, may appoint advisory committees comprised of noncommissioners. 
C.  With the consent of the city council, the commission may adopt rules and regulations for the transactions of its business. 
D.  The transportation director, or such other person as is designated by the city manager to do so, shall serve as the secretary of the commission. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 2 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2015-320, § 5 , 2-11-2015; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 4 , 4-8-2015)  
2.36.040 - Duties. 
When requested by the city council, the commission will advise the planning commission and/or city council on general policy matters related to the following: 
A.  Traffic concerns originating by or through the city council, planning commission, traffic and transportation commission, general public, or city staff; 
B.  Community goals regarding traffic and circulation; 
C.  Investigating and making recommendations to the city council and/or city staff regarding traffic control devices including, but not limited to, traffic signals, signs, striping within the city; and 
D.  Such other duties as may be requested from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 2 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 4 , 4-8-2015)  
2.36.050 - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings shall be held not less than quarterly on a date established from time to time by resolution of the commission. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 2 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 4 , 4-8-2015)  
2.36.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-321, § 4 , adopted April 8, 2015, repealed § 4, which pertained to absence from meetings and derived from Ord. 2006-215, § 2(part), adopted in 2006.  
2.36.070 - Reimbursement for expenses. 
The commissioners shall serve without compensation, but may receive reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their duties. No expense of any kind shall be incurred by the commission or any commissioner, unless first authorized and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 2 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 4 , 4-8-2015)  
Chapter 2.37 - PUBLIC SAFETY COMMISSION[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-309, § 2 , adopted Feb. 12, 2014, amended the title of Ch. 2.37, which was formerly titled "Calabasas Public Safety Commission." 
 
2.37.010 - Creation. 
The public safety commission of the City of Calabasas is created. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 2003-184 § 1 (part), 2003) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 5 , 4-8-2015)  
2.37.020 - Membership. 
A.  The commission shall consist of six (6) members who shall be lawful residents of the city and electors during their respective terms of office. The sixth member shall be appointed from the members of the Calabasas Emergency Response Program (CERP) or its successor city emergency response organization. 
B.  Commissioners nominated by individual councilmembers shall have a term lasting for the lesser of two (2) years or until the expiration of the term of the councilmember who nominated that commissioner. The commissioner nominated from the CERP or its successor organization shall have a term lasting two (2) years. Notwithstanding the expiration of a term, a commissioner shall continue until his or her successor has been appointed. 
C.  If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term, a new commissioner shall be appointed in the manner as set forth in this section and shall serve the unexpired portion of the term. 
D.  The commission may appoint or reappoint a high school student lawfully resident in the city as a nonvoting commissioner for a one-year term. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 2003-184 § 1 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 2010-274, § 4, 4-28-2010; Ord. No. 2014-309, § 3 , 2-12-2014; Ord. No. 2015-320, § 6 , 2-11-2015; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 5 , 4-8-2015)  
2.37.030 - Organization. 
A.  The commission shall elect a chair and vice chair from among its members, each for a term of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting of each year. No person shall serve more than two (2) successive one-year terms in either office. The chair, or in the absence of the chair, the vice chair, shall preside over the meetings of the commission. 
B.  The commission may appoint standing or ad hoc subcommittees from its membership and with the consent of the city council, may appoint advisory committees comprised of noncommissioners. 
C.  With the consent of the city council, the commission may adopt rules and regulations for the transactions of its business. 
D.  The city manager, or his or her designee, shall serve as the staff liaison to the commission. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 2003-184 § 1 (part), 2003) 
( Ord. No. 2015-320, § 7 , 2-11-2015; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 5 , 4-8-2015)  
2.37.040 - Duties. 
When requested by the city council, the commission will advise the city council on matters related to public safety, crime and fire prevention, emergency preparedness and response, service contracts with public safety agencies and related matters. In its advisory role, the commission will make recommendations to the city council regarding budgets for public safety services and perform such other functions as the city council may direct. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 2003-184 § 1 (part), 2003) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 5 , 4-8-2015)  
2.37.050 - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings shall be held not less than quarterly on a date established from time to time by resolution of the commission. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 2004-194 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2003-184 § 1 (part), 2003) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 5 , 4-8-2015)  
2.37.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-321, § 5 , adopted April 8, 2015, repealed § 2.37.060, which pertained to absence from meetings and derived from Ord. No. 2003-184, § 1(part), adopted in 2003; Ord. 2006-215, § 2(part), adopted in 2006.  
2.37.070 - Reimbursement for expenses. 
The commissioners shall serve without compensation, but may receive reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their duties. No expense of any kind shall be incurred by the commission or any commissioner, unless first authorized and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 2003-184 § 1 (part), 2003) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 5 , 4-8-2015)  
Chapter 2.38 - COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION* 
Sections: 
 
2.38.010 - Creation. 
The communications and technology commission of the City of Calabasas is created. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 4 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 6 , 4-8-2015)  
2.38.020 - Membership. 
A.  The commission shall consist of five (5) members who shall be lawful residents of the city and electors during their respective terms of office. 
B.  Commissioners nominated by individual councilmembers shall have a term lasting for the lesser of two (2) years or until the expiration of the term of the councilmember who nominated that commissioner. Notwithstanding the expiration of a term, a commissioner shall continue until his or her successor has been appointed. 
C.  If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term, a new commissioner shall be appointed in the manner as set forth in this section and shall serve the unexpired portion of the term. 
D.  The commission may appoint or reappoint a high school student lawfully resident in the city as a nonvoting commissioner for a one-year term. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 4 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 2010-274, § 5, 4-28-2010; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 6 , 4-8-2015)  
2.38.030 - Organization. 
A.  The commission shall elect a chair and vice chair from among its members, each for a term of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting of each year. No person shall serve more than two (2) successive one-year terms in either office. The chair, or in the absence of the chair, the vice chair, shall preside over the meetings of the commission. 
B.  The commission may appoint standing or ad hoc subcommittees from its membership and with the consent of the city council, may appoint advisory committees comprised of noncommissioners. 
C.  With the consent of the city council, the commission may adopt rules and regulations for the transactions of its business. 
D.  The media operations director, or such other person as is designated by the city manager to do so, shall serve as the secretary of the commission. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 4 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2015-320, § 8 , 2-11-2015; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 6 , 4-8-2015)  
2.38.040 - Duties. 
The purpose of the commission is to advise the city council on various matters relating to the city's video service providers, telecommunications issues, communication technology, and other relevant emerging technologies. In addition, the commission acts as a planning commission when reviewing and approving wireless telecommunications facilities. 
The objectives of the commission include the following: 
A.  Monitoring state franchised video service providers and, to the extent permitted by federal, state, and city law and regulation, recommending enforcement actions for consideration by the city council; 
B.  Monitoring the status of state and federal legislation and relevant case law regarding wired and wireless telecommunications and cable television issues, making recommendations to the city council on actions to take in light of these issues and performing any additional duties related hereto as requested by the city council; 
C.  Providing input on programming and production for CTV, the Calabasas channel, and on the content of the city's website; 
D.  Acting as a planning commission of the city with respect to wireless communication facilities, holding public hearings on proposed applications and related conditional use permits, and related actions as provided by Section 17.12.050(1) of this Code; 
E.  Monitoring and recommending adoption of or further consideration of technologies to the city council; 
F.  Overseeing the issuance of permits for film and video production; and 
G.  Performing such other duties as may be requested from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 4 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 2012-295, § 1, 6-27-2012; Ord. No. 2014-309, § 4 , 2-12-2014; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 6 , 4-8-2015)  
2.38.050 - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings shall be held not less than quarterly on a date established from time to time by resolution of the commission. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 4 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 6 , 4-8-2015)  
2.38.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-321, § 6 , adopted April 8, 2015, repealed § 2.38.060, which pertained to absence from meetings and derived from Ord. 2006-215, § 4(part), adopted in 2006.  
2.38.070 - Reimbursement for expenses. 
The commissioners shall serve without compensation, but may receive reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their duties. No expense of any kind shall be incurred by the commission or any commissioner, unless first authorized and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 4 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 6 , 4-8-2015)  
Chapter 2.39 - ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.39.010 - Creation. 
The environmental commission of the City of Calabasas is established. The commission shall constitute, and may also from time to time be referred to as, the tree board of the City of Calabasas and fulfills the standards of the National Arbor Day Foundation for the city to maintain its status as a Tree City USA. 
(Ord. 2005-206 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 97-119 § 2 (part), 1997) 
( Ord. No. 2014-309, § 5 , 2-12-2014; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 7 , 4-8-2015)  
2.39.020 - Membership. 
A.  The commission shall consist of five (5) members who shall be lawful residents of the city and electors during their respective terms of office. 
B.  Commissioners nominated by individual councilmembers shall have a term lasting for the lesser of two (2) years or until the expiration of the term of the councilmember who nominated that commissioner. Notwithstanding the expiration of a term, a commissioner shall continue until his or her successor has been appointed. 
C.  If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term, a new commissioner shall be appointed in the manner set forth above and shall serve the unexpired portion of the term to which he or she is appointed. 
D.  The commission may appoint or reappoint one (1) high school student lawfully resident in the city as a nonvoting commissioner for a one-year term. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 5, 2006; Ord. 2005-206 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2002-174 § 7, 2002; Ord. 2002-172 §§ 9 and 10, 2002; Ord. 99-140 § 1, 1999: Ord. 97-119 § 2 (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 2010-274, § 6, 4-28-2010; Ord. No. 2014-309, § 5 , 2-12-2014; Ord. No. 2015-320, § 9 , 2-11-2015; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 7 , 4-8-2015)  
2.39.030 - Organization. 
A.  The commission shall elect a chair and vice chair from among its members, each for a term of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting of each year. No person shall serve more than two (2) successive one-year terms in either office. The chair, or in the absence of the chair, the vice chair, shall preside over meetings of the commission. 
B.  The commission may appoint standing or ad hoc subcommittees from its membership and, with the consent of the city council, may appoint advisory committees comprised of noncommissioners. 
C.  With the consent of the city council, the commission may adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of its business. 
D.  The public works director and his/her designee shall serve as the secretary of the commission. 
(Ord. 2005-206 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 97-119 § 2 (part), 1997) 
( Ord. No. 2014-309, § 5 , 2-12-2014; Ord. No. 2015-320, § 10 , 2-11-2015; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 7 , 4-8-2015)  
2.39.040 - Duties. 
A.  When requested by the city council, the commission will advise the planning commission and/or city council on general policy matters related to the following: 
1.  Air quality, including transportation alternatives, stationary sources and mobile sources; 
2.  Waste management, including municipal solid waste management and compliance with AB 939, and hazard and toxic waste management; 
3.  Water quality, including National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) requirements, watershed protection; stormwater discharge; and 
4.  Flora and fauna, including habitat and species diversity, wildlife protection, and protection of trees; 
5.  Resources, including water conservation and energy conservation, green space and scenic beauty; 
6.  Public education programs and events, regarding such topic areas as listed and regarding other appropriate environmental issues. 
B.  As the tree board, the commission will also be responsible for the following: 
1.  The commission is to consider and propose recommendations for the adoption of the Urban Forestry Master Plan and to make recommendations to carry out the policies and goals of the plan pursuant to the California Urban Forestry Act of 1978, California Public Resources Code Section 4799.06 et seq., including making recommendations for updates to the plan; 
2.  Continued education for the care and welfare of trees; 
3.  At the request of city council, the commission shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Ord. 2005-206 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 97-119 § 2 (part), 1997) 
( Ord. No. 2014-309, § 5 , 2-12-2014; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 7 , 4-8-2015)  
2.39.050 - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings shall be held not less than quarterly on a date established from time to time by resolution of the commission. 
(Ord. 2005-206 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2004-194 § 5; Ord. 97-119 § 2 (part), 1997) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 7 , 4-8-2015)  
2.39.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-321, § 7 , adopted April 8, 2015, repealed § 2.39.060, which pertained to absence from meetings and derived from Ord. 97-119, § 2(part), adopted in 1997; and Ord. 2005-206, § 1(part), adopted in 2005.  
2.39.070 - Reimbursement of expenses. 
The commissioners shall serve without compensation, but may receive reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their duties. No expense of any kind shall be incurred by the commission or any commissioner unless first authorized and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 2005-206 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 97-119 § 2 (part), 1997) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 7 , 4-8-2015)  
Chapter 2.40 - ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW PANEL* 
Sections: 
 
2.40.010 - Architectural review panel creation. 
An architectural review panel (ARP) is created in and for the City of Calabasas. 
(Ord. 2002-171 § 1 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 2, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 7 , 4-8-2015)  
2.40.020 - Membership. 
The architectural review panel shall consist of the following members: 
A.  Five (5) members, with two (2) members to serve as alternate members, residing in or near the City of Calabasas or conducting business in the city, at the time of appointment and during their respective terms of office. A majority vote of the entire planning commission is required to appoint members. Each member may serve an unlimited number of terms subject to periodic planning commission reappointment. 
1.  At least one (1) member of the architectural review panel shall be a licensed architect. 
2.  Other members of the panel shall be persons who, as a result of their training, experience and attainments, are qualified to analyze and interpret architectural and site planning information, including, but not limited to, licensed landscape architects, urban planners, engineers and builders/developers. 
3.  A preference shall be given to the appointment of Calabasas residents meeting the panel's qualifications. 
B.  Any member of the panel may be removed from office with or without cause by a majority vote of the entire planning commission. 
C.  All terms of office shall run for a period of two (2) years. The terms of office for each member shall continue to and include October 30 of the year in which the term shall expire, and thereafter until a successor is appointed. 
D.  If a vacancy occurs other than by term expiration, the planning commission shall fill such vacancy by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. 
E.  The alternate members shall attend and participate in meetings of, and deliberate on matters before, the architectural review panel, as necessary to fill in for any absent member(s). 
(Ord. 2005-209 §§ 1, 2, 2005; Ord. 2002-171 § 1 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 2, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2011-283, § 1, 3-16-2011; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 7 , 4-8-2015)  
2.40.030 - Organization. 
A.  The panel shall elect a chair and a vice chair from among its members, each for a term of one (1) year. No person shall serve more than two (2) successive terms in either position. The chair, or in the absence of the chair, the vice chair, shall preside over the meetings of the panel. 
B.  The community development director, or such other person as is designated by the city manager to do so, shall serve as secretary of the panel. 
(Ord. 2002-171 § 1 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 2, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 7 , 4-8-2015)  
2.40.040 - Duties. 
The purpose of the panel is to make advisory recommendations to the planning commission and the city council in all matters pertaining to site plan reviews, and evaluating architectural designs of buildings and other structures, landscape plans and other site features. Procedures in this section for site plan reviews, and evaluating architectural designs of buildings and other structures, landscape plans and other site features are established to pursue the following purposes: 
A.  To preserve and enhance the beauty of the city's natural and built environment; 
B.  To encourage individual building scale and character consistent with the existing community; 
C.  To discourage development of individual buildings that dominate the cityscape or attract attention to themselves through inappropriate color, mass, or architectural expression; 
D.  To ensure that new development, and the alteration or enlargement of existing development, maintain the attractiveness and character of the city, especially as projects are seen from city streets, freeway and scenic corridors, adjacent properties, and from neighboring communities; 
E.  To maintain and improve the quality of, and relationship among, individual buildings, and between structures and their sites, so that groups of structures contribute to neighborhood and community attractiveness; 
F.  To ensure that: 
1.  Site landscaping provides visually pleasing settings for structures, 
2.  Proposed landscaping blends harmoniously with the natural landscape, 
3.  Appropriate landscape themes and variations support the design and function of the structures to which they relate, 
4.  Views of structures from off-site are softened or screened; 
G.  To encourage the highest quality of architectural design, energy efficiency, minimal use of toxic materials during construction, maximum use of natural materials, and emphasis on construction methods which are least disruptive to the site and to the community; 
H.  To balance private prerogatives and preferences with the public interest and welfare; 
I.  In order to achieve these purposes, except for projects zoned Commercial, Old Town (CT), the architectural review panel shall review the architecture and landscape architecture of all commercial projects and signage and residential projects within scenic corridors, Master Plan and the Old Topanga/Highlands Overlay Areas, proposed subdivisions, hillside developments. The architectural review panel may also review other projects the community development director or planning commission deem appropriate for the panel's review, including projects zoned Commercial, Old Town (CT). The panel shall limit its advice to architecture, site planning, landscaping, signage and streetscape design. The panel shall perform such other advisory duties as the planning commission may request from time to time. 
(Ord. 2005-201 § 4, 2005: Ord. 2002-171 § 1 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 2, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2010-276, § 5, 6-23-2010; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 7 , 4-8-2015)  
2.40.050 - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings shall be held not less than monthly on a date established from time to time by resolution of the panel. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 6 (part), 2006: Ord. 2002-171 § 1 (part), 2002) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 7 , 4-8-2015)  
2.40.060 - Absence from meetings. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, any panelist who absents himself or herself from three (3) regular meetings of the panel in any calendar year, unless excused by the panel by action recorded in its minutes, shall thereby automatically forfeit his or her position. The panel chair or vice chair shall thereupon promptly notify the planning commission, and the former panelist, of the fact of the vacancy. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 6 (part), 2006: Ord. 2002-171 § 1 (part), 2002) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 7 , 4-8-2015)  
2.40.070 - Reimbursement for expenses. 
The panelists shall serve without compensation, but may receive reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their duties. No expense of any kind shall be incurred by the panel or any panelist, unless first authorized and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 6 (part), 2006: Ord. 2002-171 § 1 (part), 2002) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 7 , 4-8-2015)  
Chapter 2.41 - PARKS, RECREATION AND EDUCATION COMMISSION* 
Sections: 
 
2.41.010 - Creation. 
The parks, recreation and education commission of the City of Calabasas is established. 
(Ord. 2005-211 § 2 (part), 2005) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 9 , 4-8-2015)  
2.41.020 - Membership. 
A.  The commission shall consist of seven (7) members, who shall be lawful residents of the city and electors during their respective terms of office. The sixth member shall be the chair of the Calabasas Arts Council or his or her designee and shall be subject to city council confirmation. The seventh member shall be nominated by the Calabasas Savvy Seniors Advisory Group, which nomination shall be subject to city council confirmation. 
B.  Commissioners nominated by individual councilmembers shall have a term lasting for the lesser of two (2) years or until the expiration of the term of the councilmember who nominated that commissioner. The Calabasas Arts Council chair and the Calabasas Savvy Seniors Advisory Group member shall have terms lasting two (2) years. Notwithstanding the expiration of a term, a commissioner shall continue to serve until his or her successor has been appointed. 
C.  If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term, a new commissioner shall be appointed in the manner set forth above and shall serve the unexpired portion of the term. 
D.  The commission may appoint or reappoint a high school student lawfully resident in the city as a nonvoting commissioner for a one-year term. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 7, 2006; Ord. 2005-211 § 2 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 2010-274, § 7, 4-28-2010; Ord. No. 2011-279, § 1, 6-8-2011; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 9 , 4-8-2015)  
2.41.030 - Organization. 
A.  The commission shall appoint a chair and a vice chair pro tem from among its members, each for a term of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting of each year. No person shall serve more than two (2) successive one-year terms in either office. The chair, or in the absence of chair, the vice chair, shall preside over the meetings of the commission. 
B.  The commission may appoint standing or ad hoc subcommittees from its membership and, with the consent of the city council, may appoint advisory committees comprised of noncommissioners. 
C.  With the consent of the city council, the commission may adopt rules and regulations for the transactions of its business. 
D.  The community services director, or such other person as is designated by the city manager to do so, shall serve as the secretary of the commission. 
(Ord. 2005-211 § 2 (part), 2005) 
( Ord. No. 2015-320, § 11 , 2-11-2015; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 9 , 4-8-2015)  
2.41.040 - Duties. 
The commission will fulfill any function assigned by this Code to the parks and recreation commission or to the education commission. In addition, when requested by the city council, the commission will advise the city council on all matters pertaining to park and recreation facilities, current or future educational programs and services, and communication and coordination with local schools and residents, as well as on general policy matters related to the following: 
A.  City cooperation with other governmental agencies and civic groups in the advancement of sound recreation and parks planning and programming as well as educational programs or services to meet community needs; 
B.  Reviewing the parks and recreation portion of the annual budget/Parks and Recreation Master Plan to make recommendations to the city council and the city manager; 
C.  Recommending to the community services director plans for the acquisition, development, beautification and maintenance of public park and recreational areas, including parks, community centers and open space areas; 
D.  Recommending standards on organization, staffing, areas and facilities, program and financial support of education, recreation and park activities; 
E.  Making periodic inventories of recreation programs and services within the city that exist or may be needed by the public; 
F.  Annually advising the city council on the long-range parks and recreation capital improvement program; 
G.  Develop procedures to encourage harmonious land use of city, school and park properties; 
H.  Develop programs to promote and encourage joint recreational/educational programs with regional schools; 
I.  Communicating and providing a liaison to the Las Virgenes Unified School District and private educational institutions in the Calabasas area; 
J.  Review community service funding grant applications and make appropriate recommendation to city council; and 
K.  Performing such other duties as may be requested from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. 2005-211 § 2 (part), 2005) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 9 , 4-8-2015)  
2.41.050 - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings shall be held not less than quarterly on a date established from time to time by resolution of the commission. 
(Ord. 2005-211 § 2 (part), 2005) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 9 , 4-8-2015)  
2.41.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-321, § 9 , adopted April 8, 2015, repealed § 2.41.060, which pertained to absence from meetings and derived from Ord. 2005-211, § 2(part), adopted in 2005.  
2.41.070 - Reimbursement for expenses. 
The commissioners shall serve without compensation, but may receive reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their duties. No expense of any kind shall be incurred by the commission or any commissioner unless first authorized and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 2005-211 § 2 (part), 2005) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 9 , 4-8-2015)  
Chapter 2.43 - LIBRARY COMMISSION* 
Sections: 
 
2.43.010 - Creation. 
The library commission of the City of Calabasas is established in accordance with the provisions of Education Code Section 18900, et seq., and may also be known as the library board and commissioners as trustees. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 8 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 10 , 4-8-2015)  
2.43.020 - Membership. 
A.  The commission shall consist of six (6) members who shall, with the exception of the sixth member, be lawful residents of the city and electors during their respective terms of office. The sixth member shall be an ex-officio, nonvoting member and shall be a resident of the City of Hidden Hills and shall be appointed, removed and/or replaced by a majority vote of the Hidden Hills city council. 
B.  All commissioners shall hold office for three (3) years. Notwithstanding the expiration of a term, a commissioner shall continue until his or her successor has been appointed. 
C.  If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term, a new commissioner shall be appointed in the manner as set forth in this section and shall serve the unexpired portion of the term. 
D.  The commission may appoint or reappoint a high school student lawfully resident in the city as a nonvoting commissioner for a one-year term. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 8 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2014-309, § 6 , 2-12-2014; Ord. No. 2015-320, § 12 , 2-11-2015; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 10 , 4-8-2015)  
2.43.030 - Organization. 
A.  The commission shall elect a president and president pro tem from among its members, each for a term of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting of each year. No person shall serve more than two (2) successive one-year terms in either office. The president, or in the absence of the president pro tem, shall preside over meetings of the commission. 
B.  The commission may appoint standing or ad hoc subcommittees from its membership and with the consent of the city council, may appoint advisory committees comprised of non-commissioners. 
C.  The commission may adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of its business pursuant to Education Code Section 18919. 
D.  The city manager, or his or her designee, shall serve as the staff liaison to the commission. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 8 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2015-320, § 13 , 2-11-2015; Ord. No. 2015-321, § 10 , 4-8-2015)  
2.43.040 - Duties. 
The commission shall have the powers and duties specified in Education Code Sections 18910 et seq., and the power and duty to act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to the management, administration, operation, development, improvement and maintenance of municipal libraries and the provision of library services within the city, including: 
A.  Reviewing contracts for library services, acquisitions and equipment and making recommendations to the city council; 
B.  Developing and implement library goals and objectives, as well as policies and procedures necessary to provide library services; 
C.  Submitting an annual report on the condition of the library to the city council and state librarian on or before August 31, pursuant to Section 18927 of the California Education Code; 
D.  Developing an annual budget with city staff in order to make recommendations to the city council and the city manager; 
E.  Communicating with and providing liaison to the "friends of the library" and their counterparts in other jurisdictions; and 
F.  Performing such other duties as may be requested from time to time by the city council or as may be required by law. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 8 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 10 , 4-8-2015)  
2.43.050 - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings shall be held not less than monthly on a date established from time to time by resolution of the commission as required by Education Code Section 18914. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 8 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 10 , 4-8-2015)  
2.43.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-321, § 10 , adopted April 8, 2015, repealed § 2.43.060, which pertained to absence from meetings and derived from Ord. 2006-215, § 8(part), adopted in 2006.  
2.43.070 - Reimbursement for expenses. 
The commissioners shall serve without compensation, but may receive reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their duties. No expense of any kind shall be incurred by the commission or any commissioner, unless first authorized and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 2006-215 § 8 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2015-321, § 10 , 4-8-2015)  
Chapter 2.44 - EMERGENCY SERVICES ORGANIZATION 
Sections: 
 
2.44.010 - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-20 § 1, 1991)  
2.44.020 - Definitions. 
As used in the chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities for this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-20 § 2, 1991)  
2.44.030 - Disaster council—Membership. 
The Calabasas disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be chairperson; 
B.  The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chairperson; 
C.  The assistant director of emergency services; 
D.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter; 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-20 § 3, 1991)  
2.44.040 - Disaster council—Powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Calabasas disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairperson or, in his/her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairperson. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-20 § 4, 1991)  
2.44.050 - Director and assistant director of emergency services. 
A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
B.  There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-20 § 5, 1991)  
2.44.060 - Director and assistant director of emergency services—Powers and duties. 
A.  The director is empowered to: 
1.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
2.  Request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
3.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
4.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
5.  Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein; 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as herein provided, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or the director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is empowered: 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council, 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use, 
c.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he/she deems necessary in the execution of his/her duties; such persons shall be entitled to the privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster services workers, 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and 
e.  To execute all of his/her ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him/her by this chapter, or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him/her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
B.  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his/her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. 
C.  The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-20 § 6, 1991)  
2.44.070 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may, by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of subsection (A)(6)(c) of Section 2.44.060 of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-20 § 7, 1991)  
2.44.080 - Emergency plan. 
The Calabasas disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the City of Calabasas Emergency Plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-20 § 8, 1991)  
2.44.090 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-20 § 9, 1991)  
2.44.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him/her, by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-20 § 10, 1991)  
Chapter 2.52 - CERTIFICATES OF INSURANCE 
Sections: 
 
2.52.010 - Applicants for building or encroachment permits—Indemnification. 
If an applicant for a building or encroachment permit is required, as a condition for the issuance of such permit, to indemnify the city from liability or responsibility for any damage or injury to persons or property occurring as a proximate result to activities undertaken pursuant to the permit applied for, the applicant may be required to file a certificate of insurance evidencing coverage of the city of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injury and/or one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage liability to assure compliance with the foregoing indemnification. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 2.60 - PERSONS WITH AIDS OR AIDS-RELATED CONDITIONS 
Sections: 
 
2.60.010 - Availability of city facilities. 
A.  No person shall deny any individual the full and equal enjoyment of, or place different terms and conditions on the availability or the use of, any facility, program or service wholly or partially operated or funded by the city, because the individual has AIDS or an AIDS-related condition. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting conduct which is proved to be necessary to protect the health and safety of any individual or the general public. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 2.64 - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
2.64.010 - Adoption. 
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters, and to place municipal employment on a merit basis so that the most qualified and competent available people may be brought into and retained in the municipal service, the city adopts personnel rules and regulations which shall be adopted and amended by resolution of the city council. The rules may establish regulations governing the personnel system, including: 
A.  Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the personnel system, including employment standards and qualifications for each class; 
B.  Appropriate announcement of the selection process and acceptance of applications for employment; 
C.  Selection process; 
D.  Establishment of probationary testing periods; 
E.  Evaluation of employees during the probationary testing period and thereafter; 
F.  Appointment, transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees; 
G.  Separation of employees from the city service; 
H.  The establishment and maintenance of adequate personnel records for purposes of accounting and legal requirements; 
I.  The establishment of any necessary appeal procedures. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.64.020 - Definitions. 
The terms used to administer the personnel system shall be defined in the personnel rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.64.030 - Administration. 
The director of finance is the personnel officer and shall administer the personnel rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.64.040 - Purpose and policy. 
The objectives of the personnel rules and regulations are to facilitate effective and economical services to the public and to provide for a fair and equitable system of personnel management in the municipal service. These rules and regulations set forth in detail those procedures which ensure equal treatment for applicants and employees, and define the obligations, rights, privileges, benefits and prohibitions placed upon all employees in the municipal service. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.64.050 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all officers, positions and employments in the service of the city, except: 
A.  Elective officers; 
B.  The city manager; 
C.  The city attorney and any assistant or deputy city attorneys; 
D.  Members of appointive boards, commissions, and committees; 
E.  Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or any other services; 
F.  Volunteer personnel; 
G.  All council-appointed city officers; 
H.  Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake which threatens life or property; 
I.  Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in permanent positions. "Regularly employed in permanent positions" means an employee hired for an indefinite term into a budgeted position, who is regularly scheduled to work no less than one thousand forty (1,040) hours per year, and has successfully completed the probationary period and been retained as provided in this chapter and the personnel rules and regulations; 
J.  Any position primarily funded under a state or federal employment program; 
K.  Employees not included in the personnel system under this chapter shall serve at the pleasure of their appointing authority. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.64.060 - Employee compensation plan. 
An employee compensation plan shall be established to provide salary schedules, salary rates, salary changes, steps and time intervals for salary review. Each class in the city classification plan shall be assigned a salary range or a rate established in the compensation plan. All persons employed by the city shall be compensated in accordance with the compensation plan currently in effect. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.64.070 - Employee compensation plan—Administration and review. 
A.  The personnel office shall administer the employee compensation plan for all employees (except the city manager) which shall be ratified by the city council. 
B.  At least once a year, the city manager shall recommend to the city council an appropriate salary range for each class. In the case when the salary range for a class is changed by the city council, all employees whose positions are allocated to this class shall be adjusted to the corresponding step in the new range (e.g. Step "C" Old Range, Step "C" New Range). 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
2.64.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violations of the provisions of the personnel rules and regulations shall be grounds for rejection, suspension, demotion, dismissal, or other disciplinary action. 
(Ord. 95-92 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 91-3, 91-5, 91-6, 91-7, 91-8A and 93-94. 
 
Chapter 3.04 - TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - Assessor and tax collector. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51500 et seq. of the Government Code of the state of California, the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the city assessor and tax collector are transferred to the assessor and tax collector of the county of Los Angeles. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 3.08 - UNIFORM SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "uniform local sales and use tax of the city of Calabasas." 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.08.020 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.08.030 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall be operative on May 1, 1991. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.08.040 - Purpose. 
The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Parts 1 and 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, Sections 6000 et seq. and 7200 et seq.; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record-keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.08.050 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.08.060 - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.08.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.08.070 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.08.080 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.08.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.08.090 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein, with the exception of Chapter 7 of Part 1 of Division 2, regarding overpayments and refunds. All refund claims under this chapter shall be governed by Section 3.28.030 of this code. 
(Ord. 2006-230 § 2, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.08.100 - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provision of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not by subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.08.110 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.08.120 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax chapter enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.08.130 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become part of this chapter. This chapter also shall be deemed to adopt by reference the provisions of Sections 7202 to 7203, inclusive, of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as now in effect or as later amended, which are required to be included in this chapter. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.08.140 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.08.150 - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 3.12 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "real property transfer tax of the city of Calabasas." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.12.020 - Imposition. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents (27 ½¢) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.12.030 - Payment. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.12.020 of this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.12.040 - Exemptions. 
The tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Instruments given to secure a debt (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11921); 
B.  Instruments of the United States or agencies or instrumentalities thereof (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11922); 
C.  Conveyances under reorganization or adjustment plans (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11923); 
D.  Conveyances under order of Securities and Exchange Commission (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11924); 
E.  Transfers of certain partnership property (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11925); 
F.  Instruments taken in lieu of foreclosure (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11926); 
G.  (a) Any deed, instrument or other writing which purports to transfer, division, or allocation of community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property assets between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to the Family Code, or by a written agreement between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any such judgment or order, whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part of any of those judgments or orders; (b) in order to qualify for the exemption provided in subdivision (a), the deed, instrument, or other writing shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument, or other writing is entitled to the exemption. (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11927); 
H.  Conveyances to the state of California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, pursuant to an agreement whereby the purchaser agrees to immediately reconvey the realty to the exempt agency (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11928); 
I.  Conveyances by the state of California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, conveys to a nonprofit corporation realty the acquisition, construction, or improvement of which was financed or refinanced by obligations issued by the nonprofit corporation on behalf of a governmental unit, within the meaning of Section 1.103-1(b) of Title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11929). 
As these sections of the Revenue and Taxation Code may be from time to time amended. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.12.050 - Administration. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county chapters adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.12.060 - Claims for refund. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by Section 3.28.030 of this code. 
(Ord. 2006-230 § 3, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 3.16 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Title of chapter provisions. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known, and may be cited as the "uniform occupancy tax of the city of Calabasas." 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 3, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter: 
"Article" means an article of Los Angeles County Ordinance 8607 as originally adopted, unless some other ordinance or statute is mentioned. 
"City" means the city of Calabasas. 
"Council" means the city council of the city of Calabasas. 
"Hotel" means any structure in the city, or any portion of any such structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
"Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
"Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter, and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
"Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash credits and property and services of any kind in nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
"Section" means a section of this chapter. 
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
"Tax collector" means the chief financial officer of the city or any other person designated by the city manager to enforce this chapter. 
"Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 4, 2006: Ord. 2005-200 §§ 1, 2, 2005; Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.030 - Interpretation of language. 
A.  Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. 
B.  Genders. Each gender includes the other genders. 
C.  Number. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 5, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.040 - Imposition of tax—Amount. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of twelve (12) percent of the rent charged by the operator. This tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.050 - Payment. 
A transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. Any unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing occupancy in the hotel. If, for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax collector may require the transient to pay such tax directly to the tax collector. 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 6, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.060 - Exemptions—Designated. 
If a proper claim for exemption is made a tax shall not be imposed upon: 
A.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this chapter; 
B.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.070 - Exemptions—Claim requirements. 
The tax collector shall prepare and furnish to the operators of hotels who have registered, as required by Sections 3.16.100 through 3.16.120 of this chapter, forms by which transients may claim exemption from the payment of the tax. An exemption shall not be granted to any transient except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon the form supplied by the tax collector. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.080 - Collection—Operator's duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. The operator of a hotel shall not advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.090 - Recordkeeping requirements. 
Every operator responsible for the collection of any payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter shall keep and preserve, for not less than three years, all records which may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax for which he or she may be or may become obligated to remit to the city. The operator shall make such records available for inspection at any reasonable time requested by the tax collector upon not less than five days' notice. 
(Ord. 2005-200 § 3, 2005: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.100 - Operator—Registration required. 
Within thirty (30) days after commencing business, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the tax collector by completing a registration form provided by the city. Upon registration, the tax collector shall issue a transient occupancy registration certificate to the operator. 
(Ord. 2005-200 § 4, 2005: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.110 - Registration certificate—Posting. 
The operator shall post, and at all times keep posted in a conspicuous place on the premises of the hotel, the transient occupancy registration certificate issued pursuant to Section 3.16.100 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 7, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.120 - Registration certificate—Contents. 
The transient occupancy registration certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Occupancy Tax of the City of Calabasas by registering with the Tax Collector for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting said tax to the tax collector. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 8, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.130 - Tax return required monthly. 
Each operator, on or before the last day of each month following a month in which he or she collected any tax imposed under this chapter, or at the close of any other reporting period as may be established by the tax collector, shall make a return to the tax collector on forms provided by him or her of the total rents charged and received for occupancy by transients and the amount of tax collected for that month or reporting period. 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 9, 2006: Ord. 2005-200 § 5, 2005: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.140 - Payment remitted with return. 
A.  At the time the return is filed, the operator shall remit the full amount of the tax collected to the tax collector. The tax collector may establish shorter, longer or other reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary or expedient in order to ensure collection of the tax. The tax collector may require additional information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. 
B.  For the purpose of this section, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, "cessation of business" shall be deemed to occur thirty (30) days after a business ceases to rent rooms to transient occupants. 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 10, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2010-270, § 1, 2-10-2010)  
3.16.150 - Tax held in trust. 
Every operator shall hold in trust for the account of the city, until payment thereof is made to the tax collector, all taxes collected by such operator pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 11, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.160 - Late payment—Penalty. 
Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the unpaid tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.170 - Late payment—Continued delinquency penalty. 
Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before the thirtieth day following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the unpaid tax, in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty imposed under Section 3.16.160 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 12, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.180 - Nonpayment due to fraud—Penalty. 
If the tax collector determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in Sections 3.16.160 and 3.16.170 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.190 - Late payment—Interest imposed. 
In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the unpaid tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until the date of payment. 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 13, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.200 - Penalties merged with tax. 
Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this chapter shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.210 - Failure to collect and report tax—Amount determined by tax collector. 
If any operator fails to collect the tax imposed under this chapter or to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax collector shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information upon which to estimate the tax due. As soon as the tax collector shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to estimate the tax due under this chapter payable by an operator who has failed to collect the same or to make such report and remittance, the tax collector shall determine the amount due and assess against the operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 14, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.220 - Determination by tax collector—Notice required. 
If the tax collector makes a determination pursuant to Section 3.16.210 of this chapter, he or she shall give a notice of the amount determined, either by serving such notice personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his, her or its last known place of business. 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 15, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.230 - Hearing on amount assessed—Application. 
Within ten (10) days after the service of notice upon any operator pursuant to Section 3.16.220 of this chapter, such operator may apply in writing to the tax collector for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax collector shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 16, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.240 - Hearing on amount assessed—Notice. 
If timely application for a hearing is made pursuant to Section 3.16.230 of this chapter, the tax collector shall give at least five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this chapter to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the tax collector shall determine the proper tax, interest and penalties to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the operator in the manner prescribed in this chapter of that determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties due to the city. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless otherwise ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction upon a timely petition for judicial review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. 
(Ord. 2006-229 § 17, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.250 - Refunds—Claim filing requirements. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by Section 3.28.030 of this code. 
(Ord. 2006-230 § 5, 2006: Ord. 2006-229 §§ 2 (part), 18, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.260 - Refunds—Paid to guests when. 
A transient or other guest of a hotel may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in Section 3.16.250 of this chapter, if the tax was paid by the transient or other guest directly to the tax collector, or if the transient or other guest has paid the tax to the operator, and established to the satisfaction of the tax collector that the transient or other guest has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
(Ord. 2006-230 § 8, 2006; Ord. 2006-229 §§ 2 (part), 21, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.270 - Tax deemed debt to city. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. 
(Ord. 2006-230 § 9 (part), 2006; Ord. 2006-229 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.280 - Collected tax deemed debt by operator. 
Any tax collected from a transient by an operator pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. 
(Ord. 2006-230 § 9 (part), 2006; Ord. 2006-229 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.290 - Actions to collect authorized when. 
The tax collector, in the name of the city, as plaintiff, may bring suit for the recovery of any tax, interest or penalty due to the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-230 § 9 (part), 2006; Ord. 2006-229 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.300 - Acts deemed misdemeanors designated. 
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who: 
A.  Fails or refuses to register as required by this chapter. 
B.  Fails or refuses to furnish any return required to be made, or fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax collector; 
C.  Renders a false or fraudulent return; 
D.  If required by this chapter to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim, makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due; 
E.  Collects the tax due pursuant to this chapter from any transient and fails to pay the same to the city; 
F.  Violates in any way any other provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-230 § 9 (part), 2006; Ord. 2006-229 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.310 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable pursuant to Section 1.16.020(A) of this code. 
(Ord. 2006-230 § 9 (part), 2006; Ord. 2006-229 §§ 2 (part), 23, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.16.320 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies and penalties authorized by this chapter or available under any other provision of law or equity, including, but not limited to, the California False Claims Act (Government Code Section 12650 et seq.) and California Penal Code Section 424, as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended, are cumulative. Resort to one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-230 § 9 (part), 2006; Ord. 2006-229 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 2005-200 § 6, 2005)  
Chapter 3.20 - UTILITY USER TAX* 
Sections: 
 
3.20.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Utility User Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.020 - Tax imposed. 
There is established and imposed, on January 22, 1991, the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, a utility user tax in the manner and at the rates set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.030 - Purpose of this chapter. 
This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for the general governmental purposes of the city. All of the proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the city's general fund and used for the usual current expenses of the city. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.040 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section: 
"Billing address" means the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer. 
"City" means the city of Calabasas. 
"City administrator" means the city manager, or his or her authorized representative. 
"Electrical corporation" means a corporation or person as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 218. 
"Exempt wholesale generator" shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Federal Power Act (15 U.S.C. Section 79z-5a) and the regulations thereunder. 
"Gas" means natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel, which may be substituted therefor. 
"Month" means a calendar month. 
"Non-utility service supplier" means: 
1.  A service supplier, other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which generates electricity for sale to others, and shall include but is not limited to any publicly owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, cogenerator, distributed generation provider, exempt wholesale generator, municipal utility district, federal power marketing agency, electric rural cooperative, or other supplier or seller of electricity; 
2.  An electric service provider (ESP), electricity broker, marketer, aggregator, pool operator or other electricity supplier other than a provider of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental services to electricity users within the city; and 
3.  A gas service supplier, aggregator, marketer or broker, other than a supplier of gas distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which sells or supplies gas or supplemental services to gas users within the city. 
"Person" means, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnerships of every kind, association, syndicate, club, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and nonprofit), municipal corporation (other than the city), municipal district, cooperative, or receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by court. 
"Service address" means the residential street address or the business street address of the service user's primary place of usage. 
"Service supplier" means any entity or person, or its billing agent, that provides telephone communication, electric or gas service to a user of such services in the city, and includes an entity or person, required to collect, or self-collect under Section 3.20.100 of this chapter, and remit a tax as imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter, including its billing agent in the case of electric and gas suppliers. 
"Service user" means a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"Tax administrator" means the treasurer and/or tax collector of the city, or his or her designated representative. 
"Telephone communication services" means and includes any telephonic quality communication for the purpose of transmitting messages or information (including, but not limited to, voice, telegraph, teletypewriter, data, facsimile, video, or text) by electronic, radio or similar means through "interconnected service" with the "public switched network" as these terms are commonly used in the Federal Communications Act and the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission - [see 47 U.S.C.A. Section 332(d)], whether such transmission occurs by wire, cable, fiber-optic, light wave, laser, microwave, radio wave, including, but not limited to, cellular service, commercial mobile service, personal communications service (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), and other types of personal wireless service - [see 47 U.S.C.A. Section 332(c)(7)(C)(i)] regardless of radio spectrum used, switching facilities, satellite or any other similar facilities. 
"Telephone corporation" means a corporation or person as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 234. 
(Ord. 2006-231 § 1, 2006: Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.050 - Constitutional exemptions. 
A.  The taxes imposed by this chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  Any person or service when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of a federal or California statute, the Constitution of the United States, or the Constitution of the State of California; and 
2.  The city. 
B.  Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter pursuant to subsection (A) of this section shall file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a commonly recognized name. Such application shall be made upon a form approved by the tax administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all utility service providers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the tax administrator, such service user shall give the tax administrator timely written notice of any change in utility service providers so that the tax administrator can properly notify the new utility service provider of the service user's tax-exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of utility users taxes collected and remitted to the tax administrator from such service user as a result of such noncompliance. Upon request of the tax administrator, a service supplier or non-utility supplier, or their billing agents, shall provide a list of names and addresses of those customers which, according to their billing records, are deemed exempt from the utility users tax. 
(Ord. 2006-231 § 2, 2006: Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.051 - Senior citizen exemption. 
A.  The taxes imposed by this chapter shall not apply to any person who is the head of a household and both: 
1.  Is sixty-two (62) years old or older; and 
2.  Receives supplemental social security benefits. 
B.  To qualify for the exemption set forth in this section, the person shall file an application in the form, time and manner prescribed by the tax administrator. 
C.  The tax administrator shall, within sixty (60) days of receipt of an application for exemption, determine whether the exemption is granted, and if so, notify the service supplier. 
D.  The exemption granted to a person pursuant to this section shall become effective on the beginning of the first regular billing period which commences after the tax administrator has notified the service supplier that an exemption has been granted. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.052 - UUT exemption if eligible for CARE program. 
As of January 1, 2002, the tax imposed on the use of electricity/gas pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any individual who qualifies, and has been accepted, for the California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE) Program pursuant to Public Utilities Code Sections 327 and 739.1 et seq., and as it may be amended from time to time. In the event that the CARE Program is repealed or otherwise ceases to exist in a substantially similar form, the exemption granted under this subsection shall automatically terminate. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, this exemption shall expire automatically on July 1, 2003 and shall no longer be in effect as of said date. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.060 - Telephone user tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax upon every person who uses telephone communication services in the city, including intrastate, interstate and international telephone communication services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of all charges made for such telephone communication services and shall apply to a service user if the billing or service address of the service user is within the city's boundaries. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credit, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telephone communication services. 
C.  The tax administrator, from time to time, may issue and disseminate to telecommunication service suppliers which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those telecommunication services that are subject to the tax of subsection (A) of this section. This administrative ruling shall be consistent with legal nexus rules, regulations, and shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology so as to increase a tax, or increase an existing tax. 
D.  The following shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section: 
1.  Charges paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones available to the public with respect to local telephone service, or with respect to toll telephone service if the charge for such toll telephone service is less than twenty-five cents (25¢); except that where such coin-operated telephone service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be subject to the tax; 
2.  Except with respect to local telephone service, on any charges for services used in the collection of news for the public press, or a news ticker service furnishing a general news service similar to that of the public press, or radio broadcasting, or in the dissemination of news through the public press, or a news ticker service furnishing a general news service similar to that of the public press, or by means of radio broadcasting, if the charge for such service is billed in writing to such person; 
3.  Charges for services furnished to an international organization or to the American National Red Cross; 
4.  Charges for any toll telephone service which originates within a combat zone, as defined in Section 112 of the Internal Revenue Code, from a member of the Armed Forces of the United States performing service in such combat zone, as determined under such section, provided a certificate, setting forth such facts as the Secretary of the U.S. Treasury may by regulations prescribe, is furnished to the person receiving such payment; 
5.  Charges for any long distance telephone service to the extent that the amount so paid is for use by a common carrier, telephone or telegraph company, or radio broadcasting station or network in the conduct of its business as such; 
6.  Amounts paid by a nonprofit hospital for services furnished to such organization. For purposes of this subsection, the term "nonprofit hospital" means a hospital referred to in Internal Revenue Code Section 170(b)(1)(A)(iii) which is exempt from income tax under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(a); 
7.  Charges for services or facilities furnished to the government of any state, or any political subdivision thereof, or the district of Columbia; 
8.  Charges paid by a nonprofit educational organization for services or facilities furnished to such organization. For purposes of this subsection, the term "nonprofit educational organization" means an educational organization described in Internal Revenue Code Section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii) which is exempt from income tax under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(a). The term also includes a school-operated as an activity of an organization described in Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3) which is exempt from income tax under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(a), if such school normally maintains a regular faculty and curriculum and normally has a regularly enrolled body of pupils or students in attendance at the place where its educational activities are regularly carried on; 
9.  Charges for maritime mobile services as defined in Section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations as such section existed on January 1, 1970; 
10.  Charges for "private mobile radio service" as defined in Part 20 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations or "private mobile service" as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 332(d) which is not interconnected to the public switched network; 
11.  Charges for any type of service or equipment furnished by a service supplier subject to public utility regulation during any period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to public utility regulation. 
E.  To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of telephone communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such telephone communication service, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city, provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section. For purposes of establishing sufficient legal nexus for the imposition and collection of utility users tax on charges for telephone communication services pursuant to this chapter, "minimum contacts" shall be construed in favor of the imposition and collection of the utility users tax to the fullest extent permitted by California and federal law, and as that law may change from time to time. 
F.  The tax on telephone communication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of tax collected during one month must be received by the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. 
(Ord. 2006-231 § 3, 2006: Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.080 - Electricity user tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax on every person other than a telephone corporation, electrical corporation, or gas corporation, using electricity in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such electricity, and for any supplemental service or other associated activities directly related and/or necessary for the provision of electricity to the end-user, which are provided by a service supplier or non-utility supplier to a service user. The tax shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall apply to all services, components and items that are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term "charges" shall include: 
1.  Energy charges; 
2.  Distribution or transmission charges; 
3.  Metering charges; 
4.  Stand-by, reserves, firming, ramping, voltage support, regulation, emergency, or other similar services minimum charges for services; 
5.  Customer charges, services charges, demand charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, power exchange charges, independent system operator (ISO) charges, stranded investment or competitive transition charges (CTC), public purpose program charges, nuclear decommissioning charges, trust transfer amounts (bond financing charges), franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees, and surcharges which are necessary to or common for the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric service; and 
6.  Charges, fees, or surcharges for electricity services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing. 
C.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the electricity or services related to the provision of such electricity. 
D.  The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the electric service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of electric retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such electric service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such electric service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (A) above. This administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax or increase an existing tax. 
E.  As used in this section, the term "using electricity" shall not be construed to mean: 
1.  Electricity used in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or a government agency; 
2.  The mere receiving of such electricity by an electrical corporation or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale; 
3.  Electricity used in the conduct of business by a telephone corporation, electrical corporation, or gas corporation; and 
4.  Electricity used after February 28, 1991, by a farmer using such electricity for the sole purpose of pumping water for irrigating food and fiber crops raised for commercial sale; provided that said farmer has applied for and received written confirmation from the tax administrator that the farmer's operations are commercial in nature and that the electricity is used solely for the purpose of pumping water for agricultural irrigation. 
F.  The tax on electricity provided by self-production or by a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.20.100. All other taxes on charges for electricity imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the electric service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit that tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.090 - Gas user tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person, other than a telephone corporation, electrical corporation, or gas corporation, using gas in the city which is transported and delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made to for such gas, including all services related to the storage, transportation and delivery of such gas. The tax shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall apply to all services, components and items for gas service that are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of gas service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term "charges" shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges: 
1.  The commodity charges for purchased gas, or the cost of gas owned by the service user (including the actual costs attributed to drilling, production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline, and other operating costs associated with the production and delivery of such gas), which is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system; 
2.  Gas transportation charges (including interstate charges to the extent not included in commodity charges); 
3.  Storage charges; provided, however, that the service provider shall not be required to apply the tax to any charges for gas storage services when the service provider cannot, as a practical matter, determine the jurisdiction where such stored gas in ultimately used; but it shall be the obligation of the service user to self-collect the amount of tax not applied to any charge for gas storage by the service provider and to remit the tax to the appropriate jurisdiction; 
4.  Capacity or demand charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, transition charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charges which are necessary or common to the receipt, use, and enjoyment of gas service; 
5.  Charges, fees, or surcharges for gas services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing. 
C.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the gas or services related to the delivery of such gas. 
D.  The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the gas service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of gas retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such gas service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such gas service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of gas service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (A) above. This administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax or increase an existing tax. 
E.  There shall be excluded from the calculation of the tax imposed in this section: 
1.  Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through a pipeline distribution system; 
2.  Charges made for gas used in the production of electricity by a cogenerator, an electric corporation, a public agency that supplies or sells electricity, or an exempt wholesale generator; 
3.  Charges made for gas used in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or governmental agency; 
4.  Charges for propane or other alternate hydrocarbon fuels which are sold in quantities of twenty-five (25) gallons or less to be used in motor vehicles; 
5.  Charges made for gas used by a non-utility service supplier to generate electricity for its own use, or for sale to others, provided the electricity so generated is subject to the tax in accordance with Section 3.20.080; and 
6.  Charges made for gas which is consumed after February 28, 1991, by a commercial farmer using gas for the sole purpose of pumping water for irrigating food and fiber crops raised for commercial sale, provided that said farmer has applied for and received written confirmation that the farmer's operations are commercial in nature and that the gas is used solely for the purpose of pumping water for commercial irrigation. 
F.  The tax that is calculated on charges for gas provided by self-production or by a non-utility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.20.100. All other taxes on charges for gas imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the gas service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001).  
3.20.100 - Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity. 
A.  Any service user subject to the tax imposed by Sections 3.20.080 or 3.20.090 hereof, which produces gas or electricity for self-use; which receives gas or electricity directly from a service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this ordinance; or which otherwise is not having the full tax collected and remitted by a service supplier or a non-utility service supplier on its use of gas or electricity in the city, shall report said fact to the tax administrator and shall remit the remaining tax due directly to the tax administrator within thirty (30) days of such use. In lieu of paying said actual tax, the service user may, at its option, remit to the tax administrator within thirty (30) days of such use an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, or upon the pattern payment of similar customers of the service supplier using similar amounts of gas or electricity, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. 
B.  The tax administrator may require said service user to identify its non-utility supplier and provide, subject to audit, invoices, books of account, or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used and the cost or price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide such satisfactory evidence, or, if the administrative cost of calculating the tax, in the opinion of the tax administrator, is excessive, the tax administrator may determine the tax by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or electricity used had been provided by the service supplier, which is the primary provider of gas or electricity within the city. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the city. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.105 - Effect of commingling non-taxable items with taxable items. 
If one or more non-taxable items are bundled or billed together with one or more taxable items (as provided for by this chapter) under a single charge on a customer's bill, the entire single charge shall be deemed taxable unless, upon the written request of the customer, the service supplier can reasonably identify the non-taxable component of the single charge based upon one or more of the following methodologies, as selected by the tax administrator: i) the average industry charges for the individual non-taxable items included in the entire single charge; ii) the amount of the entire single charge less the average industry charges for the individual taxable items included in the entire single charge; or, iii) the service supplier's books and records that are kept in the regular course of business, which must be consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.109 - Temporary rebates. 
A.  The city council, by resolution, may grant a temporary utility users tax rebate to any class of service users for the purpose of easing the tax burden on such customer class, which is due to an unusually large increase in the service charges for a particular utility industry subject to the utility users tax. The city council may rebate an appropriate percentage of the tax prospectively for a period of no more than twelve (12) months. If applicable, the tax administrator shall implement the temporary tax rebate by giving sixty (60) day written notice to all affected service suppliers as required by Public Utilities Code Section 799. 
B.  The city council may consider the following factors in determining whether to grant a temporary tax rebate under this section: 
1.  The amount of the increase in the average billing for the utility service for which a rebate is being considered; 
2.  The severity of the burden that the increased billing and associated tax imposes on the customer class for which a rebate is being considered; 
3.  The increased expense to the city as a utility customer, which occurs as a result of the increase in the cost of such utility service; 
4.  The estimated time period that the billing increase will likely persist; 
5.  The forecasted and historical increases or decreases in the other sources of utility users tax; 
6.  The forecasted and historical increases or decreases in municipal tax revenues other than the utility users tax; 
7.  The overall inflation rate during relevant time periods, as measured by the Consumer Price Index (CPI); and/or, 
8.  Any other factor that affects the fairness or equity of granting such a temporary rebate. 
C.  In a resolution granting a temporary tax rebate, the city council shall make the following findings: 
1.  The temporary tax rebate is necessary to abate a significantly increased tax burden on a class of service users; or, 
2.  The temporary tax rebate shall not adversely affect the city's ability to meet its financial obligations as contemplated in its current budget. 
D.  Nothing herein shall prohibit the city council from granting consecutive temporary rebates, provided that the city council reconsiders the factors enumerated in subsection (B), above, for each subsequent temporary rebate, and makes appropriate findings for each resolution. As stated in Government Code Section 9611, the enactment of a temporary tax rebate by the city council shall not constitute a repeal of one or more of the original provisions of this chapter. Upon the expiration of the time of the temporary tax rebate, the original provisions of this chapter shall have the same force and effect as if the temporary tax rebate had not been enacted. Nothing herein is intended to constitute a decrease in a tax, or an increase in a tax requiring an election approval under California Constitution Article XIIIC; and to the extent that any aspect of a temporary tax rebate resolution is found to invoke such a requirement, the entire temporary rebate resolution shall be deemed null and void ab initio and there shall be no entitlement to a rebate for any service user. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.110 - Duty to collect—Procedures. 
The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be performed as follows: 
A.  The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as, and along with, the collection of charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges, Section 3.20.170 (B) shall apply. 
B.  The duty of a service supplier to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where charges are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.120 - Filing return and payment. 
Each person required by this chapter to remit a tax shall make a return to the tax administrator on forms approved by the tax administrator on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax owed shall be included with the return and filed with the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such additional information as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Tax Code Section 7284.6, the tax administrator, and its agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information, and not subject to the Public Records Act. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.130 - Interest and penalty. 
A.  Taxes collected from a service user, or owed by a service user subject to Section 3.20. 100 of this chapter, which are not received by the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent and are subject to penalties and interest. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the tax administrator on the first regular working day following a Saturday/Sunday or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this subsection shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the city's account on or before the following business day. 
B.  If the person required to collect and/or remit the utility users tax fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more services or charges on the customer's billing) or fails to remit the tax collected on or before the due date, or, in the case of a service user that fails to properly self-collect and remit the tax under Section 3.20.100 on or before the due date, the tax administrator shall attach a penalty for such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of five percent of the total tax that is delinquent or deficient in the remittance, and if not remitted within two working days after the date of the delinquency, shall pay a total penalty of twenty (20) percent of the amount of tax owed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person required to collect and/or remit the utility users' tax shall not be subject the fifteen (15) percent penalty and interest for an "improper assessment," if such "improper assessment" is voluntarily disclosed to the tax administrator, or its agent, and promptly corrected thereafter by such person, whether the disclosure occurs in the course of a tax administrator survey under Sections 3.20.060(C), 3.20.080(D) and 3.20.090(G) or the disclosure is voluntarily initiated by such person. For purposes of this subsection the term "voluntarily disclosed" shall mean information freely offered by a service supplier to the city for the purpose of increasing the accuracy of the service supplier's tax collection and/or remittances before the issue has been raised or an inquiry has been initiated by the city or any other California municipality. 
C.  The tax administrator shall have power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and/or remit taxes under the provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the tax administrator. 
D.  In addition to any other penalties imposed by this chapter, any person required to collect and/or remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter who fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on the customer s billing) or fails to remit the tax collected, or, in the case of a service user that fails to properly self-collect and remit the tax under Section 3.20.100 of this chapter, shall pay interest at the rate of three-quarters per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid. 
E.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (B) and (D), no penalty or interest shall be applied if delinquencies are the result of natural disasters or other phenomena beyond the control of the person charged with collecting and remitting the tax, provided the person being delinquent notifies the tax administrator as soon as normal communications permit. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.140 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit, and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount, along with any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the person's noncompliance with this chapter including but not limited to, reasonable attorneys fees. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.150 - Additional powers and duties of tax administrator. 
A.  The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The tax administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations that are consistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator's office. 
C.  Upon a proper showing of good cause, the tax administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby: i) conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier (or service user subject to section 3.20.100 of this chapter) so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or, ii) to avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator's office and are voidable by the tax administrator or the city at any time. 
D.  The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by this chapter. The tax administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any person who the tax administ-rator determines is exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with the address and account number to which service is supplied to any such exempt person. The tax administrator shall notify the service supplier of the termination of any person's right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.170 - Administrative remedy—Service users. 
A.  Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of tax to such person for a period of two or more billing periods, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods. 
The service supplier shall provide the city with amounts refused, along with the names, addresses and reasons of the service users refusing to pay the tax imposed under provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The tax administrator shall notify the service user that he or she has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handling it to him or her personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have changed his or her address, to his or her last known address. 
C.  If a service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen (15) days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of twenty-five (25)percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, the tax administrator shall assess the delinquent service user for the required tax pursuant to Section 3.20.175 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.175 - Assessments and appeal. 
A.  The tax administrator may make an assessment for taxes not paid or remitted by a person required to pay or remit. The tax administrator shall mail a notice of such assessment, which shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes, penalties and interest imposed and the time and place where the assessment may be contested, to the service supplier and/or the service user at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing and shall post such notice for at least five continuous days prior to the date of the hearing. A penalty of twenty-five (25)percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, along with interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid, but not less than five dollars. Any interested party having any objections may appear and be heard at tax administrator prior hearing provided his or her objection is filed in writing with the tax administrator prior to the time of the hearing. At the time fixed for considering such assessment, the tax administrator shall hear the same, together with any objections filed as provided in this subsection, and thereupon may confirm or modify such assessment. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.180 - Records. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and/or remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator, or the tax administrator's designated representative, shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time. 
B.  The city may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the tax administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the tax administrator t o establish compliance with this chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the tax administrator on or before the due date provided in the subpoenaed records to the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the city on or before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse the city for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the city to conduct the inspection. 
C.  The tax administrator is authorized to execute a non-disclosure agreement approved by the city attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7. The tax administrator may request from a person providing transportation or distribution services of gas or electricity to service users within the city a list of the names, billing and service addresses, and other pertinent information, of its transportation customers within the city pursuant to Section 6354(E) of the Public Utilities Code. 
D.  If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: i) provide to the tax administrator the name, in address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and, ii) upon request of the tax administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the tax administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the city. 
E.  If any person subject to record-keeping under this section unreasonably denies the tax administrator, or the tax administrator's designated representative, access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, the tax administrator may impose a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) on such person for each day following: i) the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or, ii) the due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.190 - Refunds. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by Section 3.28.030 of this code. 
(Ord. 2006-230 § 4, 2006: Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.200 - Appeals. 
A.  The provisions of this section apply to any assessment, decision or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.20.190 of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by any assessment, decision or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, other than a decision relating to a refund, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. [See Government Code Section 935(b).] Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers. 
B.  If any person is aggrieved by any assessment, decision or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, other than a decision relating to a refund; or with the failure of the tax administrator to grant an exemption as provided for under this chapter; he or she may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fourteen (14) days of the date of the assessment, decision or administrative ruling of the tax administrator which aggrieved the service user or service supplier. 
C.  The matter shall be set for hearing no more than thirty (30) days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party and any other interested person may present to the tax administrator such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken. 
D.  Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the city's files, the city council shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within fourteen (14) days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within ninety (90) days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. If the city council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the fourteen (14) day period, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the city council on the fourteenth day. The action of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
E.  No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.210 - Termination or suspension of utility user tax. 
The service supplier shall, upon notification, terminate or suspend any utility user tax commencing with the first full billing period which occurs after the effective day of such action by the city. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.220 - Notice of changes to ordinance. 
If a tax under this ordinance is added, repealed, increased, reduced, or the tax base is changed, the tax administrator shall follow the notice requirements of Public Utilities Code Section 799. Prior to the effective date of the ordinance change, the service supplier shall provide the tax administrator with a copy of any written procedures describing the information that the service supplier needs to implement the ordinance change. If the service provider fails to provide such written instructions, the tax administrator, or its agent, shall send, by first class mail, a copy of the ordinance change to all collectors and remitters of the city's utility users' taxes according to the latest payment records of the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
3.20.230 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies and penalties prescribed by, this chapter or which are available under any other provision of law or equity, including, but not limited to, the California False Claims Act (Government Code Section 12650 et seq.), are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-168 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 3.24 - SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Creation. 
To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code and to avail itself of its benefits of Sections 2106 and 2107 thereof, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "special gas tax street improvement fund." 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.24.020 - Deposits into fund. 
All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein or for engineering or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways by the city, and all interests received from the investment thereof, shall be paid into said fund. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.24.030 - Expenditures from fund. 
All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purpose authorized by and subject to the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 3.28 - CLAIMS AND DEMANDS AGAINST CITY 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Purpose. 
The city desires to adopt procedures relative to the fiscal affairs of the new city and to provide for the payment of its debts as they come due. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.28.020 - General. 
The provisions of this chapter recognize the general claim procedures applicable to the local public agencies, including the city, are governed by the provisions of Chapter 1 of Division 3.6 of the Government Code of the state, commencing with Section 900 and following. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.28.030 - Claims. 
A.  Authority. The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to the city's authority under the Constitution and laws of the state of California, including but not limited to California Constitution Article XI, Sections 7 and 9, and Sections 935 and 37100.5 of the California Government Code. 
B.  Claims Required. All claims against the city for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Government Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this section, "claims") shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by the ordinance codified in this section. 
C.  Form of Claim. All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910. The foregoing reference to Government Code Section 910 shall not be construed to authorize a class claim or a representative claim, and no claim may be filed on behalf of another person or a class of persons unless verified by such other person(s) and each member of any purported class. 
D.  Claim Prerequisite to Suit. In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the city prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of subsection (B) of this section. 
E.  Suit. Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940 through 949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the city shall conform to the requirements of Sections 950 through 951 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 2006-230 § 1, 2006: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2012-299, §§ 1, 2, 4-25-2012)  
3.28.040 - Claims covered by insurance. 
All claims filed with the city clerk, which claims are covered by insurance, shall be forwarded by the risk manager after action thereon by the council to the appropriate insurance carrier for handling and further processing. 
(Ord. 2006-230 § 7 (part), 2006; Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.28.050 - Purchases, supplies or services. 
A.  All demands, invoices or claims for purchases, supplies or services included within budgetary appropriations shall be presented in writing to the city manager. All such demands, invoices or claims shall be fully itemized and verified as just and correct by the claimant or his or her authorized agent. 
B.  Each demand shall bear the number of the purchase order issued for the materials or services rendered. 
C.  Such demands, invoices or claims shall be audited by the director of finance, who shall prepare a register of audited demands. The affidavit of the director of finance shall be attached to such register, certifying to the accuracy of the register. 
D.  Such demands, invoices or claims shall be approved by the city manager and finance committee consisting of two designated members of the city council. 
E.  All claims approved shall be paid by checks drawn upon the city treasurer signed by the person(s) designated by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2006-230 § 7 (part), 2006; Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.28.060 - Exhaustion of administrative remedies. 
Prior to seeking judicial relief with respect to a dispute regarding a tax, fee or other charge imposed by the city, an aggrieved taxpayer, fee payer or other person must exhaust administrative remedies by: (i) exhausting any administrative remedies specified by any other provision of this code or other applicable law, (ii) paying the full amount owed, including applicable penalties and interest, and (iii) presenting a claim for refund under Section 3.28.030 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-271, § 1, 2-10-2010)  
Chapter 3.32 - JUDICIAL REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS 
Sections: 
 
3.32.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 provides in full as follows: 
(a)  Judicial review of any decision of a local agency, other than school district, as the term local agency is defined in Section 54951 of the Government Code, or of any commission, board, officer or agent thereof, may be had pursuant to Section 1094.6 of this Code only if the petition for writ of mandate pursuant to this section is filed within the time limits specified in this section. 
(b)  Any such petition shall be filed not later than the 90th day following the date on which the decision becomes final. If there is no provision for reconsideration of the decision, or for a written decision or written findings supporting the decision, in any applicable provision of any statute, charter, or rule, for the purposes of this section, the decision is final on the date it is announced. If the decision is not announced at the close of the hearing, the date, time, and place of the announcement of the decision shall be announced at the hearing. If there is a provision for reconsideration, the decision is final for purposes of this section upon the expiration of the period during which such reconsideration can be sought; provided, that if reconsideration is sought pursuant to any such provision the decision is final for the purposes of this section on the date that reconsideration is rejected. If there is a provision for a written decision or written findings, the decision is final for purposes of this section upon the date it is mailed by first-class mail, postage prepaid, including a copy of the affidavit or certificate of mailing, to the party seeking the writ. Subdivision (a) of Section 1013 does not apply to extend the time, following deposit in the mail of the decision or findings, within which a petition shall be filed. 
(c)  The complete record of the proceedings shall be prepared by the local agency or its commission, board, officer, or agent which made the decision and shall be delivered to the petitioner within 190 days after he had filed a written request therefor. The local agency may recover from the petitioner its actual costs for transcribing or otherwise preparing the record. Such record shall include the transcript of the proceedings, all pleadings, all notices and admitted exhibits, all rejected exhibits in the possession of the local agency or its commission, board, officer, or agent, all written evidence, and any other papers in the case. 
(d)  If the petitioner files a request for the record as specified in subdivision (c) within 10 days after the date the decision becomes final as provided in subdivision (b), the time within which a petition pursuant to Section 1094.5 may be filed shall be extended to not later than the 30th day following the date on which the record is either personally delivered or mailed to the petitioner or his attorney of record, if he has one. 
(e)  As used in this section, decision means a decision subject to review pursuant to Section 1094.5, suspending, demoting, or dismissing an officer or employee, revoking, or denying an application for a permit, license, or other entitlement, or denying an application for any retirement benefit or allowance. 
(f)  In making a final decision as defined in subdivision (e), the local agency shall provide notice to the party that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by this section. 
As used in this subdivision, "party" means an officer or employee who has been suspended, demoted or dismissed; a person whose permit, license, or other entitlement has been revoked or suspended, or whose application for a permit, license, or other entitlement has been denied; or a person whose application for a retirement benefit or allowance has been denied. 
(g)  This section shall prevail over any conflicting provision in any otherwise applicable law relating to the subject matter, unless the conflicting provision is a state or federal law which provides a shorter status of limitations, in which case the shorter statute of limitations shall apply. 
B.  It is the desire of the city to make the above-stated provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, and any amendments thereto, applicable to the judicial review of its decisions and those of its commissions as specified in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6(e) in order to avoid the prejudice to the city and its staff inherent in delaying judicial review of such decisions. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.32.020 - Applicability of Section 1094.5 of California Code of Civil Procedure. 
The provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 shall be applicable to the judicial review of any and all decisions of the council and commissions of the city of Calabasas, as specified in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6(e). 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.32.030 - Notice to all parties. 
In making any final decision specified in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6(e), the council or the commission making the decision shall provide notice to all parties concerned that the time within which judicial review of the decision must be sought is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 3.36 - RETURNED CHECK FEE 
Sections: 
 
3.36.010 - Check returned without payment. 
There shall be a twelve dollar ($12.00) charge for the processing of any check returned for insufficient funds or any other reason to the city or any department thereof. The twelve dollar ($12.00) charge shall be added to and become part of the underlying obligation. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 3.38 - REFUND OF DEPARTMENT FEES 
 
3.38.010 - Claim for a refund. 
No claim for a refund of department fees shall be allowed in whole or in part unless filed with the city clerk within the earlier of (1) twelve (12) months from the date of expiration of the permit/application or of any extensions granted by the department, or (2) twelve (12) months from the date of any department or commission action. 
Upon request of a claimant, the City Council may make an exception to the twelve (12) month filing limitation for good cause demonstrated by a claimant. However, in no event may an exception be considered or granted if the claim was filed more than twenty four (24) months from the date of expiration of the permit/application or of any extensions granted by the department, or twenty four (24) months from the date of any department or commission action. 
(Ord. No. 2016-341 , § 1, 11-9-2016; Ord. No. 2017-348 , § 1, 3-22-2017)  
3.38.020 - Refunds of license permit or application fees. 
A.  The head of a department in which there is collected or received for and on behalf of the city any fee, permit fee or application fee may, upon written application of the person who paid such fee, refund all or part of such payment as herein provided, and if such department head is satisfied, upon such proof as may be presented to or required by him/her, that any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Where a refund is specifically authorized by the provision of law requiring payment of the license, permit or application fee. 
2.  Where the money is paid to secure a registration certificate, license or permit not required by law. 
3.  Where the amount paid was in excess of the amount required by law. 
4.  Where the money paid was not required by law. 
5.  Where the applicant for any registration certificate, license or permit has not, at any time after the commencement of the period or term during which the requested certificate, license or permit would have been effective, commenced or engaged in the business or occupation, or performed any act, for which the certificate, license or permit was required; or where a person has filed an application or appeal and subsequently has withdrawn said application or appeal; provided, however, that the city has not made any physical inspection or examination of real property, held or conducted any hearing, performed any tests, or done any similar work, whether required or contemplated by law or not, as a result of the filing or issuance of any of the foregoing, which actions result in city costs and expenses less than or equal to five hundred dollars ($500.00); and, provided further, that the certificate, license, or permit, if the same has in fact been issued, must be surrendered for cancellation and a written request for such cancellation must be filed with the department of the city issuing the same on or before the date of refund. In case of refunds made under this subsection, the actual city costs and expenses shall be deducted and retained by the city, to a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the amount paid, to cover clerical and other overhead costs and expenses incurred in processing the refund transaction. 
B.  Any requests for refunds where any registration certificate, license or permit has resulted in the city conducting a physical inspection or examination of real property, or where the city has held or conducted any hearing, performed any tests, or done any similar work, whether required or contemplated by law or not, as a result of the filing or issuance of any of the foregoing which actions result in city costs and expenses exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), shall require city council approval, upon such proof as may be presented to or required by the city council, that any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Where a refund is specifically authorized by the provision of law requiring payment of the license, permit or application fee. 
2.  Where the money is paid to secure a registration certificate, license or permit not required by law. 
3.  Where the amount paid was in excess of the amount required by law. 
4.  Where the money paid was not required by law. 
5.  Where the applicant for any registration certificate, license or permit has not, at any time after the commencement of the period or term during which the requested certificate, license or permit would have been effective, commenced or engaged in the business or occupation, or performed any act, for which the certificate, license or permit was required; or where a person has filed an application or appeal and subsequently has withdrawn said application or appeal; and, provided further, that the certificate, license, or permit, if the same has in fact been issued, must be surrendered for cancellation and a written request for such cancellation must be filed with the department of the city issuing the same on or before the date of refund. In case of refunds made under this subsection, the actual city costs and expenses shall be deducted and retained by the city, to a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the amount paid, to cover clerical and other overhead costs and expenses incurred in processing the refund transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2016-341 , § 1, 11-9-2016)  
3.38.030 - Contents of claim for a refund. 
A.  A claim for a refund form shall be filed with the city clerk and shall contain the following information in addition to the information given by the claimant thereon or reasonably required by the city clerk therefor: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of the claimant. 
2.  The type of action requested. 
3.  The date fees were paid. 
4.  Receipt/permit/reference number. 
5.  The grounds for the refund request. 
(Ord. No. 2016-341 , § 1, 11-9-2016)  
3.38.040 - Procedure after filing. 
A.  Upon receipt of the claim for a refund, the city clerk shall notify the concerned city officials, bodies or departments that a claim for a refund has been filed and shall transmit a copy of the claim form to such officials, bodies or departments. 
B.  When city council approval is required, the city clerk shall prepare the necessary reports for the city council, and place the claim for a refund on the agenda for hearing before the city council within thirty (30) days of receipt of the said claim, and notify the applicant in writing of the time, date and place of the hearing not less than five (5) days before the council hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2016-341 , § 1, 11-9-2016)  
3.38.050 - Hearing before council. 
The council shall hold a hearing at the time set therefor. The council may summon witnesses and hear evidence relating to such request, but the rules of evidence shall not apply. The council may continue the hearing from time to time. At the conclusion thereof, the council shall grant or deny such claim or make such modifications of the decision or action from with reference thereto as it may deem fit. The action of the council shall be immediately final and conclusive, and no claimant shall file another claim for the same purpose after the date of such action. 
(Ord. No. 2016-341 , § 1, 11-9-2016)  
Chapter 3.40 - PURCHASING SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
3.40.010 - Purpose. 
A.  This chapter is adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 54201 et seq. to provide guidance and direction regarding the procurement of supplies, equipment, and services and to ensure that the city and its departments will receive high quality goods and services at minimum cost to the taxpayer. 
B.  The policies and procedures contained in this chapter are not intended to conflict with California Public Contracts Code Section 20160 et seq. or any other applicable law governing the solicitation of bids and award of contracts for public works projects requiring the expenditure of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more. 
(Ord. 2008-242 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2008: Ord. 2005-204 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2005: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2010-273, § 1(Att. A), 4-28-2010)  
3.40.020 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise indicated, the following definitions shall apply to this chapter. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Calabasas or his or her designee. 
"Department head" means a person designated by the city manager and/or the city council to be responsible for the management of a department of the city or his or her designee. 
"Emergency" means an emergency as defined by Section 2.44.020 of this code. 
"Equipment" means items that are durable, have a fixed life expectancy and are shown in the city's books as fixed assets. 
"General services" means all services other than professional services and services pursuant to a public works contract excluded from this chapter by Section 3.40.010(B). 
"Professional services" means those services governed by Government Code section 4525 et seq., including architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, environmental, and land surveying services. 
"Professional service agreement (PSA)" means a written contract for professional services entered into as provided in this chapter. 
"Purchase" means the renting, leasing, purchasing, licensing or trade of supplies or equipment or the hiring of private contractors. 
"Purchasing officer" means the city manager or his or her designee. 
"Purchase order (PO)" means a form approved by the purchasing officer for the purchase of supplies, material, and/or equipment, but not professional services. 
"Supplies" means office supplies, janitorial supplies, material, goods, tools, or other commodities used in the general conduct of the city's business that do not constitute equipment. 
(Ord. 2008-242 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2008: Ord. 2005-204 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2005: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2010-273, § 1(Att. A), 4-28-2010)  
3.40.030 - Powers and duties. 
A.  Department heads: 
1.  Shall have the power to: 
a.  Negotiate and recommend to the city council contracts for the purchase of supplies, equipment, and/or services on behalf of their respective departments. 
b.  Approve purchase orders and professional service agreements for the benefit of their respective departments for amounts up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
c.  Execute contracts for the purchase of supplies, equipment and/or services for the benefit of their respective departments in accordance with the policies and procedures prescribed by this chapter. 
d.  Increase the time for performance or the not-to-exceed amounts prescribed by professional service agreements for which they are responsible by up to ten (10) percent of the original agreement amount if they reasonably conclude that doing so will result in cost and/or time savings to the city. 
2.  Are under the duty to: 
a.  Identify the type and quantity of supplies, equipment, and/or services required to fulfill the responsibilities of their respective departments. 
b.  Engage in an informal bidding process under Section 3.40.070 of this chapter for items expected to cost more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and less than or equal to sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00), or a formal bidding process under Section 3.40.080 of this chapter for items expected to cost more than sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00). 
NOTE: It is not permissible to split or separate purchases into smaller amounts to evade the requirements of this chapter. 
c.  Maintain records of all submitted bids for the procurement of supplies, equipment, and/or services as required by the city's approved document-retention schedule. 
d.  Determine whether the required items or services are budgeted or the city council has otherwise authorized their purchase. 
e.  Secure necessary authorization prior to the commencement of work or delivery of supplies and equipment by preparing a purchase order or professional service agreement and ensuring that it is approved as prescribed by this chapter. 
f.  Supervise the inspection of supplies or equipment purchased to ensure that the items conform to the quality expectations of the city. 
g.  Monitor the work of contractors to ensure adherence to the terms and conditions of professional service agreements. 
h.  Provide coded and approved invoices to the finance department for payment in a timely fashion. 
B.  The purchasing officer: 
1.  Shall have the power to: 
a.  Negotiate contracts for the purchase of supplies, equipment, and/or services on behalf of the city. 
b.  Approve purchase orders and professional service agreements on behalf of the city in amounts up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
c.  Execute contracts for the purchase of supplies, equipment and/or services on behalf of the city in accordance with this chapter. 
2.  Is under the duty to: 
a.  Enforce this chapter. 
b.  Recommend the transfer or exchange of surplus supplies and equipment between departments as needed, and recommend the sale of all supplies and equipment which have become obsolete, useless, or otherwise unsuitable for use by the city. 
C.  The city manager: 
1.  Shall have the power to: 
a.  Approve purchase orders and professional service agreements on behalf of the city for amounts up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) during a state of emergency declared pursuant to Chapter 2.44 of this code. 
b.  Perform any or all the duties of a department head or the purchasing officer. 
2.  Is under the duty to: 
a.  Ensure that the process for purchasing supplies, equipment, and services meets the needs of the community and the city. 
b.  Recommend to the city council revisions and amendments to this chapter to achieve its purposes. 
D.  Chief financial officer: 
1.  Shall have the power to: 
a.  Issue payment to vendors after receiving properly coded and approved invoices. 
b.  Delay issuing payments to vendors if an agreement is void. Purchase orders and professional service agreements are void if any of the following is true: 
i.  The term of the agreement has expired; 
ii.  The not-to-exceed amount specified by the agreement has been exceeded; or, 
iii.  The services performed are other than specified in the agreement. 
(Ord. 2008-242 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2008: Ord. 2005-204 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2005: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2010-273, § 1(Att. A), 4-28-2010; Ord. No. 2018-370 , § 1, 11-28-2018)  
3.40.040 - Purchasing guidelines. 
A.  Purchases of supplies, equipment, or services for amounts equal to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less do not require a bidding process and may be approved by a department head. Purchases in this range do not require a purchase order or a professional service agreement unless otherwise required by the vendor. 
B.  Purchases of supplies, equipment, or services for amounts greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) but less than or equal to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) do not require a bidding process. Purchases in this range require that a purchase order or a professional service agreement be prepared and approved by a department head. 
C.  Purchases of supplies, equipment, or services for amounts greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) but less than or equal to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) are subject to the informal bidding process set forth in Section 3.40.070. Purchases in this range require that a purchase order or a professional service agreement be prepared and approved by a department head and by the purchasing officer or city manager. 
D.  Purchases of supplies, equipment, or services for amounts greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) but less than or equal to sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) must meet the requirements of the informal bidding process set forth in Section 3.40.070. Purchases in this range require that a purchase order or a professional service agreement be prepared and approved by the department head and by the city manager. 
E.  Purchases of supplies, equipment, or services for amounts greater than sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) must meet the requirements of the formal bidding process set forth in Section 3.40.080. Purchases in this range require that a purchase order or a professional service agreement be prepared and approved by the department head, the city manager, and council. 
F.  During a declared state of emergency, purchases of supplies, equipment, or services for any amount do not require a bidding process. Purchases less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) require the approval of the city manager. Purchases greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) require the approval of the city council. 
G.  All properly executed original or amended purchase orders and professional service agreements must be forwarded to the finance department. A copy of all professional service agreements shall also be forwarded to the city clerk and maintained as required by the city's document retention schedule. 
Purchase Order and Professional Service Agreement Requirement Matrix 
Contract Amount 	Purchase Order 	Professional Service Agreement 	Bidding Process 	Authorization Required 
$1,000.00 or less 	Not required 	Not required 	None 	Department head only 
$1,000.01—$10,000.00 	Required 	Required 	None 	Department head only 
$10,000.01—$25,000.00 	Required 	Required 	Informal 	Department head, purchasing officer or city manager 
$25,000.01—$60,000.00 	Required 	Required 	Informal 	Department head, city manager 
$60,000.01 or greater 	Required 	Required 	Formal 	Department head, city manager, city council 
Any amount during a declared state of emergency 	Not required 	Not required 	None 	City manager (up to $100,000.00) city council (above $100,000.00) 
 
NOTE:  The above matrix is intended to summarize the requirements of this chapter and not to change them. If the matrix contradicts the text of this chapter in any respect, the language of the chapter will prevail. 
(Ord. 2008-242 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2008: Ord. 2005-204 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2005: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2010-273, § 1(Att. A), 4-28-2010; Ord. No. 2018-370 , § 2, 11-28-2018)  
3.40.050 - Purchase agreements. 
A.  Professional service agreement (PSA): 
1.  Professional service agreements are used to purchase professional services as defined in Section 3.40.020. 
2.  All purchases of professional services over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) require the completion of a PSA on the city's standard form, except during times of a declared state of emergency. Deviations from the city's standard professional service agreement must be approved by the purchasing officer or the city manager. 
3.  The city shall secure professional services based upon demonstrated competence, professional qualifications, and suitability for the project in general and needs to comply with either the informal or formal bid procedures set forth in Sections 3.40.070 or 3.40.080 respectively if the value of the agreement exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The city should also consider the cost of the professional service, and in the event that a vendor is selected that does not offer the lowest price, a rationale must be provided to and approved by the city manager prior to final selection being made. 
4.  Authority to approve a professional service agreement shall be as specified in Section 3.40.040. 
B.  Purchase order (PO): 
1.  Purchase orders are used to purchase supplies, material, and/or equipment having a cost greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). They are not to be used to secure professional services. 
2.  Authority to approve a purchase order shall be as specified in Section 3.40.040. 
(Ord. 2008-242 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2008: Ord. 2005-204 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2005: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2010-273, § 1(Att. A), 4-28-2010)  
3.40.060 - Award of contracts to businesses located in the city. 
The city shall give preference to businesses located in the city ("local businesses") when the difference between the bids from Calabasas businesses and those outside the city is less than the current sales tax benefit the city would receive from the local sales tax and the local business will be able to provide goods or services which are equal in quality to those of other competing bidders and meet all bid specifications. 
(Ord. 2008-242 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2008: Ord. 2005-204 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2005: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2010-273, § 1(Att. A), 4-28-2010)  
3.40.070 - Informal bid procedure. 
When the informal bid procedure is required, purchases shall be made in compliance with the following: 
A.  The city shall specifically identify the goods and/or services it wishes to purchase and submit that description to enough providers so it receives informal bids from at least three different providers. 
B.  Informal bids received must be documented in writing and retained by the department head as required by the approved document retention schedule. 
C.  Unless otherwise provided by any existing law, rule, regulation, or policy, the purchase of supplies, equipment and non-professional services shall be awarded to the provider giving the lowest qualified quote. 
(Ord. 2008-242 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2008: Ord. 2005-204 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2005: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2010-273, § 1(Att. A), 4-28-2010)  
3.40.080 - Formal bid procedure. 
When the formal bid procedure is required, purchases shall be made following compliance with the following: 
A.  Notice Inviting Bids. Notices inviting sealed bids shall include: 1) a general description of the articles and/or services to be purchased, 2) where bid forms and specifications may be obtained, 3) the date, time and place for the bidders' conference, if any, and for the submission of sealed bids, and 4) any other information which the department head conducting the procurement deems useful. 
B.  Published Notice. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city, or if there is none, posted in at least three public places in the city designated by the city clerk for posting public notices. 
C.  Bidder's Security: 
1.  When deemed necessary or appropriate, as with public works projects, the purchasing officer may require a bidding vendor to submit a bid security in any of the following forms: 
a.  Cash; 
b.  A cashier's check made payable to the city; 
c.  A certified check made payable to the city; 
d.  A bidder's bond executed by a surety insurer admitted to do business in California, made payable to the city. 
2.  Any requirement for bid security must be included in the public notice inviting bids. 
3.  The security shall be in an amount equal to at least ten (10) percent of the bid amount. 
4.  A vendor shall forfeit its bid security upon its refusal or failure to perform pursuant to the terms of its contract with the city within twenty (20) days after notice of award of contract or such lesser period specified in the notice inviting bids. 
D.  Failure to Perform: 
1.  Upon refusal or failure of the lowest successful bidder to execute or perform the contract pursuant to its terms, the officer or agency of the city authorized to award the contract may award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. 
2.  If the officer or agency of the city authorized to award the contract awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
E.  Bid Opening Procedure: 
1.  Sealed bids shall be submitted to the office of the city clerk and shall be identified as "Submitted Bid" on the envelope. 
2.  Bids shall be opened by the city clerk at the time and place stated in the notice inviting bids. 
3.  A record of all bids submitted to the city shall be subject to public inspection at the office of the city clerk during regular business hours for at least thirty (30) calendar days after the bids are opened. 
F.  Rejection of Bids. The officer or agency of the city authorized to award the contract may reject any and all bids and require the purchasing officer or department head to rebid the purchase. 
G.  Award of Contracts. The officer or agency of the city authorized by Section 3.40.040 of this code to do so shall award contracts. 
H.  Tie Bids. If two of more bids are submitted in the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the officer or agency of the city authorized to award the contract may accept either bid. 
I.  No Bids Received. If no bids are received following compliance with the requirements of this section, the officer or agency of the city authorized to award the contract may procure the requested supplies, equipment, or services without further compliance with this chapter. 
J.  Performance Bonds: 
1.  The purchasing officer may require a performance bond in such amount as may be reasonably necessary to ensure performance before entering into any contract. 
2.  If a performance bond is required, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
(Ord. 2008-242 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2008: Ord. 2005-204 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2005: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2010-273, § 1(Att. A), 4-28-2010)  
3.40.090 - Sole-source purchasing. 
A.  Prior to submitting a purchase request, the requesting department shall conduct a survey of available sources to determine whether there is only one source capable of competently and efficiently providing the required supplies, equipment or service. 
B.  If it is determined that there is only a single source for the purchasing of a particular item or service, the requesting department shall prepare a waiver of bid and submit it to the purchasing officer. 
C.  If it is determined that there is only a single source for the purchasing of a particular item or service, upon review and approval of the request by the purchasing officer and the city manager, the contract may be awarded to the sole source vendor without competition. In this case, the purchasing officer or authorized designee shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery, and terms. 
(Ord. 2008-242 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2008: Ord. 2005-204 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2005: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2010-273, § 1(Att. A), 4-28-2010)  
3.40.100 - Emergency purchases. 
A.  The city manager shall make, or authorize others to make, emergency purchases of supplies, equipment or services during a declared state of emergency for amounts less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); provided that such emergency purchases shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. Purchases for amounts greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) must be approved by the city council. 
B.  When making an emergency purchase, the requesting department shall complete a waiver of bid form and submit it to the purchasing officer. 
(Ord. 2008-242 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2008: Ord. 2005-204 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2005: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2010-273, § 1(Att. A), 4-28-2010)  
3.40.110 - Exemptions from bidding procedure. 
A.  Purchases of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or less. 
B.  Single source purchases in accordance with Section 3.40.090 of this code. 
C.  Emergency purchases in accordance with Section 3.40.100 of this code. 
D.  Intergovernmental orders by which the city has contracted with another governmental entity to purchase particular supplies, equipment or services on a cooperative basis. 
E.  Purchases of professional services in accordance with Section 3.40.050 of this code. 
(Ord. 2008-242 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2008: Ord. 2005-204 § 1, Attach. A (part), 2005: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2010-273, § 1(Att. A), 4-28-2010)  
Chapter 3.42 - AWARDING PUBLIC PROJECTS 
 
3.42.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is intended to establish regulations to apply to all public contracts in a manner that is consistent with the requirements of the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (Public Contracts Code § 22000 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 2012-293, § 1, 2-22-2012)  
3.42.020 - Public projects. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection E of this section, the city manager may cause public projects of sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) or less to be performed by employees of the city by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection E of this section, public projects of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) or less, may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Section 3.42.040. 
C.  Except as provided in subsection E of this section, and subsection E of Section 3.42.040, public projects of more than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) shall be let to contract by the formal bidding procedure outlined in Sections 3.42.050 and 3.42.060. 
D.  The term "public project" shall have the definition set forth in Public Contracts Code § 22002. 
E.  The dollar limits set forth in subsections A and B of this section shall adjust without city council action as necessary to comply with any adjustment mandated by the controller pursuant to the authority granted by Public Contract Code § 22020. 
(Ord. No. 2012-293, § 1, 2-22-2012; Ord. No. 2018-370 , § 3, 11-28-2018)  
3.42.030 - List of contractors. 
A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with Public Contracts Code § 22034(a) and any criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission (commission). Such list will be maintained by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2012-293, § 1, 2-22-2012)  
3.42.040 - Informal bidding procedure. 
The following apply to informal bids for public projects: 
A.  Notice Inviting Informal Bids. 
1.  Required Noticing. When a public contract is to be bid pursuant to the procedures in this section, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all construction trade journals specified by the commission in accordance with Public Contract Code § 22036. 
2.  Optional Noticing. Notification may be also provided to the contractors on the list created pursuant to Section 3.42.030 for the category of work being bid, and to any additional contractors and/or construction trade journals. 
3.  Exception. If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. 
B.  Mailing Notices. All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals pursuant to subsections A.1 and A.3, above, shall be completed not less than ten (10) calendar days before bids are due. 
C.  Description of Project. The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms and how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids. 
D.  Authority to Award Contracts. The city manager is authorized to award a contract if the lowest bid received is sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) or less. Contracts valued at more than sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) can only be awarded by the city council. 
E.  Bids Exceeding $200,000.00. If all bids received pursuant to the informal process are in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), the city council may adopt a resolution by a four-fifths vote to award the contract at two hundred twelve thousand five hundred dollars ($212,500.00) or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if the city council determines the city's cost estimate was reasonable. Otherwise, the project shall be re-bid pursuant to Section 3.42.050 and awarded pursuant to Sections 3.42.050 and 3.42.060 of this chapter. 
F.  Award of Contract. The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(Ord. No. 2012-293, § 1, 2-22-2012; Ord. No. 2018-370 , § 4, 11-28-2018)  
3.42.050 - Notice inviting formal bids. 
The following rules apply to notices for bids for public projects pursuant to the formal bidding process: 
A.  Contents of Notice. Notice inviting formal bids shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the project. 
B.  Publication of Notice. The notice shall be published at least fourteen (14) calendar days before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city, or otherwise comply with the requirements of Public Contracts Code § 22037. 
C.  Electronic transmission of notice. The notice inviting formal bids shall also be sent electronically, if available, by either facsimile or electronic mail and mailed to all construction trade journals specified in accordance with Public Contract Code § 22036. The notice shall be sent at least fifteen (15) calendar days before the date of opening the bids. The city may provide additional notice. 
(Ord. No. 2012-293, § 1, 2-22-2012)  
3.42.060 - Awarding formal bids. 
The following rules apply to awarding formal bids for public projects: 
A.  Rejecting Formal Bids. In its discretion, the city council may reject any bids presented, if the city, prior to rejecting all bids and declaring that the project can be more economically performed by employees of the agency, furnishes a written notice to an apparent low bidder. The notice shall inform the bidder of the city's intention to reject the bid and shall be mailed at least two business days prior to the hearing at which the city intends to reject the bid. If after the first invitation of bids all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the city shall have the option of either of the following: 
1.  Abandoning the project or re-advertising for bids in the manner described by this chapter. 
2.  By passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote of the city council declaring that the project can be performed more economically by city employees, may have the project done by force account without further complying with this article. 
B.  Lowest Bidder. If a contract is awarded, it shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the city may accept the one it chooses. 
C.  No Bids. If no bids are received through the formal or informal procedure, the project may be performed by the employees of the city by force account or negotiated contract without further complying with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-293, § 1, 2-22-2012)  
3.42.070 - Emergencies. 
A.  In cases of emergency when repair or replacements are necessary, the city council may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details, or giving notice for bids to let contracts. The work may be done by day labor under the direction of the city council, by contractor, or by a combination of the two. The city council's authority under this section may be exercised by the city manager during an emergency declared pursuant to Chapter 2.44 of this code. 
B.  In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the city shall comply with Chapter 2.5 of Part 3 of Division 2 of the Public Contracting Code (commencing with Section 22050). 
(Ord. No. 2012-293, § 1, 2-22-2012)  
Chapter 3.44 - MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION PROGRAM AND AIR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT TRUST FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.44.010 - Statement of support. 
In accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 44243(b)(1), the city does hereby express its support for the imposition by the South Coast Air Quality Management District of a motor vehicle registration fee increase as authorized by Health and Safety Code Section(s) 44223 (and 44225), for the purpose of using the fees so generated to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles pursuant to the requirements of the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the Air Quality Management Plan for the South Coast Air Quality Management District; prepared and adopted pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 40460 through 40470. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-15 § 1, 1991)  
3.44.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Fee administrator" means the city manager or his or her designee. 
"Mobile source air pollution reduction program" means any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution emitted from motor vehicles pursuant to the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the Air Quality Management Plan for the South Coast Air Quality Management District prepared and adopted in accordance with the provisions of Health and Safety Code Sections 40460 through 40470. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-15 § 2, 1991)  
3.44.030 - Air quality improvement trust fund. 
The fee administrator shall establish a separate interest bearing trust fund account with a financial institution authorized to accept deposits of city funds. This account shall be known as the air quality improvement trust fund. All interest earned by the account shall be credited to this account. All funds received by the city pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 44243 and 44244, along with any other funds designated by the city council, shall be deposited in this account and shall be used for the sole purpose of financing mobile source air pollution reduction programs. The fee administrator shall be responsible for depositing funds in the air quality improvement trust fund. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-15 § 3, 1991)  
3.44.040 - Audits. 
The city hereby consents to audits, at least once every two years, of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fees provided by Health and Safety Code Section 44243, provided that such audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the South Coast Air Quality Management District. Audit costs shall be funded as provided in Health and Safety Code Section 44244.1. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-15 § 4, 1991)  
3.44.050 - Construction of provisions. 
It is the intent of the city council that the provisions of this chapter and the interpretation of the term "mobile source air pollution reduction programs" shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out the purposes of this chapter, which are hereby found and declared to be to further public health, safety, welfare, and convenience, in accordance with the requirements and limitations of Health and Safety Code Sections 44243 and 44244. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 91-15 § 5, 1991)  
Chapter 3.48 - MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET POLICY 
Sections: 
 
3.48.010 - Revenue. 
A.  The city will attempt to maintain a diversified and stable revenue base to minimize the effects of economic fluctuations on revenue generation. 
B.  The city will estimate revenue using an objective, analytical process; in the case of uncertainty, conservative projections will be utilized. 
C.  The city will fund all current expenditures from current revenues. 
D.  Development process costs and related administrative expenses will be offset by development fees. 
E.  The finance director will provide monthly reports to the city council which discuss revenue projections in light of actual collections to date. Revised revenue projections will be adjusted, if necessary, half way through the fiscal year. 
F.  Beginning with the 1994-95 budget, all operating costs should be analyzed based on the following two revenue restrictions: 
1.  The city will be losing a significant amount of state subvention revenue in fiscal year 1998-99 based on revised population figures. Section 11005(c) of the State Revenue and Taxation Code established a formula of three times the number of registered voters for purposes of calculating population used in determining state subvention levels for cities incorporated after January 1. 1987. In the case of Calabasas, the formula resulted in a population of twenty-eight thousand two hundred thirty-four (28,234) as compared to the 1993 General Plan estimate of population of nineteen thousand eight hundred fifty-seven (19,857). The law freezes the original population figure for a period of eight years. At the conclusion of the eight years, the population number used reverts to the State Department of Finance certified population. General fund revenues affected are the following state subvention revenues: motor vehicle in lieu tax, trailer coach in lieu tax and off highway license fees. Highway users' tax revenues in the gas tax funds will also be reduced. 
2.  Past levels of development activity are unlikely to continue in the future. This change will affect the amount of service fees collected by the city relative to development and new construction, and therefore, this revenue source should not be expected to continue at current levels. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.48.020 - Reserves. 
A.  A contingency reserve account will be appropriated annually to provide for unanticipated expenditures of a nonrecurring nature and/or to meet unexpected increase in costs. 
B.  A reserve for future capital improvement projects will be established, and will be carried forward from year to year to provide resources for the city council to found future infrastructure and other one-time expenditure needs of the city. 
C.  The city is a member of the Southern California Joint Powers Insurance Authority (SCJPIA), a consortium of approximately sixty-eight (68) California cities. The SCJPIA is a risk-sharing, self-funded pool providing insurance-like benefits to its members. A self insurance reserve will be maintained for the purpose of setting aside resources to finance higher deductibles and self insurance retention in the future. The amount of the reserve will be analyzed annually to determine to appropriate funding level. 
D.  General fund unappropriated fund balance reserves will not be allowed to fall below ten (10) percent of current year general fund operating budget. This policy will be reevaluated every two years. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.48.030 - Cash management. 
A.  The authority of the city council to invest or to reinvest funds of the city, or to sell or exchange securities so purchased, may be delegated for a one-year period to the city treasurer, who shall thereafter assume full responsibility for those transactions until the delegation of authority is revoked or expires and shall make a monthly report of those transactions to the legislative body. The delegation may be made by resolution of the city council adopted at a public meeting. The city treasurer shall work under the general direction of the city manager. 
1.  Subject to review, the city council may renew the delegation of authority pursuant to this section each year. 
2.  Investments and cash management shall be consistent with the current investment policy adopted on an annual basis by resolution of the city council. The city treasurer shall annually submit a statement of investment policy which the city council shall consider at a public meeting. Any change in the policy shall also be considered by the city council at a public meeting. 
3.  The city's independent auditors, in conjunction with their annual audit, will audit the cash and investment balances in conformance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
B.  Surplus funds of the city shall be invested in accordance with the provisions of the California Government Code Sections 53600 et. seq., and of the current investment policy. 
(Ord. 97-116 § 1, 1997: Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.48.040 - Capital financing and debt management. 
A.  When the city finances capital projects by issuing bonds or certificates of participation, it will pay back the debt within a period not to exceed the expected useful life of the project. 
B.  The city will not use long-term debt financing for any recurring purpose such as current operating and maintenance expenditures. Short-term debt instruments such as revenue, tax or bond anticipation notes shall be excluded from this limitation. 
C.  An internal analysis will be conducted for each long-term financing which analyzes the impact on current and future budgets for debt service and operations. This analysis will also address the reliability of revenues to support debt service. 
D.  The city will generally conduct debt financing on a competitive basis. However, negotiated issues may be used due to market volatility of the use of an unusual or complex financing or security structure. 
E.  The city will diligently monitor its compliance with bond covenants and ensure its adherence to federal arbitrage regulations. 
F.  The city will provide full disclosure on every financial report and bond prospectus and will strive to maintain the best possible bond rating on all debt issuances. 
G.  The making of any decision that involves the borrowing of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or more must be discussed, considered and deliberated as a separate item of business on the agenda of a meeting of the city council. 
(Ord. 97-116 § 2, 1997; Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.48.050 - Budgeting. 
The budget is developed with the goal of presenting a clear picture to residents, council and staff of the city's direction. It shall include information about the city and the services that are provided. Summaries of revenue, expenditures and personnel will provide an overview of what funds are received and how they are spent. The remainder of the budget shall be devoted to detail about the services provided and the funds spent. Activity descriptions and annual departmental objectives will be listed and a report on accomplishments of the previous year budget objectives will be provided. This approach allows council members to make informed decisions about the emphasis they would like staff to put on various services. Therefore: 
A.  The annual operating budget for the city will be presented in a line item budget format. 
B.  The city will avoid budgetary and accounting procedures that balance the current budget at the expense of future budgets. 
C.  All budgetary procedures will conform to state regulation and generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.48.060 - Capital improvement program. 
A.  The purpose of the capital improvement program is to plan, schedule and finance capital projects as determined by the city council. The city's goal is to prepare a comprehensive five-year capital improvement budget. The capital improvement program will include major on-going maintenance and repair costs to existing infrastructure and facilities, as well as the cost of new facilities or capital improvements. 
B.  As part of the budget process, departments will submit capital improvement requests providing a detailed description of the proposed project or purchase. All requests will be reviewed and evaluated by the city manager using criteria set by city council policy. A comprehensive multi-year capital plan will then be developed and presented to the city council for further review. 
C.  The city will actively pursue grants and other outside funding sources for all capital improvement projects. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 3.52 - LOST OR UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
3.52.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Department head" means supervisor of the department on the premises of which the found property is found or saved, unless such department head delegates to another officer or employee in his or her department the duties prescribed by this chapter, in which case the words "department head" mean such officer or employee. 
"Found property" means unclaimed personal property in the possession of any city officer or employee, or personal property found or saved on property subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.52.020 - Property found by private persons. 
A person neither an officer nor employee of the city shall deliver found property to a responsible employee of the city or to the department head. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.52.030 - Property found by city employees. 
A city officer or city employee shall deliver found property to the department head. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.52.040 - Return to owner—Conditions. 
If any person proves to the satisfaction of a department head that such person is the owner of any found property in the possession of such department head, the department head shall deliver such found property to such owner. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.52.050 - Holding and disposition of unclaimed property. 
A department head shall hold for at least three months found property which is not claimed by the owner thereof, and then shall dispose of such found property as follows: 
A.  The department head shall deliver to the probation department of the Los Angeles County sheriff's department, all bicycles and toys for use by the probation department in any program of activities designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. 
B.  The department head shall deliver to the city treasurer all found money. 
C.  The department head shall deliver all found property not described in subsection (A) or (B) of this section to the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. 95-94 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - MOTION PICTURE, TELEVISION AND PHOTOGRAPHIC PRODUCTION 
Sections: 
 
5.04.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Motion Picture, Television and Photographic Production Rules of the city of Calabasas. 
(Ord. 2007-238 § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 2004-187 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 93-58 § 1, 1993)  
5.04.020 - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is to establish procedures for the review and issuance of city filming permits allowing work associated with the production of commercial filming activities, within the city of Calabasas, subject to the permit requirements. The intent of this chapter is to facilitate the production of such work while protecting the residents and property owners from the potential adverse impacts of filming activities. 
(Ord. 2007-238 § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 2004-187 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 93-58 § 2, 1993)  
5.04.030 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"City filming permit" means a permit issued by the city of Calabasas to allow the activities associated with the production, filming or video taping of motion picture and television shows, programs, commercials and still photography. 
"City filming permit coordinator" means the city manager of the city of Calabasas or designee. 
"City-produced or city-sponsored government or educational access productions" means motion picture, television, or still photography produced by or in association with the city. 
"Family video" means the filming or videotaping of motion pictures or taking of still photographs solely for private use. 
"Motion picture, television, or still photography" means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting motion pictures, television shows or programs, and commercials and to the taking of single or multiple photographs for sale or commercial use where the photographer sets up stationary equipment in any one location for longer than five consecutive minutes. 
"News media" means the photographing, filming or videotaping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast or reporting for print media by reporters, photographers or cameramen. 
"Student films" means motion picture, television, or still photography produced to satisfy a course or curriculum requirement at an educational institution. The student film maker must supply proof that he or she is currently enrolled. 
"Studio" means a legally established, commercial, motion picture/television/still photography place of business where filming activities (motion or still photography) are regularly conducted inside a studio/stage upon the premises. 
(Ord. 2007-238 § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 2005-201 § 7, 2005; Ord. 2004-187 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 93-58 § 3, 1993)  
5.04.040 - Permit required. 
No person shall use any public or private property, building, facility or residence for the purpose of producing, taking or making any motion picture, television or still photography production without first obtaining a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2007-238 § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 2005-201 § 8, 2005: Ord. 2004-187 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 93-58 § 4, 1993) 
(Ord. No. 2010-270, § 2, 2-10-2010)  
5.04.050 - Permit exceptions. 
The provisions of Section 5.04.040 shall not apply to the following: 
A.  News media; 
B.  Family video; 
C.  Studio productions. 
(Ord. 2007-238 § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 2004-187 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 93-58 § 5, 1993)  
5.04.060 - Permit application and issuance. 
A.  Permit Application. Any person desiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall fill out an application provided by the city. The form must be signed and accompanied by all required fees, deposits, and the insurance certificate required by this chapter before the permit will be processed. Such application shall be submitted at least two working days prior to the date on which such person desires to conduct the activity for which a permit is required. If such activity interferes with traffic or involves potential public safety hazards, an application shall be submitted at least five working days in advance. 
Written evidence of permits and/or coordination with other public agencies may be required upon submission of an application for a film permit. Requirements of these responsible agencies shall be requirements of this permit. Examples of such agencies include, but are not limited to, the California Highway Patrol, the Los Angeles County sheriff's department and the Los Angeles County fire department. 
B.  Permit Issuance. The city manager shall designate the person or body responsible for issuing permits under this chapter. 
The city manager or his or her designee shall issue a permit as provided for in this chapter when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained, the application complies with the provisions of this chapter and he or she finds that: 
1.  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets will be completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time. Seventy-two (72) hours' notice of any street closure shall be given; 
2.  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or city operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the city incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the applicant; and 
3.  At the determination of the city's public works department as well as the Los Angeles County sheriff's department, Los Angeles County fire department, and Los Angeles County public works department, that the condition of such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or any other type of hazard and all proper safety precautions will be taken as determined by the heads of the aforementioned departments or their designee. 
C.  Cost of Additional Services. If deemed necessary by the city manager or his or her designee, additional sheriff, code enforcement, fire, and other city services shall be provided for the purpose of protecting, assisting and regulating the proposed activity. The cost of providing such additional services shall be paid in advance to the city by the applicant. Any additional city services will be provided/coordinated through the city manager or his or her designee. 
D.  Additional Conditions. The city manager may impose any conditions found necessary to protect the public health safety and welfare. The applicant shall comply with any conditions or restrictions the city may impose as a condition to issuing a permit. No changes shall be made without first obtaining the city's approval. 
(Ord. 2007-238 § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 2004-187 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 93-58 § 6, 1993)  
5.04.070 - Appeal procedures. 
The decision of the city manager or designee to issue, conditionally issue, or not issue a permit shall be final unless appealed in writing within five working days of the decision by requesting a hearing of the city council at the next available meeting. The appeal must include copies of all pertinent material necessary to reinforce the permittee's position supporting the appeal. Written notice of the appeal must be mailed to residents within a five-hundred-foot radius of each filming location. Any actions of the city council shall be final. Such written request for an appeal consideration shall be accompanied by a fee, as established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 2007-238 § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 2004-187 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 97-126 § 1, 1997: Ord. 93-58 § 9, 1993)  
5.04.080 - Rules and regulations. 
A.  Rules. The city manager, or his or her designee, is authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations governing the form, time and location of any film activity set forth within the city. He or she shall also set forth the procedures for the issuance of permits. The rules, regulations, and procedures shall be based on the criteria set forth in Section 5.04.060. 
B.  In accordance with city of Calabasas Ordinance No. 2006-217, a comprehensive Second Hand Smoke Control Ordinance is in effect. All applicants shall comply with said ordinance which is available at www.cityofcalabasas.com. 
C.  Maximum Number of Filming Days Allowed. The maximum number of filming days that will be allowed for filming activity at the same location is fourteen (14) days within the immediately prior twelve-month period of the date(s) for which a film permit is sought. The Calabasas film office may grant an extension to the fourteen-day limit only due to acts of God or force majeure. Any such event must be reported to the Calabasas film office immediately in order to be evaluated for an extension in filming days. 
To extend the filming period for up to and including twenty (20) total days of filming activity during a twelve-month period, an application including one hundred (100) percent approval signatures from properties within five hundred (500) feet of the filming location shall be obtained and submitted to the Calabasas film office. The film office will provide a radius map or list of addresses within the five-hundred-foot area. A signature form will also be provided. To extend beyond the twenty (20) days, an applicant shall be required to obtain approval from the city council at the next available meeting. 
D.  Filming Hours. In addition to any special conditions imposed by the permit, the following restrictions shall apply to all filming activity: Filming activities may occur between the hours seven a.m. and seven p.m. Monday through Sunday. Applications to film from six a.m. to seven a.m. and seven p.m. to midnight must include one hundred (100) percent signature consent from the current residents, whether they are the owner of the property or the lessee, whose properties are immediately contiguous to a filming location and written consent of at least seventy-five (75) percent of the remaining properties within the five-hundred-foot radius. 
E.  Applications that fail to include the minimum amount(s) of consent shall require approval from the city council at the next available meeting. 
(Ord. 2007-238 § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 2004-187 § 1 (part), 2004)  
5.04.090 - Permit fees. 
Each application shall be accompanied by: 
A.  A security deposit to ensure cleanup and restoration of the site at the time application is submitted. The deposit, in full or part thereof, may be returned to the applicant upon completion of filming and inspection of the site by the city; and 
B.  A processing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to reimburse the city for staff time required to evaluate the application and establish conditions of approval and to monitor the activity. The processing fee shall not apply to or affect: 
1.  City-produced or city-sponsored government or educational access productions, and 
2.  Student productions; 
C.  A daily property use fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to compensate the city for the use of public property and its unavailability for ordinary and usual purposes resulting from the filming activity. The property use fee shall not apply to or affect: 
1.  City-produced or city-sponsored government or educational access productions, 
2.  Student productions, and 
3.  Productions conducted wholly on private, county, or state property where no vehicles or equipment are parked or stored on city property or rights-of-way, where no traffic control measures are required and where the production activity will not in any respect interfere with the use and enjoyment of city property, public streets and neighboring property. 
(Ord. 2007-238 § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 2004-187 § 1 (part), 2004)  
5.04.100 - Liability provisions. 
A.  Liability Insurance. Before a permit is issued, a certificate of insurance will be required in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) naming the city of Calabasas as an additional insured for protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths, and property damage and to indemnify the city for damage to city property arising out of the permittee's activities. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after thirty (30) days' written notice to the city. Such insurance shall be evidenced by the standard General Liability Special Endorsement Form mandated by the California Film Commission which will remain on file with the Calabasas film office. 
B.  Worker's Compensation Insurance. An applicant shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements for worker's compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit. 
(Ord. 2007-238 § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 2004-187 § 1 (part), 2004)  
5.04.110 - Enforcement. 
If an applicant violates any provisions of this chapter or a permit issued pursuant thereto, the city may cancel the permit. Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and may be punishable by a fine, or imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 2007-238 § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 2004-187 § 1 (part), 2004)  
5.04.120 - Administrative procedures. 
The city manager and his or her designee is authorized to promulgate and enforce administrative procedures in the implementation and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2007-238 § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 2004-187 § 1 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 5.08 - PUBLIC DANCES 
Sections: 
 
5.08.010 - Unlawful dance or party. 
It is unlawful for any person to conduct or hold on property partially or entirely used for residential proposes any dance or party: 
A.  For which brochures, posters, or handbills advertising the dance or party are posted, displayed, or distributed, if such brochures, posters, or handbills are designed to attract the attention of persons other than the residents of the property; or 
B.  For which a charge or donation is required or solicited for admission. 
(Ord. 93-52 § 5, 1993) 
(Ord. No. 2010-270, § 3, 2-10-2010)  
Chapter 5.12 - CABLE SYSTEM FRANCHISES 
Sections:  
Article I. - Intent 
 
5.12.010 - Authority. 
The city of Calabasas pursuant to applicable federal and state law, is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct cable systems within the city limits. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.020 - Findings. 
The city council finds that the development of cable systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable systems, the city council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city may designate. It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible cable service to the public and any franchises issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this as an integral finding thereof. It is the further intent of this chapter to establish regulatory provisions that permit the city to regulate cable system franchises to the extent permitted by federal and state law, including but not limited to the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations and applicable California law. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.022 - Preexisting provisions. 
Los Angeles County Code Title 16, Division 4 Cable Television System Franchises and Ordinance No. 97-125 are not repealed by the enactment of this chapter, but rather, continue to be in full force and effect for existing franchises in the city of Calabasas which existed on the effective date of the adoption of this chapter. Any existing franchise, when renewed, and all new franchises, shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article II. - Short Title 
 
5.12.030 - Short title. 
This chapter shall constitute the "cable television system franchises" of the city of Calabasas and may be referred to as such. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article III. - Definitions 
 
5.12.040 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
"Basic cable service" means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
"Cable operator" means any person or group of persons who: 
1.  Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or 
2.  Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such cable system. 
"Cable service" means: 
1.  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and 
2.  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
"Cable system" or "system" means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
1.  A facility that serves only to retransmit television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
2.  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; 
3.  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for the purposes of Section 621(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
4.  An open video system that complies with Section 653 of Title 6 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996; or 
5.  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
"Channel" or "cable channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission. 
"Council" means the city council of the city of Calabasas. 
"Franchise" means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not supersede the requirement to obtain any other license or permit required for the privilege of transacting business within the city as required by the other ordinances and laws of the city. 
"Franchise agreement" means a franchise grant ordinance or a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters. 
"Franchise fee" means any fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city on a grantee as compensation for the grantee's use of the public rights-of-way. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
1.  Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers); 
2.  Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities; 
3.  Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
4.  Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code. 
"Grantee" means any "person" receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
"Grantor" or "city" means the city of Calabasas as represented by the council or any delegate, acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. 
"Gross annual cable service revenues" means the annual gross revenues received by a grantee from the operations of the cable system within the city to provide cable service utilizing the public rights-of-way for which a franchise is required, excluding refundable deposits, rebates or credits, and any sales, excise or other taxes or charges imposed externally to the franchise, and collected for direct pass-through to local, state or federal government. 
"Installation" means the connection of the system to subscribers' terminals, and the provision of service. 
"Normal operating conditions" means those service conditions which are within the control of grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
"Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity. 
"Public, educational or government access facilities" or "PEG access facilities" means the total of the following: 
1.  Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and 
2.  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
"Section" means any section, subsection or provision of this chapter. 
"Service area" or "franchise area" means the entire geographic area within the municipal boundaries of the city as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the franchise. 
"Service tier" means a category of cable service or other services provided by a cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"Street" or "public way" or "public rights-of-way" means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the service area: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property. 
"Subscriber" or "customer" or "consumer" means any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, cable service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system, and who pays the charges therefor. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article IV. - Franchise Terms and Conditions 
 
5.12.050 - Franchise purposes. 
A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall encompass the following purposes: 
A.  To permit the grantee to engage in the business of providing cable service, and such other services as may be permitted by law which grantee provides to subscribers within the designated service area. 
B.  To permit the grantee to erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the designated service area. 
C.  To permit the grantee to maintain and operate said franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable services, and such other services as may be permitted by law. 
D.  To set forth the obligations of the grantee under the franchise. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.060 - Franchise required. 
After the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable system in the city within any public way without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or if the franchise was granted prior to the effective date of this chapter, under the provisions stated in Section 5.12.022. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.070 - Term of the franchise. 
A.  A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in the franchise agreement, commencing on the grantor's adoption of an ordinance or resolution authorizing the franchise. 
B.  A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable state and federal law. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.080 - Franchise territory. 
Any franchise shall be valid within all the municipal limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.090 - Federal or state jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, and shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this chapter to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.100 - Franchise nontransferable. 
A.  Grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the council, which consent shall not be unreasonably denied, withheld or delayed; provided, however, that the prior consent of the council shall not be required for an intracorporate or intracompany transfer from one wholly-owned subsidiary to another wholly-owned subsidiary. Any attempt to sell transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the council shall be null and void. The granting of a security interest in any grantee assets, or any mortgage or other hypothecation or by assignment of any right, title or interest in the cable system in order to secure indebtedness, shall not be considered a transfer for the purposes of this section. 
B.  The requirements of subsection (A) of this section shall apply to any change in control of grantee. The word "control" as used herein includes majority ownership, and actual working control in whatever manner exercised. In the event that grantee is a corporation, prior consent of the council shall be required where ownership or control of more than twenty (20) percent of the voting stock of the grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom own or control the voting stock of the grantee as of the effective date of the franchise, singularly or collectively. 
C.  Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of said franchise property. Such notification shall be considered by grantor as notice that a change in control or ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions under this section governing the consent of grantor to such change in control or ownership shall apply. 
D.  For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee shall assist grantor in such inquiry. In seeking grantor's consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee shall have the responsibility of insuring that the grantee and/or the proposed transferee complete an application in accordance with Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or equivalent. An application shall be submitted to grantor not less than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses the legal, technical and financial qualifications to operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. If the franchisee is then in compliance with the requirements of the franchise, and the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the grantor shall consent to the transfer of the franchise. If the grantor has not taken action on the grantee's request for transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving such request, grantor's consent to such transfer shall be deemed given. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed. 
E.  Any financial institution having a pledge of the grantee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the cable system, in the event of a grantee default of its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also agree in writing to continue cable service and comply with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. 
F.  Any submission of an application for transfer of a franchise shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable franchise processing fee in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Additionally, grantee shall reimburse grantor for grantor's reasonable processing and review expenses in connection with the proposed transfer of the franchise including without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication costs and document preparation expenses to the extent that such expenses exceed the amount of the franchise processing fee. Any such franchise processing fee or reimbursement shall not be charged against any franchise fee due to grantor during the term of the franchise. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.110 - Geographical coverage. 
A.  Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable system to have the capability to pass every residential dwelling unit in the service area, subject to any service area line extension requirements of the franchise agreement. 
B.  After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any service area, grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that service area within thirty (30) days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way, permits and landlord agreements necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such thirty-day period on reasonable terms and conditions. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.120 - Nonexclusive franchise. 
Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable system, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law, provided that if the grantor grants an additional franchise, then the material provisions of any such additional franchise shall be reasonably comparable to the terms and conditions contained in the initial grantee's franchise, so that all grantees are accorded competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory treatment. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.130 - Multiple franchises. 
A.  Grantor may grant any number of franchises subject to applicable state or federal law. Grantor may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as: 
1.  The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage. 
2.  The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service. 
3.  The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the public rights-of-way. 
B.  Where electric and telephone utilities are to be placed underground in any new residential housing developments, grantor and the developer of such new residential housing shall give each grantee serving the franchise area within which the new residential housing development is located at least seventy-two (72) hours prior written notice of the date on which open trenching will be available for the grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and vaults. On request of the grantor or developer, the grantee shall provide specifications needed for trenching. Developers of new residential housing with underground utilities shall provide conduit to accommodate cables for at least two new entrant cable systems and dedicate the use of such conduit to the city. 
C.  Grantor may require that any new entrant, nonincumbent grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in grantor's opinion, the public rights-of-way in any particular area cannot feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional cables. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.140 - Franchise modification. 
The grantee may be required to pay any costs incurred by the grantor in processing a grantee request for franchise modification, lease, hypothecation or trust of franchise. Such costs may include the costs incurred for hiring consultants to assist in evaluating the request. Such costs shall be paid by the grantee prior to final consideration of the request by the grantor. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article V. - Franchise Applications and Renewal 
 
5.12.150 - Filing of applications. 
Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable system shall file an application with the city. A reasonable nonrefundable initial application fee established by the city shall accompany the initial franchise application to cover all validly documented reasonable costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. In the event such validly documented reasonable costs exceed the application fee, the selected applicant(s) shall pay the difference to the city within thirty (30) days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.160 - Applications—Contents. 
An application for an initial franchise for a cable system shall contain, where applicable: 
A.  A statement as to the proposed franchise and service area; 
B.  A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise of applicant in the cable system field; 
C.  A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder having a five percent or greater interest, if a corporation; 
D.  A list of officers, directors and managing employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person; 
E.  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant; 
F.  A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a certified public accountant audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city; 
G.  A proposed construction and service schedule; 
H.  Any reasonable relevant additional information that the city deems applicable. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.170 - Consideration of initial applications. 
A.  Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the city manager or a delegate shall prepare a report and make recommendations respecting such application to the council. 
B.  A public hearing shall be set prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the city council. Within sixty (60) days after the close of the hearing, the city council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the initial franchise(s) should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The city council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.180 - Franchise renewal. 
Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law. Grantor and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article VI. - Minimum Consumer Protection and Service Standards 
 
5.12.190 - Operational standards. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, grantee shall maintain the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with the following consumer protection and service standards under normal conditions of operation: 
1.  Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to assure that telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds; and callers needing to be transferred shall not be required to wait more than thirty (30) seconds before being connected to a service representative. Under normal operating conditions, a caller shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time; 
2.  Emergency toll free telephone line capacity on a twenty-four-hour basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal business hours, the telephone calls may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Calls received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. During periods when an answering service or machine is used, grantee shall provide on-call personnel who shall contact the answering service or machine, at a minimum, every four hours to check on requests for service or complaints; 
3.  A conveniently located local business and service and/or payment office open during normal business hours where grantee provides adequate staffing to accept subscriber payments and respond to service requests and complaints. Normal business hours shall include some evening hours, at least one night per week, and/or some weekend hours. The grantee may petition the grantor to reduce its business hours if the extended hours are not justified by subscriber demand, and grantor may not unreasonably deny the petition; 
4.  An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunction on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis; 
5.  An installation staff, capable of installing service to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within seven days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. "Standard installations" shall be those that are located up to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the existing distribution system, unless otherwise defined in any franchise agreement; 
6.  Grantee shall schedule, within a specified four-hour time period during normal business hours, all appointments with subscribers for installation of service, service calls and other activities at the subscriber location. Grantee may schedule installation and service calls outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. Grantee shall not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a grantee representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer shall be contacted and the appointment rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
B.  Under normal operating conditions, the standards of subsections (A)(1)—(A)(2) above shall be met not less than ninety (90) percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. The standards of subsections (A)(4)—(A)(6) above shall be met not less than ninety-five (95) percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. 
C.  Grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.200 - Service standards. 
A.  Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between midnight and six a.m. local time. 
B.  The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians normally capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames: 
1.  For a system outage: Within two hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls or requests for service which by number identify a system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting at least ten (10) percent of the subscribers of the system; 
2.  For an isolated outage: within twenty-four (24) hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or picture for one or more channels that affects five or more subscribers. On weekends, an outage affecting fewer than five subscribers shall result in a service call no later than the next business day; 
3.  For inferior signal quality: Within two business days of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality. 
C.  Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. In the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, the technician shall leave written notification of arrival. 
D.  Grantee shall not charge for the repair or replacement of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by grantee to subscribers, unless the defect was caused by the subscriber, or the equipment owned by the subscriber requires repair or replacement. 
E.  Unless excused, grantee shall determine the nature of the problem resulting in a request for service within two business days of beginning work and resolve any cable system related problems within five business days unless technically infeasible. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.210 - Billing and information standards. 
A.  Subscriber bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills shall be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
B.  In case of a billing dispute, the grantee shall respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days. 
C.  Grantee shall automatically provide credits or refunds to such subscribers whose service has been interrupted for twenty-four (24) consecutive hours or more, and upon request to subscribers whose service has been interrupted for two or more hours. 
Credits or refunds shall automatically be provided by grantee on a pro rata basis to any subscriber(s) affected by interruption(s) of service for more than two hours due to actions or outages under the control of the grantee, exclusive of scheduled repairs, maintenance or franchise required construction that grantee has provided advance written notice of to subscribers. In cases where advanced written notice is provided to subscribers, the time period detailed in said notice shall not exceed four hours in any twenty-four-hour period. In cases where said notice has been given to subscribers and the service interruption exceeds the period detailed in said notice, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
In the event grantee has improperly or inadvertently disconnected cable services to a subscriber, grantee shall provide for restoration without charge to subscriber as soon as possible, but no later than within two days of discovery of disconnection. Grantee shall credit or provide refunds to any subscriber improperly or inadvertently disconnected from receiving cable services for the period of time without cable service. 
All credits or refunds for service shall be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. For subscribers terminating service, refunds shall be issued promptly, but no later than thirty (30) days after the return of any grantee-supplied equipment. 
D.  Grantee shall provide written information on each of the following areas: (i) at the time of the installation of service, (ii) at least annually to all subscribers, and (iii) at any time upon request: 
1.  Products and services offered; and 
2.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; and 
3.  Installation and service maintenance policies; and 
4.  Instructions on how to use the cable service; and 
5.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and 
6.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the grantor office designated for dealing with cable-related issues. 
E.  Subscribers shall be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing and in accordance with state and federal law. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the grantee. In addition, grantee shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in the information required in subsection (D) of this section. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.220 - Verification of compliance with standards. 
A.  Upon ten (10) days prior written notice, grantee shall respond to a request for information made by grantor regarding grantee's compliance with any or all of the standards required in Sections 5.12.190, 5.12.200 and 5.12.210 above. Grantee shall provide sufficient documentation to permit grantor to verify grantee's compliance. 
B.  A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the consumer protection standards of Sections 5.12.190 through 5.12.210 above, after grantee's receipt of due notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement. 
C.  In order to determine whether sufficient telephone lines are provided, the grantor may require that a busy study, traffic study or other study be conducted, at grantee's expense, if any, by the local telephone company. Should grantee have its own telephone equipment which can report on telephone line(s) usage, the grantee may submit such report from its own system. The grantor, pursuant to Section 5.12.190(C), may require grantee to acquire equipment to determine compliance with the telephone answering standards of this Article VI. 
D.  Grantee shall take necessary steps to ensure that adequate telephone lines and/or staffing are available to permit grantee to satisfy its obligations under this chapter and the franchise. Consideration shall be given for periods of promotional activities or outages. The monthly billing period shall be considered as a normal, daily activity for purposes of determining the availability of adequate telephone lines and/or staffing. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.230 - Subscriber complaints and disputes. 
A.  Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the grantor. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing specifying the subscriber's grounds for dissatisfaction. Grantee shall file a copy of these procedures with grantor. The written procedures shall include a requirement that grantee respond to any written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days of receipt. 
B.  Upon prior written request, grantor shall have the right to review grantee's response to any subscriber complaints in order to determine grantee's compliance with the franchise requirements, subject to the subscriber's right to privacy. 
C.  Subject to applicable law, it shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving cable service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive cable service so long as the franchise remains in force. 
D.  In the event of a change of control of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, the original grantee shall cooperate with the grantor, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which operates the system. 
E.  Grantee response to subscriber complaints, as well as complaints made by subscribers to grantor and provided by grantor to grantee, shall be initiated within one business day of receipt by grantor. The resolution of subscriber complaints shall be effected by grantee not later than three business days after receipt of the complaint. Should a grantee supervisor not be available when requested by a subscriber, a supervisor shall respond to the subscriber's complaint at the earliest possible time, and in no event later than the end of the next business day. For complaints received by grantor and provided by grantor to grantee, grantee shall notify grantor of grantee's progress in responding to, and resolving, said complaints. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.240 - Other requirements. 
A.  In the event grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days other than for reasons beyond the control of grantee, without prior approval or subsequent excuse of the grantor, the grantor may, at its sole option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the grantor or a permanent operator is selected. If the grantor should fulfill this obligation for the grantee, then during such period as the grantor fulfills such obligation, the grantor shall be entitled to collect all revenues from the system, and the grantee shall reimburse the grantor for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of the revenues collected by grantor that are the result of grantee's failure to perform. 
B.  All officers, agents or employees of grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who, in the normal course of work come into contact with members of the public or who require entry onto subscribers' premises shall carry a photo-identification card in a form approved by grantor. Grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle of the grantee or its major subcontractors shall be clearly identified as working for grantee. 
C.  Additional service standards and standards governing consumer protection and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this chapter may be established in the franchise agreement or by separate ordinance. A verified and continuing pattern of repeated and substantial noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise, provided that grantee shall receive due process, including prior written notification and a reasonable opportunity to cure, prior to any sanction being imposed. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article VII. - Franchise Fee and Financial Requirements 
 
5.12.250 - Franchise fee. 
A.  Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee on gross annual revenues in the amount and at the times set forth in the franchise agreement. 
B.  The grantor, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a statement within one hundred twenty (120) days of the close of the calendar year, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts of gross revenues and all payments, deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon thirty (30) days prior written notice, grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent financial audit of grantee's gross annual revenue and franchise fee records, in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures (GAAP), and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of two percent or more, the grantee shall assume all reasonable documented costs of such audit. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
D.  In the event that any franchise fee payment or payment of any adjustment to any franchise fee is not made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement, unless otherwise excused, grantee shall pay: 
1.  an interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the highest of the most recently published prime lending rate of any of the five largest member banks of the New York Clearing House Association, plus one percent during the period for which payment was due; and 
2.  if the payment is late by thirty (30) days or more, a sum of money equal to five percent of the amount due in order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor due to grantee's delinquent payment. 
E.  Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule indicated in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.260 - Security fund. 
A.  Grantor may require grantee to provide a security fund, in an amount and form established in the franchise agreement. The amount of the security fund shall be established based on the extent of the grantee's obligations under the terms of the franchise. 
B.  The security fund shall be available to grantor to satisfy all claims, liens and/or taxes due grantor from grantee which arise by reason of construction, operation, or maintenance of the system, and to satisfy any actual or liquidated damages arising out of a material breach of the franchise agreement, subject to the procedures and amounts designated in the franchise agreement. 
C.  If the security fund is drawn upon by grantor in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter and the franchise agreement, grantee shall cause the security fund to be replenished to the original amount no later than thirty (30) days after receiving written confirmation from the bank where such security fund is deposited that grantor has made a draw against the security fund. Failure to replenish the security fund shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article VIII. - Construction Requirements 
 
5.12.270 - System construction. 
A.  Grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until grantee has secured the necessary permits from grantor, or other responsible public agencies. The grantee shall be subject to all permit and bonding requirements applicable to contractors working within the public rights-of-way. No provision of this chapter or the franchise agreement shall be deemed a waiver of the obligation of a grantee to pay grantor for the issuance of a permit. 
B.  In those areas of the city where transmission lines or distribution facilities of the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground. 
C.  In those areas of the city where the grantee's cables are located on the aboveground transmission or distribution facilities of the public and/or municipal utility providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the facilities of both the telephone and electric power utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at grantee's cost. Certain of grantee's equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed aboveground, may continue to remain in aboveground enclosures, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
D.  Any changes in or extensions of any poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other fixtures and equipment (herein referred to as "structures"), or the construction of any additional structures, in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets, alleys and public ways shall be made under the direction of public works director or a designee, who shall, if the proposed change, extension or construction conforms to the provisions hereof, issue written permits therefor. The height above public thoroughfares of all aerial wires shall conform to the requirements of the California regulatory body having jurisdiction thereof. 
1.  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee shall be located so as not to interfere with the proper use of the public rights-of-way, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said public rights-of-way, and not to materially interfere with existing public and municipal utility installations. 
2.  In the event that any property or improvement of the grantor in the public rights-of-way is disturbed or damaged by the grantee or any of its contractors, agents or employees in connection with undertaking any and all work pursuant to the rights granted to the grantee pursuant to this chapter and the franchise agreement, the grantee shall promptly, at the grantee's sole cost and expense, restore to the grantor's satisfaction said property or improvement which was so disturbed or damaged. If such property or improvement shall within two years (or in the case of street improvement, until the street is resurfaced if resurfaced prior to the expiration of the two years) of the date the restoration was completed, become uneven, unsettled or otherwise require additional restorative work, repair or replacement because of the initial disturbance or damage to the property by the grantee, then the grantee, as soon as reasonably possible, shall, promptly upon receipt of written notice from the grantor and at the grantee's sole cost and expense, restore to the grantor's satisfaction said property or improvement which was disturbed or damaged. Any such restoration by the grantee shall be made in accordance with such materials and specifications as may, from time to time, be established by the grantor. 
3.  Prior to commencing any work on the system in the public rights-of-way, the grantee shall obtain any and all permits, licenses and authorizations lawfully required for such work. If emergency work on the system in the public right-of-way is required, the grantee shall with all due diligence, seek to obtain any and all such required permits, licenses and authorizations within three working days after commencing such emergency work. Prior to performing any work in the public right-of-way, grantee shall give appropriate notice to the "underground service alert" ("USA"), or any similar type service provider as designated by the grantor. 
4.  There shall be no unreasonable or unnecessary obstruction of the public rights-of-way by the grantee in connection with any of the work provided for herein. The grantee shall maintain any barriers, signs and warning signals during any work performed on or about the public rights-of-way or adjacent thereto as may be necessary to reasonably avoid injury or damage to life and property. 
5.  If the grantor lawfully elects to alter or change the grade or location of any public right-of-way, the grantee shall, upon reasonable notice by the grantor, and in a timely manner, remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. 
6.  The grantee shall not place poles, conduits or other fixtures above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrants or other utility, and all such poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to comply with all ordinances of the grantor. 
7.  In accordance with applicable law, the grantee or any utility user of the public rights-of-way may be required by the grantor to permit joint use of its poles and/or conduit located in the public rights-of-way, insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of a reasonable rental fee for such usage. In the absence of agreement regarding such joint use, each party shall be entitled to exercise any rights and defenses provided by applicable law. 
8.  The grantee, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the grantor, shall temporarily raise or lower its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires or fixtures shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than five business days' prior written notice to arrange for the temporary wire or equipment changes. 
9.  Subject to provisions of city code, including, but not limited to, "Oak Tree Ordinance" No. 92-39 (Section 5.C. "Utility Projects"), the grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees or other natural growth overhanging the public rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees or other natural growth from coming in contact with the grantee's wires, cables and other equipment. The grantor may require all trimming of trees and natural growth to be done under its supervision and direction, at the expense of the grantee. 
10.  Grantee shall be subject to any and all requirements established by the grantor with regard to the placement and screening of grantee's facilities and equipment located in the public rights-of-way. Such requirements may include, but not be limited to, use of landscaping to screen pedestals and cabinets and requiring that construction be flush with the natural grade of the surrounding area. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.280 - Multiple franchises. 
A.  Subject to applicable law, in the event that more than one franchise is awarded, the grantor reserves the right to limit the number of drop cables per residence, or to require that the drop cable(s) be utilized only by the cable operator selected by the resident to provide service. 
B.  The grantor reserves the right to grant an encroachment permit to a cable franchisee applicant to install conduit and/or cable in anticipation of the granting of a franchise. Such installations shall be at the applicant's risk, with no recourse against the grantor in the event the pending franchise application is not granted. The grantor may require an applicant to provide a separate trench for its conduit and cable, at the applicant's cost, 
C.  If grantor authorizes or permits another cable system to operate within the municipal limits of the city, it shall do so on conditions that such new cable system entrant indemnify and hold harmless and reimburse grantee from and against all costs and expenses incurred in strengthening poles, replacing poles, rearranging attachments, placing underground facilities and all other costs including those of grantee, the city and utilities, incident to inspections, make ready, and construction of an additional cable system in the franchise area; and grantee shall be designated a third party beneficiary of such conditions as are incorporated into the authorization(s) granted to such new entrant cable system. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article IX. - Technical Standards 
 
5.12.290 - Applicable technical standards. 
A.  The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its cable system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, and any detailed standards set forth in its franchise agreement. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon written request, a written report of the results of the grantee's periodic proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC and franchise standards and guidelines. 
B.  Should the FCC no longer require proof of performance tests, the grantee shall make and submit such proof of performance tests and reports in response to a written request from the grantor. Such report shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty (30) days of issuance of the grantor request. 
C.  Any time the signal provided on grantee's cable system does not meet FCC technical standards or the technical standards of grantee's franchise application and/or grantee's franchise agreement, the grantee shall make a pro rata rebate, in money or services, to each subscriber based upon the percentage by which the signal falls below the most stringent technical standard and upon the length of time that such condition has existed. Such rebate shall be made to the satisfaction of each subscriber, or of the grantor, if agreement with the subscriber cannot be reached. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.300 - Noncompliance with standards. 
Repeated and verified failure to maintain specified technical standards shall constitute a material breach of the franchise. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.310 - Costs of technical assistance. 
The grantee shall pay the costs incurred by the grantor for obtaining any technical assistance deemed necessary by the grantor for obtaining independent verification of technical compliance with all franchise-imposed standards. Any such payment by grantee shall not be credited against any franchise fees due to the grantor. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article X. - Indemnification and Insurance Requirements 
 
5.12.320 - Hold harmless. 
Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold grantor, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs or expenses, to the extent provided in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.330 - Insurance. 
A.  On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee shall furnish to grantor certificates of insurance for liability, workers' compensation and property insurance from appropriately qualified insurance companies, which shall be "admitted" in the state of California. The certificates of insurance shall provide that the insurance is in force and will not be canceled or modified without thirty (30) days prior written notice to grantor. The certificates of insurance shall be in a form satisfactory to grantor. The grantee shall maintain at its cost throughout the term of the franchise, the insurance required herein and in any franchise agreement. 
B.  The policy of liability insurance shall: 
1.  Name grantor, its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds; 
2.  Indemnify all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises used pursuant to this chapter by providing coverage therefor, including but not limited to: 
a.  Negligent acts or omissions of grantee, and its agents, servants and employees, committed in the conduct of franchise operations, and/or 
b.  Use of motor vehicles; 
3.  Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive general liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the amount provided for in the franchise agreement. 
C.  The policy of workers' compensation insurance shall comply with the laws of the state of California. 
D.  The policy of property insurance shall provide fire insurance with extended coverage on the franchise property used by grantee in the conduct of franchise operations in an amount adequate to enable grantee to resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by this insurance. 
The certificates of insurance shall indicate the following information: 
1.  The policy number; 
2.  The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire; 
3.  The names of the primary insureds and any additional insured required by the franchise agreement; 
4.  The subject of the insurance; 
5.  The type of coverage provided by the insurance; and 
6.  The amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance. 
If the certificates of insurance do not provide all of the above information, grantor reserves the right to inspect the relevant insurance policies. 
E.  The commencement of franchise operations shall not begin until grantee has complied with the aforementioned provisions of this section. 
F.  In the event grantee fails to maintain any of the above-described policies in full force and effect, grantor shall, upon forty-eight (48) hours notice to grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and recover the cost thereof from grantee. Grantor shall also have the right to suspend the franchise during any period that grantee fails to maintain said policies in full force and effect. In order to account for increases in consumer prices, no more than once during any five-year period, grantor shall have the right to order grantee to increase the amounts of the insurance provided in the franchise agreement. Such order may be made by grantor after conducting a duly noticed public hearing. Increases in insurance coverage shall be based upon current prudent business practices of like enterprises involving the same or similar risks. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article XI. - Records and Reports 
 
5.12.340 - Records required. 
A.  Grantee shall at all times maintain: 
1.  A written or computer-stored record of all service calls and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two years, provided that such complaints result in or require a service call, subject to the subscriber's right of privacy. 
2.  A full and complete set of plans and record drawings showing the locations of the cable system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber's homes. 
3.  If requested by grantor, a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a monthly basis. A summary of such service calls shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty (30) days following any written request by grantor, in a form reasonably acceptable to the grantor. 
4.  If requested by grantor, a complaint record which shall contain a semi-annual (through June 30th and December 31st) breakdown indicating the total number of complaints received for the preceding reporting period, and shall indicate the classifications of complaints as follows: construction, billing, customer relations/service and miscellaneous. 
5.  A full and, complete record of rates for programming services, equipment, installations and other subscriber charges. This information shall include, but not be limited to, rates for the basic service tier, tiers of service beyond the basic tier, premium service, pay-per-view services, late fees, additional outlets, converters, remote controls and any charges for installation or service at the subscriber premises. 
B.  The grantor may impose requests for additional information, records and documents from grantee, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the city's rights under this chapter or the grantee's franchise agreement. 
C.  Upon reasonable notice, and during normal business hours, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the grantor of all: 
1.  Franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of grantee situated within the service area; and 
2.  All records relating to the franchise, provided they are necessary to enable the grantor to carry out its regulatory responsibilities under this chapter or the franchise agreement. Grantee shall have the right to be present at any such examination. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.350 - Annual reports. 
A.  Within ninety (90) days after the end of the calendar year, grantee shall submit a written report to grantor with respect to the preceding calendar year in a form approved by grantor, including, but not limited to, the following information: 
1.  A summary of the previous year's (or in the case of the initial reporting year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable system, including but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year; 
2.  A list of grantee's officers and members of its board of directors; 
3.  A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent or more of the voting interest in grantee; 
4.  An indication of any residences in grantee's service area where service is not available, and a schedule for providing service; 
5.  Information as to: 
a.  The number of homes passed; 
b.  Total subscribers; and 
c.  The number of basic and pay subscribers. 
6.  A full and complete set of plans and record drawings showing the locations of the cable system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber's homes. It is the intent of this section that the grantor have a complete set of plans and records drawings. After the initial submission of a complete set of drawings, the grantee may satisfy the provisions of this section by providing updated portions of those sections of the drawings which have changed. 
7.  Any other information relevant to franchise regulation which the grantor shall reasonably request, and which is relevant to its regulatory responsibilities. 
B.  The grantor may impose requests for additional reports, information, records and documents from grantee, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the city's rights under this chapter or the grantee's franchise agreement. 
C.  Upon request, grantee shall submit to grantor copies of all pleadings, applications and reports submitted by grantee to any federal, state or local court, regulatory agency, or other governmental body as well as copies of all decisions issued in response to such pleadings, applications and reports, which are nonroutine in nature and which will materially affect its cable system within the franchise area. 
D.  Information otherwise confidential by law and so designated by grantee, which is submitted to grantor, shall be retained in confidence by grantor and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public inspection. Notwithstanding the foregoing, grantee shall have no obligation to provide copies of documents to grantor which contain trade secrets of grantee or which are otherwise of a confidential or proprietary nature to grantee unless it receives satisfactory assurances from grantor that such information can and will be held in strictest confidence and protected by the grantor. To the extent possible, grantee may provide grantor with summaries of any required documents or copies thereof with trade secrets and proprietary matters deleted therefrom. The burden of proof shall be on grantee to establish the confidential nature of any information submitted, to the reasonable satisfaction of the grantor. 
E.  If grantee is publicly held, a copy of each grantee's annual and other periodic reports and those of its parent, shall be submitted to grantor within forty-five (45) days of the publication of such reports. 
F.  Upon grantor's request, but no more than annually, grantee shall submit to grantor a privacy report indicating the degree of compliance with the provisions contained in Sections 5.12.500(C), 5.12.500(D) and 5.12.500(F) herein and all steps taken to assure that the privacy rights of individuals have been protected. 
G.  All reports required under this chapter, except those required by law to be kept confidential, shall be available for public inspection in the grantor's offices during normal business hours. 
H.  All reports and records required to be delivered to grantor under this chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee, except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
I.  The willful refusal, failure, or willful negligence of grantee to file any of the reports required as and when due under this chapter, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement if such reports are not provided to grantor within thirty (30) days after written request therefor, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
J.  Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly and willfully by the grantee in any report required under this chapter or under the franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.360 - Opinion survey. 
Upon written request of the Grantor, but not more than once every two years, the grantee shall conduct a subscriber satisfaction survey pertaining to quality of service, which may be transmitted to subscribers in grantee's invoice for cable services. The survey shall be subject to grantor's prior review and approval, said approval to be in writing. The results of such survey shall be provided to the grantor on a timely basis. The cost of such survey shall be borne by the grantee. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article XII. - Review of System Performance 
 
5.12.370 - Biannual review. 
A.  Every two years throughout the term of the franchise, if reasonably requested by prior written notice from the grantor, grantor and grantee shall meet publicly to review system performance and quality of service. The various reports required pursuant to this chapter, results of technical performance tests, the record of subscriber complaints and grantee's response to those complaints, and the information acquired in any subscriber surveys, shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of such a review meeting, grantor may issue findings with respect to the cable system's franchise compliance and quality of service. 
B.  If grantor determines that grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or the grantee's franchise agreement, grantor shall provide grantee, in the form of written findings, the specific details of each alleged noncompliance. Grantor may then direct grantee to correct the areas of noncompliance within a reasonable period of time. 
C.  Failure of the grantee, after due notice, to: 
1.  Correct the area(s) of noncompliance within the period specified therefor; or 
2.  Commence compliance within such period and diligently achieve compliance thereafter; or 
3.  Demonstrate that the allegations of noncompliance are incorrect; 
shall be considered a material breach of the franchise, and grantor may exercise any remedy within the scope of this chapter and the franchise agreement considered appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.380 - Special review. 
When there have been extensive complaints made or where there exists other demonstrative evidence which, in the reasonable judgment of the grantor, casts reasonable doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service to the effect that the grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or its franchise, the grantor shall have the right to compel the grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the cable system in order to protect the public against substandard cable service. Grantor may not compel grantee to provide such tests or reports unless and until grantor has provided grantee with at least thirty (30) days prior written notice of its intention to exercise its rights under this Section 5.12.380 and has provided grantee with an opportunity to be heard prior to its exercise of such rights. Such test or tests shall be made and the report shall be delivered to the grantor no later than thirty (30) days after the grantor notifies the grantee in writing that it is exercising such right, and shall be made at grantee's sole cost. Such report shall include the following information: the nature of the complaints which precipitated the special tests, what system component was tested, the equipment used and procedures employed in said testing, the results of such tests, and the method by which such complaints were resolved. Any other information pertinent to the special test shall be recorded. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article XIII. - Franchise Violations 
 
5.12.390 - Remedies for violations. 
If grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder, following reasonable written notice from the grantor and a reasonable opportunity to cure such nonperformance in accordance with the provisions of Article XIII of this chapter and the franchise, grantor may at its option and in its sole discretion: 
A.  Cure the violation and recover the actual cost thereof from the security fund established in the franchise agreement if such violation is not cured within thirty (30) days after written notice to the grantee of grantor's intention to cure and draw upon the security fund; 
B.  Assess against grantee liquidated damages in an amount set forth in the franchise agreement for any such violations(s) if such violation is not cured, or if grantee has not commenced a cure, on a schedule reasonably acceptable to grantor, within thirty (30) days after written notice to the grantee of grantor's intention to assess liquidated damages. Such assessment may be withdrawn from the security fund, and shall not constitute a waiver by grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from grantee such additional damages, losses. costs and expenses, including actual attorney's fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by grantor by reason of or arising out of such material breach of the franchise. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.400 - Procedure for remedying franchise violations. 
Prior to imposing any remedy or other sanction against grantee specified in this chapter, grantor shall give grantee notice and opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  Grantor shall first notify grantee of the alleged violation in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand correction, or evidence of nonviolation, within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than fifteen (15) business days in the case of the failure of the grantee to pay any sum or other amount due the grantor under this chapter or the grantee's franchise and thirty (30) business days in all other cases. If grantee fails to: 
1.  Correct the alleged violation within the time prescribed; or 
2.  Commence correction of the alleged violation within the time prescribed and diligently remedy such alleged violation thereafter; or 
3.  Provide evidence that there is no violation, the grantor shall then give, by personal delivery or registered or certified mail written notice of not less than thirty (30) days of a public hearing to be held before the council. Said notice shall set forth in detail each of the violations alleged to have occurred. 
B.  Subsequent to the public hearing, the council shall hear and consider all other relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its decision. 
C.  If the council finds that: 
1.  The grantee has corrected the alleged violation; or 
2.  The grantee has diligently commenced correction of such alleged violation after notice thereof and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such alleged violation; or 
3.  No material violation has occurred, the proceedings shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed. 
D.  If the council finds that material violations exist and that grantee: 
1.  Has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner; or 
2.  Has not diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation; then the council may impose one or more of the remedies provided in this chapter and the franchise agreement as it, in its discretion, deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.410 - Grantor's power to revoke. 
A.  Grantor may revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and rescind all rights and privileges associated with it in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default by grantee and a material breach under the franchise: 
1.  If grantee fails to perform any of its material obligations under this chapter or the franchise agreement and continues such failure to perform after receipt of due notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure; 
2.  If grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the insurance coverage or security fund as required in the franchise agreement; 
3.  If grantee violates any order or ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the grantee's franchise, unless such order or ruling is being contested by grantee in good faith in an appropriate proceeding; 
4.  If grantee knowingly practices any material fraud or deceit upon grantor; 
5.  If grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt. 
(B)  After completing the procedures set forth in Section 5.12.400 above, the grantor may make a formal request before the city council that the grantee's franchise be revoked. The city council shall cause to be served on the grantee written notice of its intent to consider revoking grantee's franchise. Such notice shall be served on grantee at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing on the issue. The notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing and shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the franchise area ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. 
C.  The city council shall hear any person(s) interested in the revocation and within ninety (90) days after the date of the hearing shall make its determination, based on a preponderance of the evidence, whether the grantee has committed a material breach of the franchise. 
D.  If the grantor determines that the grantee has committed a material breach, then the grantor may: 
1.  Declare the franchise revoked and any security fund and bonds forfeited; or 
2.  If the material breach is curable by the grantee, direct the grantee to take appropriate remedial action within the time and manner and under the terms and conditions reasonably specified by the grantor. 
The termination and forfeiture of the grantee's franchise shall in no way affect any right of grantor to pursue any remedy under the franchise or any provision of law. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.420 - Appeal of finding of revocation. 
The grantee may appeal a finding of revocation made pursuant to Section 5.12.410 to an appropriate court of jurisdiction, which shall have the power to review "de novo." Any such appeal must be taken by the grantee within ninety (90) days of the issuance of the grantor's decision to revoke the franchise. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article XIV. - Force Majeure—Grantee's Inability to Perform 
 
5.12.430 - Force majeure—Grantee's inability to perform. 
In the event grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder is prevented by a cause or event not within grantee's control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof; provided, however, that such inability to perform shall not relieve a grantee from the obligations imposed by Section 5.12.210(C) pertaining to refunds and credits for interruptions in service. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of grantee shall include without limitation acts of God, war, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, labor disputes, restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires, but shall not include financial inability of the grantee to perform or failure of the grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from other governmental agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of grantee, or the failure of the grantee to secure supplies, services or equipment necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system where the grantee has failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure such supplies, services or equipment. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article XV. - Abandonment or Removal of Franchise Property 
 
5.12.440 - Abandonment or removal. 
A.  If the grantee discontinues the use of any of its property within the public rights-of-way for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, such property shall be deemed to have been abandoned by grantee. Any part of the cable system that is parallel or redundant to other parts of the system and is intended for use only when needed as a backup for the system or a part thereof, shall not be deemed to have been abandoned because of its lack of use. 
B.  Grantor, upon such reasonable terms as grantor may lawfully impose, may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned aboveground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from grantor and shall restore to grantor's satisfaction any affected public right-of-way. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public rights-of-way in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. Grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public rights-of-way, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and the security fund as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions of this Section 5.12.440. 
C.  Upon the approved abandonment of any franchise property, the grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor an instrument, satisfactory in form to the grantor, transferring to the grantor the ownership of the abandoned franchise property. 
D.  At the expiration, without renewal or extension, of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation, as provided herein, the grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all aboveground portions of the cable system from all streets and public ways within the service area within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
E.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility or other franchise holder. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.450 - Restoration by grantor—Reimbursement of costs. 
Upon reasonable written notice and upon the failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work to be done in any public right-of-way required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement, within the time prescribed and to the reasonable satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor may cause the work to be commenced and/or completed. The grantor shall provide to the grantee an itemized work order setting forth in detail the exact nature of the work completed and the supplies used in such work. The grantee shall pay to the grantor the reasonable costs for such work no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the itemized work order. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.460 - Extended operation and continuity of services. 
Upon expiration or revocation of the franchise, the grantor shall have the discretion to permit grantee to continue to operate the cable system for an extended period of time. Grantee shall continue to operate the system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue to receive all available services provided that financial and other obligations to grantee are honored. The grantee shall use reasonable efforts to provide continuous, uninterrupted service to its subscribers, including operation of the system during transition periods following franchise expiration or termination. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.470 - Receivership and foreclosure. 
A.  At the option of the grantor and subject to applicable law, a franchise granted hereunder may be revoked one hundred twenty (120) days after appointment of a receiver(s) or trustee(s) to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless: 
1.  The receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated within said one hundred twenty (120) days; or 
2.  Such receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall have remedied all the defaults under the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such defaults which is satisfactory to the grantor; or 
3.  Such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty (120) days, have executed an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise. 
B.  In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the cable system, in whole or in part, the grantor may serve notice of revocation upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall be revoked thirty (30) days after service of such notice, unless: 
1.  Grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, in the manner provided by law; and 
2.  The successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Article XVI. - Grantor and Subscriber Rights 
 
5.12.480 - Reservation of grantor rights. 
In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this chapter, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the franchise. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.490 - Waiver. 
A.  The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the franchise, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the grantor determines: 
1.  That it is in the public interest to do so, or 
2.  That the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or on the subscribers. 
To be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the grantor. Waiver of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise unless the statement so recites. 
B.  The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of this chapter or the franchise agreement by any failure of the grantor on any one or more occasions to require or seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.12.500 - Rights of individuals. 
A.  Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination. 
However, nothing in this chapter or the franchise shall limit the right of the grantee to deny service to any household or individual which has a negative credit or service history with the grantee, which may include nonpayment of bills or theft or damage to grantee's equipment, or who has threatened or assaulted employees of the grantee in the course of their employment. 
B.  Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local regulations, as now written or as amended from time to time. 
C.  Neither grantee, nor any person, agency, or entity shall, without the subscriber's consent, tap, or arrange for the tapping, of any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose except routine maintenance of the system, detection of unauthorized service, polling with audience participation, or audience viewing surveys to support advertising research regarding viewers where individual viewing behavior cannot be identified. 
D.  In the conduct of providing its cable services or in pursuit of any collateral commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, grantee shall take reasonable steps to prevent the invasion of a subscriber's or general citizen's right of privacy or other personal rights through the use of the system as such rights are delineated or defined by applicable law. The grantee shall not without lawful court order or other applicable valid legal authority utilize the system's interactive two-way equipment or capability, if such equipment or capability exists, for unauthorized personal surveillance of any subscriber or general citizen. 
E.  No cable line, wire amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment owned by grantee shall be installed by grantee in the subscriber's premises, other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon subscriber's property shall be deemed granted. 
F.  The grantee, or any of its agents or employees, shall not sell, or otherwise make available to any party without consent of the subscriber pursuant to state and federal privacy laws: 
1.  Any list of the names and addresses of subscribers containing the names and addresses of subscribers who request in writing to be removed from such list; and 
2.  Any list which identifies the viewing habits of individual subscribers, without the prior written consent of such subscribers. This does not prohibit the grantee from providing composite ratings of subscriber viewing to any party. 
(Ord. 99-141 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 5.14 - STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES 
Sections: 
 
5.14.010 - State video service fees for educational and governmental access. 
A.  1.  As of December 31, 2006, the city was imposing a fee for educational and government access (hereinafter, "EG") channel facilities capital uses of up to three percent of gross revenues as part of the two city-granted cable franchises held by Time Warner Cable. The actual payment required as of December 31, 2006 was two percent of gross revenues. 
2.  As of December 31, 2006, the city was imposing a fee for EG channel facilities capital uses of eighty-five cents ($0.85) per month per subscriber as part of the city-granted cable franchise held by Charter Communications. This fee represented recovery of a one-time capital grant plus on-going capital support of fifty cents ($0.50) per subscriber per month. At the time the franchise was granted, it was the intent of the city and the cable operator that the negotiated grants would be equal to the EG channel facilities capital support of two percent of gross revenues required by the Time Warner Cable franchises in the city. 
3.  The EG capital support fees of subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section are for EG capital support and are in addition to the franchise fee paid to the city by the cable operators. 
B.  1.  As required by Section 5870(n) of the California Public Utilities Code, the city establishes a fee of two percent of gross revenues to support EG channel facilities capital support to be paid by any state video franchise holder operating in the Time Warner Cable service areas of Saratoga Hills and Calabasas Park, as such service areas are detailed in the Time Warner Cable franchise agreements with the city. The fee shall be paid quarterly no later than the sixty (60) days following the quarter for which the payment is due. 
2.  As required by Section 5870(n) of the California Public Utilities Code, the city establishes a fee of eighty-five cents ($0.85) per month per subscriber to support EG channel facilities capital support to be paid by any state video franchise holder operating in the Charter Communications service areas of Lost Hills and Mulwood, as such service areas are detailed in the Charter Communications franchise agreement with the city. The fee shall be paid quarterly no later than the sixty (60) days following the quarter for which the payment is due. 
3.  Additionally, the city-granted franchise to Charter Communications for the provision of video service in the city in the Lost Hills and Mulwood service areas contains a requirement for a fifty thousand dollar ($50,000.00) capital grant to be paid by not later than July 1, 2009. As required by Section 5870(l) of the California Public Utilities Code, any state video franchise holder operating in the Lost Hills or Mulwood areas of the city as of the date of the grant payment shall be responsible for a pro-rata, per subscriber share of this capital grant. 
4.  The EG capital support fees of subsections (b)(1), (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section are for EG capital support and are in addition to the franchise fee to be paid to the city by the state video service franchise holders. 
C.  As of December 31, 2006, the capital support fees of subsections (a) and (b) of this section were intended to be the equivalent of two percent of the gross revenues of the city-franchised cable operators in the city. Upon the expiration of the city-granted franchise to Charter Communications on October 1, 2014, all state video franchise holders operating in all areas of the city shall pay a fee to support EG channel facilities equal to two percent of gross revenues. The fee shall be payable quarterly no later than June 1, September 1, December 1 and March 1 for the preceding calendar quarter for which the payment is due. 
(Ord. 2007-236 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.14.020 - Customer service penalties. 
A.  Any holder of a state video service franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service. 
B.  The city will provide any holder of a state video franchise written notice of any material breach of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will allow the franchise holder at least thirty (30) calendar days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. A material breach that is not remedied by the state video franchise holder within the remedy period shall subject the state video franchise holder to the following penalties to be imposed by the city: 
1.  For the first occurrence of a material breach, a penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each occurrence of a material breach. 
2.  For the second violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of the material breach. 
3.  For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each occurrence of the material breach. 
C.  Any notice and any penalty may be issued or imposed by the city manager. Any notice shall be in writing. Notices shall be transmitted by United States Postal Service certified or registered mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid, or by private commercial delivery or courier service for same day or next business day delivery with delivery and receipt signature required. 
D.  The state video service franchise holder may appeal any finding of material breach or imposition of penalties to the city council. Any appeal must be made within ten (10) calendar days of receipt by the state video service franchise holder of the finding of material breach or the imposition of penalties, and must be submitted in writing to the city clerk and the city manager in order to be placed on a city council agenda for consideration. Any appeal must contain a detailed explanation of why the appellant believes that the finding of material breach or the imposition of penalties was inconsistent with statutory requirements. 
E.  The city and any state video service franchise holder may mutually agree to extend the time periods specified herein. Any such agreement shall be in writing and executed by the city manager and an authorized representative of the state video franchise holder. 
F.  Any penalty imposed on a state video franchise holder shall be paid to the city. As provided for in Section 5900(g) of the California Public Utilities Code, the city shall submit one-half of all penalties received from a state video franchise holder to the Digital Divide Account established by Section 280.5 of the California Public Utilities Code. 
(Ord. 2007-236 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.14.030 - Procedures for appeal of denial of an encroachment permit. 
A.  As provided by Section 5885 of the California Public Utilities Code, the city shall either approve or deny an application from a state video service franchise holder for an encroachment permit within sixty (60) days of receiving a completed application. 
B.  For purposes of this section, an "encroachment permit" means any permit issued by the city relating to construction or operation of facilities relating to the provision of video service under a state video service franchise. 
C.  An application for an encroachment permit is considered complete when the applicant has complied with all statutory requirements for such an application, including those of the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq., Title 15 of this code, and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
D.  Any city denial of an application for an encroachment permit shall be in writing and shall contain a detailed explanation of the reason for the denial. 
E.  An applicant whose application for an encroachment permit has been denied may appeal the denial in the manner specified in Chapter 17.74 of this code. 
(Ord. 2007-236 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 5.16 - RENTAL REGISTRATION RULES OF THE CITY OF CALABASAS 
Sections: 
 
5.16.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Rental Registration Rules of the City of Calabasas. 
(Ord. 2004-191 (part))  
5.16.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to enable the city to develop a comprehensive inventory of rented residential dwelling units located in the city, in order to gain a better understanding of the number, location and ownership of such units. Dwelling unit shall include a mobilehome space. 
(Ord. 2004-191 (part))  
5.16.030 - Registration. 
A.  Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter, the owners of four or more rented residential dwelling units shall register such units with the city, on a form to be established by the city. 
B.  Any time that the construction of a new residential unit, the acquisition of a residential unit or the conversion of a residential unit from owner-occupied to rental results in a rented residential dwelling unit which would have been subject to the registration requirements set forth in this chapter had such unit been a rented residential dwelling unit at the time of the imposition of the registration requirement set forth in subsection (A) of this section, which unit is not registered with the city, the owner of such unit shall register such unit with the city, on a form to be established by the city, within thirty (30) days after such event causes the owner to be subject to such registration requirement. 
C.  In the event that there is a transfer of ownership of any unit which has been registered pursuant to this chapter, the transferor shall cause the transferee to file a new registration form with the city, within thirty (30) days after such transfer occurs. 
D.  Following the initial registration of any unit pursuant to the provisions of this section, the owner of such unit shall register such unit with the city annually on July 1, on a form to be provided by the city. 
E.  No registration form, nor any other form required to be filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall indicate the identity of any tenant. 
(Ord. 2004-193 § 1; Ord. 2004-191 (part))  
5.16.040 - Notice of rent increases. 
Whenever the rental rate for a unit registered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is increased by an amount which is five percent or greater than the amount charged to the same tenant of such unit at any time during the twelve (12) months prior to the effective date of such rental rate increase, the owner of such unit shall give notice of such increase to the city at least sixty (60) days prior to the effective date of such rental rate increase. A "rental rate increase" shall include any alteration to the landlord-tenant relationship that has the effect of increasing the housing cost to tenants, such as shifting responsibilities for utilities or charging for amenities previously provided within the base rent, such as parking. This notice requirement shall not apply to any increase in rental rate which occurs as a result of a negotiated increase contained within a term lease. An owner's failure to comply with the notice requirements set forth in this section shall not operate to affect the validity of any rent increase, provided that the tenant received lawful notice of such increase. 
(Ord. 2004-193 § 2; Ord. 2004-191 (part))  
5.16.050 - Registration fee. 
Each time a unit is registered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the owner of such unit shall pay a fee to cover the city's cost of administering this program, in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2004-191 (part))  
Chapter 5.18 - TOBACCO RETAILER REGISTRATION ORDINANCE 
Sections: 
 
5.18.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Tobacco Retailer Registration Ordinance" of the City of Calabasas. 
(Ord. No. 2009-259, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
5.18.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
"Arm's length transaction" means a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of the violations of this chapter is not an arm's length transaction. 
"Department" means community development department, and any other agency or person tasked by the city manager of the city with enforcement of this chapter. 
"Director" and community development director, mean the community development director of the city and any other person tasked by the city manager of the city with enforcement of this chapter. 
"Proprietor" means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business. 
"Self-service display" means the open display or storage of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display. 
"Smoking" means possessing a lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco paraphernalia, or any other lighted weed or plant (including a lighted pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind) and means the lighting of a tobacco product, tobacco par aphernalia, or any other weed or plant (including a pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind). 
"Tobacco paraphernalia" means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of tobacco products. 
"Tobacco product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence. 
"Tobacco retailer" means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. "Tobacco retailing" shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
(Ord. No. 2009-259, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
5.18.030 - Requirements and prohibitions. 
A.  Tobacco Retailer Registration Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer in the city without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's registration pursuant to this chapter for each location at which that activity is to occur. 
B.  Lawful Business Operation. In the course of tobacco retailing or in the operation of the business or maintenance of the location for which a registration issued, it shall be a violation of this chapter for a registered tobacco retailer, or any of the registered tobacco retailer's agents or employees, to violate any local, state, or federal law applicable to tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or tobacco retailing. 
C.  Display of Registration. Each tobacco retailer registration shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the registered location. 
D.  Positive Identification Required. No person engaged in tobacco retailing shall sell or transfer a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia to another person who appears to be under the age of twenty-seven (27) years without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under state law to purchase and possess the tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia. 
E.  Minimum Age for Persons Selling Tobacco. No person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products shall engage in tobacco retailing. 
F.  Self-Service Displays Prohibited. Tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display is prohibited. 
G.  False and Misleading Advertising Prohibited. A tobacco retailer or proprietor without a valid tobacco retailer registration, including, for example, a person whose registration has been revoked: 
1.  Shall keep all tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia out of public view. The public display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in violation of this provision shall constitute tobacco retailing without a registration under Section 5.18.120; and 
2.  Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the tobacco retailer's location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at that location. 
(Ord. No. 2009-259, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
5.18.040 - Limits on eligibility for a tobacco retailer registration. 
A.  No registration may issue to authorize tobacco retailing at other than a fixed location. For example, tobacco retailing by persons on foot or from vehicles is prohibited. 
B.  No registration may issue to authorize tobacco retailing within five hundred (500) feet of any primary or secondary school located in the city of Calabasas for such retailing is prohibited by Section 17.12.225 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-259, § 2, 6-10-2009; Ord. No. 2010-272, § 4, 4-28-2010)  
5.18.050 - Application procedure. 
A.  Application for a tobacco retailer's registration shall be submitted in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof. 
It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed regarding all laws applicable to tobacco retailing, including those laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer's registration. No person may rely on the issuance of a registration as a determination by the city that the proprietor has complied with all laws applicable to tobacco retailing. A registration issued contrary to this chapter, contrary to any other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor shall be revoked pursuant to Section 5.18.110(D) of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's registration any status or right to act as a tobacco retailer in contravention of any provision of law. 
All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the department and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor of the business seeking a registration. 
2.  The business name, address, and telephone number of the single, fixed location for which a registration is sought. 
3.  A single name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all communications and notices (the "Authorized Address") required by, authorized by, or convenient to the enforcement of this chapter. If an authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subparagraph 2 above. 
4.  Proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer's registration is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer's license by the California Board of Equalization. 
5.  Whether or not any proprietor or any agent of the proprietor has admitted violating, or has been found to have violated, this chapter and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations within the previous five years. 
6.  Such other information as the department deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this chapter as specified on the application form required by this section. 
B.  A registered tobacco retailer shall inform the department in writing of any change in the information submitted on an application for a tobacco retailer's registration within ten (10) business days of a change. 
C.  All information specified in an application pursuant to this section shall be subject to disclosure under the California Public Records Act (California Government Code section 6250 et seq.) or any other applicable law, subject to the laws' exemptions. 
(Ord. No. 2009-259, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
5.18.060 - Issuance of registration. 
Upon the receipt of a complete application for a tobacco retailer's registration, the department shall issue a registration unless substantial evidence demonstrates that one or more of the following bases for denial exists: 
A.  The information presented in the application is inaccurate or false. Intentionally supplying inaccurate or false information shall be a violation of this chapter. 
B.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a location for which this chapter prohibits issuance of tobacco retailer registrations. However, this subparagraph shall not constitute a basis for denial of a registration if the applicant provides the city with documentation demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence that the applicant has acquired or is acquiring the location or business in an arm's length transaction. 
C.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for a proprietor to whom this chapter prohibits a registration to be issued. 
D.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is prohibited pursuant to this chapter (e.g., mobile vending)], that is unlawful pursuant to this code, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-259, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
5.18.070 - Registration renewal and expiration. 
A.  Renewal of Registration. A tobacco retailer's registration is invalid if its term has expired. The term of a tobacco retailer registration is one year. Each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco retailer's registration no later than thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the term. 
B.  Expiration of Registration. A tobacco retailer's registration that is not timely renewed shall expire at the end of its term. To renew a registration not timely renewed pursuant to subparagraph A, the proprietor must: 
1.  Submit the registration application renewal form; and 
2.  Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor: 
(i)  Has not sold and will not sell any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia after the registration expiration date and before the registration is renewed; or 
(ii)  Has waited the appropriate ineligibility period established for tobacco retailing without a registration, as set forth in Section 5.18.120(A) of this chapter, before seeking renewal of the registration. 
(Ord. No. 2009-259, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
5.18.080 - Registrations nontransferable. 
A.  A tobacco retailer's registration may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. A new tobacco retailer's registration is required to accomplish either change. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, prior violations at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and registration ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless: 
1.  The location has been fully transferred to a new proprietor or fully transferred to entirely new proprietors; and 
2.  The new proprietor(s) provide the city with clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor(s) have acquired or is acquiring the location in an arm's length transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2009-259, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
5.18.090 - Registration conveys a limited, conditional privilege. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's registration any status or right other than the limited conditional privilege to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in the city identified on the face of the registration. For example, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable, supersede, or apply in lieu of, any other provision of applicable law, including but not limited to, any provision of this code, including without limitation chapters 8.12 and title 17 and any condition or limitation on smoking in an enclosed place of employment pursuant to California Labor Code section 6404.5. For example, obtaining a tobacco retailer registration does not make the retailer a "retail or wholesale tobacco shop" for the purposes of California Labor Code section 6404.5. 
(Ord. No. 2009-259, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
5.18.100 - Compliance monitoring. 
A.  Compliance with this chapter shall be monitored by the department. In addition, any peace officer may enforce the penal provisions of this chapter. The city may designate any number of additional persons to monitor compliance with this chapter. 
B.  The department or other person designated to enforce the provisions of this chapter should check the compliance of each tobacco retailer at least three times per twelve-month period. The department may check the compliance of tobacco retailers previously found to be in compliance a fewer number of times so that the department may check the compliance of new registrations and tobacco retailers previously found in violation of the registration law more frequently. Nothing in this paragraph shall create a right of action in any registered tobacco retailer or other person against the city or its agents. 
C.  Compliance checks shall be conducted so as to allow the department to determine, at a minimum, if a tobacco retailer is complying with laws regulating youth access to tobacco. When the department deems appropriate, the compliance checks shall determine compliance with other laws applicable to tobacco retailing. 
D.  The city shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age for tobacco purchases or possession against a person who otherwise might be in violation of such law because of the person's age (hereinafter "Youth Decoy") if the potential violation occurs when: 
1.  The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer or a code enforcement official of the city; 
2.  The youth decoy is acting as an agent of a person designated by the city to monitor compliance with this chapter; or 
3.  The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check funded in part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the city or the California Department of Health Services. 
(Ord. No. 2009-259, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
5.18.110 - Revocation of registration. 
A.  Revocation of Registration for Violation. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco retailer's registration shall be revoked if any court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the department finds based on a preponderance of the evidence, after the registered tobacco retailer is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that the registered tobacco retailer, or any of the registered tobacco retailer's agents or employees, has violated any of the requirements, conditions, or prohibitions of this chapter or has pleaded guilty, "no contest" or its equivalent, or admitted to, a violation of any law designated in Section 5.18.030 above. 
B.  New Registration After Revocation. 
1.  After revocation for a first violation of this chapter at a location within any sixty-month period, no new registration may issue for that location until three (3) months have passed from the date of revocation. 
2.  After revocation for a second violation of this chapter at a location within any sixty-month period, no new registration may issue for that location until six (6) months have passed from the date of revocation. 
3.  After revocation for a third violation of this chapter at a location within any sixty-month period, no new registration may issue for that location until one (1) year has passed from the date of revocation. 
4.  After revocation for four (4) or more violations of this chapter at a location within any sixty-month period, no new registration may issue for the location until five (5) years have passed from the date of revocation. 
C.  Appeal of Revocation. A decision of the department to revoke a registration is appealable to the city manager and must be filed with city clerk within ten (10) days of mailing of the department's decision. Any appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). If such an appeal is made, it shall stay enforcement of the appealed action. The hearing by the city manager shall be conducted pursuant to Section 8.20.110.A. of this Code. The decision by the city manager shall be the final decision of the city and not subject to further administrative appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be served on the appellant and shall be subject to judicial review in the manner specified in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. The timely filing and diligent prosecution of an appeal to the city manager is an administrative remedy which must be exhausted before judicial review may be sought. An appeal to the city manager is not available for a revocation made pursuant to subsection D. below. 
D.  Revocation of Registration Wrongly Issued. A tobacco retailer's registration shall be revoked if the department finds, after the registered tobacco retailer is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that one (1) or more of the bases for denial of a registration under Section 5.18.060 existed at the time application was made or at any time before the registration issued. The decision by the department shall be the final decision of the city and not subject to administrative appeal. Such a revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new registration application. 
E.  Notice of Violation. Upon a final determination by the city to revoke a tobacco retailer's registration under this chapter, the tobacco retailer shall prominently display notice of the revocation in a form specified by the city manager at the previously registered location of tobacco sales for the length of time the registration is revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2009-259, § 2, 6-10-2009; Ord. No. 2013-306, § I, 10-9-2013 )  
5.18.120 - Tobacco retailing without a registration. 
A.  In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if a court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the department finds based on a preponderance of evidence, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, that any person has engaged in tobacco retailing at a location without a valid tobacco retailer's registration, either directly or through the person's agents or employees, the person shall be ineligible to apply for, or to be issued, a tobacco retailing registration as follows: 
1.  After a first violation of this section at a location within any sixty-month-period, no new registration may issue for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction), until thirty (30) days have passed from the date of the violation. 
2.  After a second violation of this section at a location within any sixty-month-period, no new registration may issue for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction), until ninety (90) days have passed from the date of the violation. 
3.  After of a third or subsequent violation of this section at a location within any sixty-month-period, no new registration may issue for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction), until five years have passed from the date of the violation. 
B.  Tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia offered for sale or exchange in violation of this section are subject to seizure by the department or any peace officer and shall be forfeited after the tobacco retailer and any other owner of the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia seized is given reasonable notice and an opportunity to demonstrate that the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia were not offered for sale or exchange in violation of this chapter. The decision by the department may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 5.18.110(C). Forfeited tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia shall be destroyed after all internal appeals have been exhausted and the time in which to seek judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6 or other applicable law has expired without the filing of a lawsuit or, if such a suit is filed, after judgment in that suit becomes final. 
C.  For the purposes of the civil remedies provided in this chapter: 
1.  Each day on which a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia is offered for sale in violation of this chapter; or 
2.  Each individual retail tobacco product and each individual retail item of tobacco paraphernalia that is distributed, sold, or offered for sale in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-259, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
5.18.130 - Enforcement. 
A.  The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available by this Code or otherwise at law or in equity. 
B.  Whenever evidence of a violation of this chapter is obtained in any part through the participation of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years old, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this chapter and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented. 
C.  Violations of this chapter are subject to a civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. The civil penalty shall be recoverable in an action brought in a court of competent jurisdiction by the city prosecutor or city attorney, or in the case of an action brought in small claims court, by the director of community development or their designee. 
D.  Violations of this chapter may, in the discretion of the city prosecutor, be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors when the interests of justice so require. 
E.  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter. 
F.  Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
G.  In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter, by another provision of this code, or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the city attorney, including, for example, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. 
H.  The city manager shall annually report to the city council regarding the enforcement of this chapter in the prior year. The report shall include: (i) the number of tobacco retailers found to have violated this chapter; (ii) the number of enforcement actions taken with respect to each tobacco retailer under Section 5.18.100, (iii) the cost to the city of enforcement of this chapter, and (iv) whether additional enforcement funds are needed and, if so, whether he or she recommends those funds be derived from the city's general fund, fees imposed for the issuance of registrations under this chapter, or the proceeds of fines and penalties paid to the city under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-259, § 2, 6-10-2009; Ord. No. 2013-306, § III, 10-9-2013 )  
Chapter 5.20 - PROHIBITION ON ADVERTISING FOR UNLAWFUL SHORT-TERM, TRANSIENT, AND VACATION RENTALS 
Sections: 
 
5.20.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the proliferation of the illegal land use of unlawful short-term, transient, and vacation rentals and the associated negative effects caused by this illegal land use on the city's residents, businesses, and visitors, including excessive traffic, reductions in available parking, unlawful conversions of residential property, unlawful conversions of existing affordable housing units into illegal short term vacation rentals, and inundation of the city's low-density, quiet residential neighborhoods with commercial visitors and activity that adds traffic, noise, and destroys their quiet, low-density residential character. The city intends this prohibition on advertisements for unlawful short-term, transient, and vacation rentals will apply to the extent of, but not beyond, the limit of the city's power, consistent with the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 2 of the California Constitution, and any preemptive state or federal laws. 
This advertising ban applies to advertisements for short-term, transient, and vacation rentals, which are prohibited under the following sections of the Code: 
A.  The Code provides that any short-term, transient, or vacation rentals of property or a portion thereof for less than thirty (30) days in exchange for any form of compensation is prohibited in all residential zones as this land use is not provided for in Section 17.11.010, Table 2-2, which lists all allowable land uses in residential zones. Under the principle of permissive zoning, any land use not expressly allowed or permitted via a determination of substantially similar use under Section 17.11.020 is prohibited. Section 17.11.020 provides for the city to approve a land use that is substantially similar to a listed land use, but only after finding that the land use is consistent with the general plan, meets the stated purpose and general intent of the zoning district in which the use is proposed to be located, would not adversely affect the city's public health, safety, and general welfare, and that the proposed use shares characteristics common with, and is not of a greater intensity, density or generate more environmental impact than, those listed in the zoning district in which it is to be located. Short-term, transient, or vacation rentals are not consistent with the general plan's designated land uses for residential zones. The sole exception is a lawfully approved bed and breakfast inn operated in full compliance with applicable federal, state, and local rules and regulations including all required permits from the city, which is a conditionally permitted use in the residential, rural and rural community zones as stated in Section 17.11.010, Table 2-2. A bed and breakfast inn is not permitted in any single-family or multi-family residential zone under Section 17.11.010, Table 2-2. A lawfully operated bed and breakfast inn must conform to the definition of bed and breakfast inn in Section 17.90.020, the parking requirements of Section 17.28.040, Table 3-11, which requires one (1) parking space for each guest room or suite or one (1) parking space for every two (2) beds, whichever is greater, and all other applicable rules and regulations. 
B.  The Code provides that any short-term, transient, or vacation rentals of property or a portion thereof for less than thirty (30) days in exchange for any form of compensation is prohibited in all commercial zones as this land use is not provided for in Section 17.11.010, Table 2-2, with the following exception: 
1.  Lawfully approved hotels and motels operated in full compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local rules and regulations including all required permits from the city, which are a conditionally permitted use in the commercial retail, commercial office, commercial mixed use, and commercial business park zones, as stated in Section 17.11.010, Table 2-2. 
C.  The Code provides that any short-term, transient, or vacation rentals of property or a portion thereof for less than thirty (30) days in exchange for any form of compensation is prohibited in all special purpose zoning districts as this land use is not provided for in Section 17.11.010, Table 2-2, with the following exception: 
1.  Lawfully approved bed and breakfast inns operated in full compliance with applicable federal, state, and local rules and regulations including all required permits from the city, which are a conditionally permitted use in the hillside/mountainous zones as stated in Section 17.11.010, Table 2-2. A lawfully operated bed and breakfast inn must conform to the definition of bed and breakfast inn in Section 17.90.020, the parking requirements of Section 17.28.040, Table 3-11, which require one (1) parking space for each guest room or suite or one (1) parking space for every two (2) beds, whichever is greater, and all other applicable rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-363 , § 2, 3-14-2018)  
5.20.020. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions apply: 
"Advertisement" means any writing, picture, video, or other communication in fixed form shown, made available, published, or presented to the public in any medium or manner, whether in writing, in person, online, or otherwise via the internet, for the purpose of soliciting an unlawful short-term rental in the city, to help facilitate an unlawful short-term rental in the city, or to announce the availability of any property or portion thereof in the city for rental or occupancy for an unlawful short-term rental. 
"Broker or property manager" means person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, or organization of any kind who offers to rent or arranges for persons to rent an unlawful short-term rental or otherwise oversees and facilitates the operation of an unlawful short-term rental. 
"Person" shall mean any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, or organization of any kind. 
"Property owner" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, or organization of any kind with a beneficial ownership interest in a property. 
"Tenant" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, or organization of any kind with a leasehold interest in a property. 
"Unlawful short-term rental" means any rental or occupancy of any property or a portion thereof located in the city for any purpose, including but not limited to a vacation, for less than thirty (30) days if that rental or occupancy occurs in exchange for any form of compensation or consideration. Short-term rentals or occupancies that occur at lawfully approved hotels, motels, and bed and breakfast inns operated in full compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local rules and regulations including any and all required permits from the city are lawful. 
(Ord. No. 2018-363 , § 2, 3-14-2018)  
5.20.030. - Prohibition on advertising for unlawful short-term rentals. 
A.  All persons, including property owners, tenants, and broker or property managers, are prohibited from publishing, displaying, transmitting, sending, or posting anywhere, whether online or via the internet, in a newspaper, or in any other writing, any advertisement for an unlawful short-term rental of any property or a portion thereof located in the city. This prohibition includes causing or maintaining in any manner or medium the display, publication, transmittal or posting of an advertisement for an unlawful short-term rental by any person. 
B.  This prohibition does not apply to any advertisement for lawfully approved hotels, motels and bed and breakfast inns located in the city and operated in full compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local rules and regulations including any and all required permits from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-363 , § 2, 3-14-2018)  
5.20.040. - Penalties and enforcement. 
A.  Any person, including property owners, tenants, and broker or property managers, whether as principal, agent, employee, officer, partner, manager, member, trustee, or otherwise, violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in Title 1, Chapter 16, Section 1.16.010 of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties provided therein. Such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, maintained, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable as provided in this section. 
B.  In addition to the remedies provided in subsection (A) of this section, the city shall have the power to enforce violations of any provision of this chapter by any lawful means permitted by this Code or by applicable law, including, but not limited to, by imposing administrative remedies under Chapter 17 of Title 1 of this Code and by seeking a civil injunction from a court of competent jurisdiction against any persons who maintain an advertisement in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-363 , § 2, 3-14-2018)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMALS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Fees adopted by reference. 
The changes to fees required for animal-related services, licenses and activities enacted by the Los Angeles County board of supervisors in Ordinance 92-0056 are adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 92-36 § 1, 1992)  
Chapter 6.08 - COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE 
Sections: 
 
6.08.010 - Adoption of County Animal Code. 
The animal control ordinance of the county of Los Angeles, the same being Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code, adopted and amended through Ordinance No. 2004-0036, passed June 29, 2004 is hereby adopted by reference as the animal control ordinance of the city of Calabasas (hereinafter referred to as "animal control ordinance"). 
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of Title 10 of the county of Los Angeles Municipal Codes and or any amendment to the animal code contained in the city of Calabasas municipal code, the provision contained in the Calabasas municipal code shall control. 
(Ord. 2005-202 § 1, 2005: Ord. 96-103 § 2 (part), 1996)  
6.08.020 - Copies. 
A copy of Title 10 , the animal control ordinance, shall be on file in the office of the city clerk at all times during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 96-103 § 2 (part), 1996)  
6.08.030 - Definitions. 
Wherever in the animal control ordinance the following words or phrases are used, they respectively shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
"County" or "county of Los Angeles" means the city of Calabasas. 
"County clerk" means the city clerk of the city of Calabasas. 
"Unincorporated territory" shall be deemed to refer to the city of Calabasas. 
(Ord. 96-103 § 2 (part), 1996)  
6.08.040 - Section 10.36.330(A) amended—Impounded animals—Release for research prohibited. 
Section 10.36.330(A) of the animal control ordinance is amended to read as follows: 
  SEC. 10.36.330. 
  A. The provisions of this Section prohibit the Department of Animal Care and Control from releasing any impounded animals for research purposes which were picked up in the City of Calabasas. 
(Ord. 96-103 § 2 (part), 1996)  
6.08.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
The penalty for any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be the same as those in Section 10.04.060 of the animal control ordinance. 
(Ord. 96-103 § 2 (part), 1996)  
Chapter 6.10 - REMOVAL OF ANIMAL WASTE 
Sections: 
 
6.10.010 - Removal of animal waste from public and private properties. 
A.  No owner of any animal shall permit his or her animal to defecate on any public or private property within the city, other than the property of the owner of the animal, unless the owner immediately removes the animal waste. 
B.  No person shall permit any animal within his or her custody or control to defecate on any public or private property within the city, other than the property of either the owner of the animal or person exercising custody or control over the animal, unless the person immediately removes the animal waste. 
C.  Any person who walks or exercises an animal in or upon any public or private property shall have in his or her possession an appropriate means to retrieve and dispose of any animal waste discharged by the animal. This subsection shall not apply when the owner or person with custody or control over the animal walks or exercises the animal on his or her own private property. 
D.  No person shall dump or leave any animal waste on any public or private property; provided, however, that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of manure as fertilizer for lawns and gardens in keeping with ordinary and customary practices and applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-252, § 1)  
6.10.020 - Penalties. 
Any violation of this shall be punishable as an infraction pursuant to section 1.16.020 of this code and in any other manner permitted by this code or other law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-252, § 1)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.02 - HEALTH CODE 
Sections: 
 
8.02.010 - Adoption. 
A.  The "Los Angeles County Public Health Code" as adopted by the board of supervisors of the county of Los Angeles as Ordinance No. 7583, as amended through and including February 28, 1998, is adopted by reference as the health code of the City of Calabasas. 
B.  Chapter 8.04 of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended through and including February 28, 1998, relating to public health licenses is also adopted and incorporated into the health code of the City of Calabasas. 
C.  It is the intention of the city council to establish regulations or standards which will provide reasonable health standards and to provide for general control of conditions constituting hazards or damages to health and life and for the abatement of these conditions through the entire city. Copies of the codes being adopted, the "Los Angeles County Public Health Code" and the "Los Angeles County Public Health License Code" are on file with the city clerk and are open to public inspection. 
(Ord. 98-130 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.02.020 - Definitions. 
Wherever the "Los Angeles County Public Health Code" uses the following words or phrases, they, respectively, shall be defined as follows: 
"County" or "County of Los Angeles" shall mean the City of Calabasas. 
"Health officer" or "County Health Officer" shall mean the health officer of the City of Calabasas. 
(Ord. 98-130 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.02.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity to violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements, of this chapter. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity violating any provision of this chapter, or failing to comply with any of its requirements, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment of not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership, corporation or legal entity shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership, corporation or legal entity and shall be deemed punishable therefore as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-130 § 2 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 8.04 - FIREWORKS 
Sections: 
 
8.04.010 - Unlawful sale, use and discharge. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Los Angeles County Code, as heretofore adopted by the city council, it is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to sell, use or discharge any fireworks within the city including, but not limited to, "safe and sane" fireworks as that term is defined in Part 2 of Division 11 of the California Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended from time to time hereafter. 
(Ord. 91-12 § 2, 1991)  
8.04.020 - Violation—Nuisance—Abatement by city. 
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of nuisances. 
(Ord. 91-12 § 4, 1991)  
8.04.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to violate any provision, or to fail to comply with any of the requirements, of this chapter. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this chapter, or failing to comply with any of its requirements, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 91-12 § 3, 1991)  
Chapter 8.12 - SECOND-HAND SMOKE CONTROL* 
Sections: 
 
8.12.010 - Title. 
This chapter may be referred to as the city's "Comprehensive Second-hand Smoke Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. 2006-217 § 2 (part), 2006)  
8.12.020 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter are to: 
A.  Protect the public health, safety and general welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and in multifamily rental housing under circumstances where other persons will be exposed to second-hand smoke; 
B.  Ensure a cleaner and more hygienic environment for the city, its residents, and its natural resources, including creeks and streams; 
C.  Strike a reasonable balance between the needs of persons who smoke and the needs of nonsmokers, including children, to breathe smoke-free air, recognizing the threat to public health and the environment which smoking causes; 
D.  Recognize the right of residents and visitors to the city to be free from unwelcome second-hand smoke; 
E.  Recognizing that long-term health effects of inhaling vapors and effects of secondhand vapors from electronic (e) cigarettes are unknown, although recent tests have demonstrated the vapors from electronic (e) cigarettes contain nicotine, and other ultrafine particles, including, but not limited to, Acetaldehyde, Benzene, Cadmium, Formaldehyde, Lead, Nickel and Toluene. 
(Ord. 2008-239 § 1, 2008: Ord. 2006-217 § 2 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2014-315, § 2 , 6-11-2014)  
8.12.030 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall govern construction of this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
"Business" means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, or other entity formed for profit-making purposes or that has an employee. 
"Common area at a shopping mall" means any indoor or outdoor common area of a shopping mall accessible to and usable by the occupants or customers of more than one (1) retail establishment, including, but not limited to, halls, lobbies, outdoor eating areas, playgrounds and parking lots. 
"Electronic or "e" cigarette" means an electronic or battery operated device that delivers vapors for inhalation. This term shall include every variation and type of such devices whether they are manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, an "e" cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah or any other product name or descriptor. 
"Employee" means any person who is employed or retained as an independent contractor by any employer or any person who volunteers his or her services for an employer, association, or nonprofit entity. 
"Employer" means any person, partnership, corporation, association, nonprofit or other entity who or which employs or retains the service of one (1) or more employees. 
"Enclosed area" means: 
(1)  Any covered or partially covered area having more than fifty (50) percent of its perimeter walled or otherwise closed to the outside such as, for example, a covered porch with more than two (2) walls; or 
(2)  Any space open to the sky (hereinafter "uncovered") having more than seventy-five (75) percent of its perimeter walled or otherwise closed to the outside such as, for example, a courtyard; 
(3)  Except that an uncovered space of three thousand (3,000) square feet or more is not an enclosed area, such as, for example, a field in an open-air arena. 
"Landlord" means any person other than a sublessor who owns real property leased as residential property, who lets residential property, or who manages such property. 
"Multi-unit residence" means a premises that contains two (2) or more units rented or available to be rented and not occupied by a landlord of the premises. Multi-unit residence does not include a condominium as that term is defined in Section 17.90.020 of this Code. 
"Multi-unit residence common area" means any indoor or outdoor area of a multi-unit residence accessible to and usable by residents of more than one (1) unit, including, but not limited to, halls and paths, lobbies, laundry rooms, common cooking areas, outdoor eating areas, playgrounds, swimming pools, and parking areas. 
"Nonprofit entity" means any entity that meets the requirements of California Corporations Code section 5003 as well as any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational, political, social or similar purposes, the net proceeds of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives of the entity and not to private gain. A public agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this section. 
"Place of employment" means any area under the legal or de facto control of an employer, business or nonprofit entity that an employee or the general public may enter in the normal course of operations, but regardless of the hours of operation, including, for example, indoor and outdoor work areas, construction sites, vehicles used in employment or for business purposes, taxis, employee lounges, conference and banquet rooms, bingo and gaming facilities, long-term health facilities, warehouses, and, while employees, children or patients are present, private residences that are used as child-care or health-care facilities subject to licensing requirements. 
"Playground" means any park or recreational area designed in part to be used by children that has play or sports equipment installed or has been designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar facility located on public or private school grounds, or on city property. 
"Premises" means a parcel of land and any improvements upon it such as is usually described in a deed, deed of trust or mortgage, and includes legally separate but contiguous pieces of land that are owned by the same natural person or by legal persons under common control. 
"Present" means within a reasonable distance. 
"Private enforcer" is defined in Section 8.12.080(b) of this Code. 
"Public place" means any public or private place open to the general public regardless of any fee or age requirement, including, for example, streets, sidewalks, plazas, bars, restaurants, clubs, stores, stadiums, parks, playgrounds, taxis, and buses. 
"Reasonable distance" means a distance of twenty (20) feet or, with respect to a designated smoking area, such larger area as the city manager reasonably determines in writing to be necessary in a given circumstance to ensure that occupants of an area in which smoking is prohibited are not exposed to secondhand smoke created by smokers outside the area. 
"Recreational area" means any public or private area open to the public for recreational purposes whether or not any fee for admission is charged, including without limitation, parks, gardens, sporting facilities, stadiums, and playgrounds. 
"Shopping mall" means any parcel of land zoned and used for retail sales by more than one (1) retailer that is jointly operated or which includes shared parking facilities. 
"Smoking" or to "smoke" means possessing or to possess: 
(1)  A lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco paraphernalia, any other lighted weed or plant (including, but not limited to, a lighted pipe, lighted hookah pipe, lighted cigar, or lighted cigarette of any kind), or the lighting of a tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or any other weed or plant (including, but not limited to, a pipe, a hookah pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or 
(2)  An operating electronic (e) cigarette. 
"Tobacco product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco. 
"Unenclosed area" means any area which is not an enclosed area. 
"Unit" means: 
(1)  A dwelling space consisting of essentially complete independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including, for example, permanent provisions for living and sleeping, and any associated private outdoor spaces such as balconies and patios; and 
(2)  Senior citizen housing and single room occupancy hotels, as defined in California Health and Safety Code section 50519(b)(1), even where lacking private cooking or plumbing facilities. "Unit" does not include lodging in a hotel or motel that meets the requirements set forth in California Civil Code section 1940(b)(2). 
(Ord. 2008-239 § 2, 2008: Ord. 2006-217 § 2 (part), 2006) 
( Ord. No. 2014-315, § 2, 6-11-2014 ; Ord. No. 2015-324, § 1 , 5-27-2015)  
8.12.035 - Second-hand smoke generally. 
For all purposes within the jurisdiction of the city, nonconsensual exposure to second-hand smoke in violation of this chapter is a nuisance, and the uninvited presence of second-hand smoke on property in violation of this chapter is a nuisance and a trespass. 
(Ord. 2008-239 § 3, 2008)  
8.12.040 - Prohibition of smoking. 
A.  Public and Other Places Where Smoking Prohibited. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or by state or federal law, smoking is prohibited everywhere in the city, including but not limited to: 
1.  Public places; 
2.  Places of employment; 
3.  Multi-unit residence common areas; 
4.  Enclosed and unenclosed places of hotels, businesses, restaurants and bars, and other public accommodations. 
B.  Places Where Smoking Permitted. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, smoking is permitted in the following locations within the city, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law: 
1.  Private residential property, other than (a) those used as a child-care or health-care facility subject to licensing requirements when employees, children or patients are present; or (b) as provided in Sections 8.12.051 to 8.12.055 of this chapter with respect to multi-unit residences. Nothing in this chapter shall require a person or entity who or which owns or controls a private residential property, including but not limited to a condominium association or an apartment owner, to permit smoking and such a person may prohibit smoking throughout the property he, she or it owns or controls. 
2.  In up to twenty (20) percent of guest rooms in any hotel or motel, if the hotel or motel permanently designates at least eighty (80) percent of its guest rooms as nonsmoking rooms, appropriately signs nonsmoking rooms and permanently removes ashtrays and matches from them. Smoking rooms shall be segregated from nonsmoking rooms on separate floors, wings, or portions of either; smoking and nonsmoking rooms shall not be interspersed. Nothing in this chapter shall require a hotel or motel to provide smoking rooms and the owner or operator of a hotel or motel may choose to prohibit smoking throughout the property. 
3.  Designated unenclosed areas in shopping mall common areas ("smokers' outposts"), provided that (i) there is not more than one square foot of unenclosed area designated for smoking for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of rentable enclosed or unenclosed space of the shopping mall (provided that each shopping mall may have at least one smokers' outpost of forty (40) or fewer square feet in area, (ii) the area is prominently marked with signs, (iii) it is located the greatest distance practicable, and at least five feet, from any doorway or opening into an enclosed area or any access way from parking facilities to the retail areas of the shopping mall, (iv) smoke is not permitted to enter adjacent area in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter, other law or by the owner, lessee or licensee of the adjacent property, and (v) the location(s) of the smokers' outpost(s) is or are approved in writing by the city manager of the city based on the standards of this subsection and the goals of this chapter. 
4.  Any outdoor area in which no nonsmoker is present and, due to the time of day or other factors, it is not reasonable to expect another person to arrive. 
C.  No person shall dispose of smoking waste or place or maintain a receptacle for smoking waste in an area in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter or other law, including within any reasonable distance required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2008-239 § 4, 2008: Ord. 2006-217 § 2 (part), 2006)  
8.12.050 - Reasonable distance required. 
No person shall smoke in an area in which smoking is otherwise permitted by this chapter or other law within a reasonable distance from any entrance, opening, crack, or vent into an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter, other law or by the owner, lessee or licensee of that enclosed area. 
(Ord. 2008-239 § 5, 2008: Ord. 2006-217 § 2 (part), 2006)  
8.12.051 - No smoking common areas, designated smoking area. 
A.  Notwithstanding the prohibition of smoking in all multi-unit residence common areas established by Section 8.12.040 of this chapter, a landlord of a multi-unit residence shall designate a portion of the outdoor area of the premises as a smoking area as provided in subsection (B) below. 
B.  A designated smoking area must: 
1.  Be located a reasonable distance from any indoor area where smoking is prohibited; 
2.  Not include, and be a reasonable distance from, outdoor areas primarily used by children including, but not limited to, playgrounds and other areas improved or designated for play or swimming; 
3.  Be no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total outdoor area of the premises on which it is located; 
4.  Have a clearly marked perimeter; 
5.  Be identified by conspicuous signs; 
6.  Not overlap any area in which smoking is otherwise prohibited by this chapter, other provisions of this Code, or other law; and 
7.  If the requirements set forth in subsection (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section cannot be satisfied due to unique circumstances affecting a multi-unit residence, the city manager may approve a smoking area that meets the requirements of this section to the extent practicable or, if in his or her judgment such an area cannot be designed, the city manager may exempt the landlord from the requirement to designate a smoking area. 
(Ord. 2008-239 § 6 (part), 2008)  
8.12.053 - Smoke-free buffer zones. 
Smoking is prohibited (i) on the premises of a multi-unit residence; and (ii) in any public place within a reasonable distance of any entrance, opening, or other vent into an enclosed area of a multi-unit residence in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter, other provisions of this Code, or other law. For example, and without limitation, smoking on balconies, porches, or patios of a nonsmoking unit is prohibited. 
(Ord. 2008-239 § 6 (part), 2008)  
8.12.055 - Smoke-free multi-unit residences. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, on or before January 1, 2012, at least eighty (80) percent of the units in all multi-unit residences shall be designated as nonsmoking units, and smoking shall be prohibited inside such units. Upon designating nonsmoking units and not later than January 1, 2012, the landlord shall give written notice to every lawful tenant(s) then in occupancy of each nonsmoking unit, informing the tenant(s) that smoking is prohibited inside that unit. If fewer than all units in a multi-unit residence are designated as nonsmoking units, nonsmoking units shall be grouped together (e.g., horizontally and/or vertically) and physically separated from smoking units to the maximum extent practicable; if a multi-unit residence is comprised of more than one building, smoking units shall be contained in as few buildings as possible. 
B.  Upon designating nonsmoking units and not later than January 1, 2012, each landlord of an existing multi-family residence that is not a "new" multifamily residence shall give written notice to every lawful tenant(s) who has continuously occupied a unit in the multifamily residence from February 1, 2008 to the date the notice is given, informing the tenant(s) of his or her right to make a written request to the landlord that his or her unit be designated a smoking unit during his or her tenancy. Upon such a request, the inside of such unit shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this section while such tenant(s) continuously occupy(ies) the unit. If such tenant(s) subsequently relocates from that unit to another unit within the same multi-unit residence, both such units shall thereafter be subject to the smoking restrictions of this section unless either is designated as a smoking unit as permitted by subsection (A) above. A multi-unit residence shall be considered "new" for purposes of this section if a certificate of occupancy for any unit is first issued by the city after February 1, 2008. 
C.  By July 1, 2008, each landlord of a multifamily residence in the city shall report, in writing, to the city manager, the number and locations of (i) designated nonsmoking units in the multifamily residence, (ii) any unit in the multifamily residence which is designated as a grandfathered unit under subsection (B) of this section, (iii) designated smoking units in the multifamily residence, and (iv) the location of any smoking area designated pursuant to subsection (B) of Section 8.12.051 of this Code. Each landlord of a multifamily residence in the city shall make this written report annually thereafter until the multi-unit residence for which the report is made complies with the eighty (80) percent smoke-free requirement of subsection (A) of this section, exclusive of grandfathered smoking units under subsection (B) of this section. 
(Ord. 2008-239 § 6 (part), 2008)  
8.12.057 - Required lease terms. 
A.  Every new lease or other agreement entered into after the effective date of this section for the occupancy of a unit in a multi-unit residence, other than a renewal of an existing lease to a tenant subject to Section 8.12.055(B), shall include: 
1.  A clause stating that smoking is prohibited in the unit, if the unit has been designated as a nonsmoking unit; 
2.  A clause stating that it is a material breach of the lease or agreement to (i) violate any law or rule regulating smoking while on the premises; (ii) smoke inside a nonsmoking unit; or (iii) smoke in any multi-unit residence common area in which smoking is prohibited by the landlord or by law; and 
3.  A clause stating that all lawful occupants of units in the multi-unit residence are third-party beneficiaries of the clauses required by subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section. 
B.  The lease or agreement terms required by subsection (A) of this section are incorporated by force of law into any lease or other agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a multi-unit residence made on or after the effective date of this section which lease does not fully comply with subsection (A) of this section. 
C.  A tenant who breaches the smoking regulations included in a lease pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, or incorporated into a lease by subsection (B) of this section, or who knowingly allows another person to do so shall be liable to: (i) the landlord; and (ii) to any lawful occupant of a unit in the multi-unit residence who is exposed to second-hand smoke as a result of that breach. 
D.  A landlord shall not be liable to any person for a tenant's breach of smoking regulations if: 
1.  The landlord has fully complied with subsection (A) of this section, and 
2.  Upon receiving a signed written complaint regarding prohibited smoking, the landlord provides a written warning to the offending tenant, stating that such tenant may be evicted if another complaint is received. Upon receipt of a second signed, written complaint against the offending tenant, the landlord may evict such tenant, but will not be held liable for the failure to do so. 
E.  Failure to enforce any smoking regulation of a lease or agreement on one or more occasions shall not constitute a waiver of the lease or agreement provisions required by this section and shall not prevent future enforcement of any such smoking regulation. 
(Ord. 2008-239 § 6 (part), 2008)  
8.12.059 - Disclosure of units subject to smoking restrictions by landlord. 
Every landlord shall maintain a list of designated nonsmoking units and a floor plan identifying the relative positions of smoking and nonsmoking units. The floor plan also shall identify the location of any designated smoking areas. A copy of this list and floor plan shall accompany every new lease or other agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a multi-unit residence entered into after the sooner of (i) the date nonsmoking units are first designated by the landlord under this chapter; or (ii) January 1, 2012. 
(Ord. 2008-239 § 6 (part), 2008)  
8.12.060 - Allowing, aiding or abetting smoking. 
A  No person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly permit smoking in an area under his, her, or its legal or de facto control in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter or other law. 
B.  No person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity shall allow the placement or maintenance of a receptacle for smoking waste in an area under his, her, or its legal or de facto control in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter or other law. 
C.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any owner, landlord, employer, business, nonprofit entity, or other person who or which has legal or de facto control over any property may declare any area in which smoking would otherwise be permitted to be a nonsmoking area and, provided that signs are posted giving notice of the smoking restriction, smoking in or within a reasonable distance of that area shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
D.  "No Smoking" or "Smoke Free" signs, with letters of not less than one inch in height or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) or any alternative signage approved by the city manager shall be conspicuously posted by the person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity who or which has legal or de facto control of such place at each entrance to a public place in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter or any other place where the city manager reasonably determines that smoking in violation of this chapter has occurred, or is likely to occur. The city manager shall post signs at each entrance to a public place in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter which is owned or controlled by the city. Signage required by this subsection shall not be subject to Chapter 17.30 ("Signs") of this Code. Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to the violation of any other provision of this chapter, except as to an area in which smoking is prohibited only by subsection (C) of this section. 
(Ord. 2008-239 § 7, 2008: Ord. 2006-217 § 2 (part), 2006)  
8.12.070 - Penalties and enforcement. 
A.  A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.16 of this Code unless the prosecutor determines to prosecute it as an infraction as authorized by Section 1.16.010. 
B.  The city council declares that exposing other persons to second-hand smoke constitutes a public nuisance and may be remedied as such. 
C.  No person shall cause, permit, aid, abet, or conceal a violation of any provision of this chapter. 
D.  The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
E.  The city prosecutor, city attorney, any peace officer or city code enforcement officer may enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. 2008-239 § 8, 2008; Ord. 2006-217 § 2 (part), 2006)  
8.12.080 - Private enforcement. 
A.  The city attorney or city prosecutor may also bring a civil action to enforce this chapter and to obtain the remedies specified below or otherwise available in equity or at law. 
B.  Any person acting for the interests of him-, her-, or itself, or of its members, or of the general public (hereinafter "a private enforcer") may bring a civil action to enforce this chapter with the remedies specified below, if both of the following requirements are met: 
1.  The action is commenced more than sixty (60) days after the private enforcer has given written notice of an alleged violation of this chapter to the city attorney and to the alleged violator. 
2.  No person acting on behalf of the city or the state has commenced or is prosecuting an action regarding the violation(s) which was or were the subject of the notice on the date the private action is filed. 
C.  A private enforcer shall provide a copy of his, her, or its action to the city attorney within seven days of filing it. 
D.  Upon settlement or judgment of an action brought pursuant to subsection (G) of this section, the private enforcer shall give the city attorney a notice of that settlement or judgment and of the final disposition of the case. No private enforcer may settle such an action, unless the city attorney or the court determines the settlement to be reasonable in light of the purposes of this chapter and any settlement in violation of this requirement may be set aside upon motion to a court of competent jurisdiction by the city attorney or city prosecutor. 
E.  Upon proof of a violation of this chapter, the court shall award the following: 
1.  Damages in the amount of either: 
a.  Upon proof, actual damages; 
b.  With insufficient or no proof of damages, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation of this chapter (hereinafter "statutory damages"). Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no private enforcer suing on behalf of the general public shall recover statutory damages based upon a violation of this chapter if a previous claim brought on behalf of the general public for statutory damages and based upon the same violation has been adjudicated, whether or not the private enforcer was a party to that earlier adjudication. 
2.  Restitution to the appropriate party or parties of the gains obtained by way of violation of this chapter. 
3.  Exemplary damages, where it is proven by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant is guilty of oppression, fraud, malice, or a conscious disregard for the public health and safety. 
4.  Attorney's fees and costs reasonably incurred by a successful party in prosecuting or defending an action. 
Any damages awarded in an action brought by the city attorney or city prosecutor shall be paid into the city's general fund, unless the court determines that they should be paid to a damaged third party. 
F.  Upon proof of at least one violation of this chapter, a private enforcer, the city prosecutor, city attorney, any peace officer or code enforcement official may obtain an injunction against further violations of this chapter or as, to small claims court actions, a judgment payable on condition that a further violation of this chapter occur within a time specified by the court. 
G.  Notwithstanding any legal or equitable bar, a private enforcer may bring an action to enforce this chapter solely on behalf of the general public. When a private enforcer do so, nothing about such an action shall act to preclude or bar the private enforcer from bringing a subsequent action on his, her, or its own behalf based upon the same facts. 
H.  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a private enforcer from bringing a civil action in small claims court to enforce this chapter, as long as the amount in demand and the relief sought are within the jurisdiction of small claims court. 
(Ord. 2006-217 § 2 (part), 2006)  
CHAPTER 8.13 - CULTIVATION AND USE OF MARIJUANA[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-355 , § 1, adopted June 14, 2017, amended Ch. 8.13 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8.13, § 8.13.010, pertained to marijuana cultivation and dispensaries, and derived from Ord. No. 2016-332, § 2 , 1-27-2016; Ord. No. 2016-335, § 1 , 4-13-2016. 
 
8.13.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the community by establishing reasonable standards and limitations regarding the cultivation, processing, distribution and use of marijuana and marijuana products commensurate with state and federal law, to include Proposition 64 as passed and approved by the voters of California on November 8, 2016, and Proposition 215 as passed and approved by the voters of California on November 5, 1996. This section is to be read in conjunction with Section 17.12.125 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-355 , § 1, 6-14-2017)  
8.13.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Delivery" means the commercial delivery, transfer or transport, or arranging for the delivery, transfer or transport, or the use of any technology platform to arrange for or facilitate the commercial delivery, transfer or transport of marijuana or marijuana products to or from any location within the city. For purposes of this chapter, "delivery" shall not include the transportation of marijuana by a primary caregiver to a qualified patient consistent with a physician recommendation for medicinal use of marijuana. 
B.  "Marijuana" is defined as the term is defined in California Health and Safety Code section 11018 as that section may be amended from time to time. 
C.  "Marijuana cultivation" or "cultivation" means the planting, growing, harvesting, drying or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof, and any and all associated business or operational activities. 
D.  "Marijuana products" is defined as the term is defined in California Health and Safety Code section 11018.1 as that section may be amended from time to time. 
E.  "Primary caregiver" is defined as that term is defined in California Health and Safety Code section 11362.7, subdivision (d), as that section may be amended from time to time. 
F.  "Qualified patient" means a seriously ill person who obtains a written recommendation from a physician licensed to practice medicine in the State of California to use marijuana for personal medical purposes. In addition, persons currently under the care of a physician for a "serious medical condition" as that term is defined in California Health and Safety Code section 11362.7, subdivision (h), are presumed to be "qualified patients." 
(Ord. No. 2017-355 , § 1, 6-14-2017)  
8.13.030 - Prohibited activities involving marijuana or marijuana products. 
The following activities involving marijuana or marijuana products are prohibited and may not be conducted anywhere in the city: 
A.  The cultivation, processing, warehousing, packaging, or distribution of marijuana or any marijuana product or derivative for commercial purposes, to include marijuana dispensaries or commercial marijuana businesses of any kind, whether providing marijuana for medical or recreational purposes; 
B.  The cultivation, processing, warehousing, packaging, or distribution of marijuana or any marijuana product or derivative for personal non-commercial medical or recreational purposes in a manner which conflicts with the land use limitations set out in CMC section 17.12.125, or which conflicts with any parameter or limitation established in California Health and Safety Code sections 11362.1 et seq.; 
C.  Delivery or transport of marijuana or of any marijuana product or derivative to any location in the city for medical or recreational purposes in quantities exceeding established maximum limits, or in any manner which fails to comply with the parameters and limits set out in California Business and Professions Code sections 26080 and 26090; 
D.  Any other facility, business, or activity involving the manufacture, cultivation, processing, packaging, storage or warehousing, distribution or delivery of drugs or other substances which it is illegal to distribute or possess under state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-355 , § 1, 6-14-2017)  
8.13.040 - Exceptions. 
A.  Possession or cultivation of marijuana on private residential property strictly for the personal use and benefit of one (1) or more residents on the property, where the marijuana cultivation and related activities are non-commercial and occur entirely within the confines of a fully enclosed and secure primary dwelling unit, or within a fully enclosed and secure accessory structure thereto, in compliance with Section 17.12.125 of Title 17 of this Code and compliant with the limits and requirements established under California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1, 11362.2, 11362.3, 11362.4, and 11362.45 and any other applicable state laws. 
B.  Delivery or transport of marijuana within the city by a person or entity licensed to provide such transport or delivery service by the California Department of Consumer Affairs and by the California Bureau of Marijuana Control, where such delivery service is accomplished via public roadways, does not originate from a location within the city, and conforms to the parameters and limitations established by California Health and Safety Code sections 26080 and 26090 and any other applicable state laws. 
C.  Possession or cultivation of marijuana or marijuana products for personal medical use by a qualified patient, consistent with a physician's recommendation, and conducted by the qualified patient or his or her primary caregiver in accordance with the parameters and limitations set out in sections 11362.5 and sections 11362.7 through 11362.83 of the California Health and Safety Code and any other applicable state laws. 
D.  The personal use or cultivation of marijuana or marijuana products as allowed under subsections (A) and (C) in this section shall be conducted within a fully enclosed and secure structure which does not permit visual or olfactory evidence of cultivation detectable from the public right-of-way, and shall not: 
1.  Displace any space used for required on-site parking of a motor vehicle. 
2.  Utilize lighting that exceeds one thousand two hundred (1,200) watts. 
3.  Utilize an electric generator. 
4.  Utilize gas products including, but not limited to, carbon dioxide, butane, or flammable gas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-355 , § 1, 6-14-2017)  
8.13.050 - Limits to criminal liabilities. 
No conduct which is protected from criminal liability pursuant to the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act (California Health and Safety Code, §§ 11362.1, 11362.2, 11362.3, 11362.4, and 11362.45), the Compassionate Use Act (Health and Safety Code, § 11362.5) and the Medical Marijuana Program Act (Health and Safety Code, §§ 11362.7 through 11362.83) shall be made criminal by this Code. Conduct or uses which violate the requirements of this section are a nuisance, and shall be subject to non-criminal remedies, including, but not limited to, administrative citations and abatement. 
(Ord. No. 2017-355 , § 1, 6-14-2017)  
Chapter 8.16 - COLLECTION OF MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS 
Sections: 
 
8.16.010 - Findings. 
The city council finds and determines as follows: 
A.  In order to meet the requirements of the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (Public Resources Code Sections 40000, et. seq.) including source reduction of the municipal solid waste stream, diversion of municipal solid waste from landfills and conservation of natural resources, it is necessary to regulate the collection of municipal solid waste from residential, commercial, industrial and institutional premises, and to encourage the recycling of solid waste materials. 
B.  The mandates of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Southern California Air Quality Management District, and other regulatory agencies, concerning air pollution and traffic congestion management, require the regulation and, where possible, reduction in the number of municipal solid waste collection vehicles and vehicle trips which cause the discharge of air contaminants and create air pollution. 
C.  A reduction in the number of waste collection vehicles using the city streets daily will reduce traffic hazards and congestion and promote safety. 
D.  The storage, accumulation, collection and disposal of municipal solid waste, including without limitation, garbage, trash, debris and other discarded materials is a matter of substantial public concern in that improper control of these materials may create a public nuisance, air pollution, fire hazard, rat and insect infestation and other problems adversely affecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
E.  Regulation of the collection of garbage, refuse, and other discarded materials from all residential, commercial, industrial and institutional properties within the city will provide the most orderly and efficient solution to these problems and will promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
F.  The regulation of solid waste handling services in the City of Calabasas will also promote the public health, safety and welfare by requiring the use of newer and safer vehicles, the regular maintenance of these vehicles, and the reduction of spillage and litter on the public streets, by establishing responsibility for the cleaning of solid waste bins and containers, and by providing for accountability to the public. 
G.  The public health, safety and welfare will best be served by providing for collection of municipal solid waste and recyclable materials by permittees approved by the city or by one or more exclusive franchises for municipal solid waste and recyclable materials collection services. The city is authorizing the issuance of permits for municipal solid waste, green waste and recyclable materials collection services to qualified applicants. The city is also notifying all existing permit holders, pursuant to Public Resources Code Sections 49520 and 49421, that said permit holders may continue to provide municipal solid waste, green waste and recyclable materials collection services (subject to obtaining the permits required by the city) for up to five years following the issuance of said notice. The five-year period expires on December 31, 2003. The city reserves the right to either continue to issue permits or to enter into one or more franchise agreements after the five-year notice period has elapsed. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.020 - Objectives. 
This chapter is enacted by the city council pursuant to the following statutory authorization and in order to accomplish the objectives set forth in this section: 
A.  Public Resources Code Section 40059 authorizes the city to determine (i) all aspects of solid waste handling which are of local concern, including, but not limited to, frequency of collection, means of collection and transportation, level of services, charges and fees, and nature, location and extent of providing solid waste handling service; (ii) whether the services are to be provided by means of non-exclusive franchise, contract, license, permit, or otherwise, either with or without competitive bidding, or if, in the opinion of its governing body, the public health, safety and well-being so require by partially exclusive or wholly exclusive franchise, contract, license, permit or otherwise, either with or without competitive bidding. 
B.  Public Resources Code Section 49300 provides that the city may, pursuant to terms and conditions as may be prescribed by its legislative body, contract for the collection or disposal, or both, of garbage, waste, refuse, offal, trimmings or other refuse matter. 
C.  Public Resources Code Section 49501 provides that the city may take action, whether by franchise, contract, license, permit or otherwise, whereby the city itself, or one or more other local agencies or solid waste enterprises is authorized or permitted to have the exclusive right to provide solid waste handling services of any class or type within all or any part of the territory of the city. 
D.  It is the intent of this chapter to set forth terms and conditions pursuant to which authorization may be granted by the city council to provide solid waste handling services, and to promote the public health, welfare and safety of the community by establishing reasonable regulations relating to the storage, accumulation, collection and disposal of garbage, trash, rubbish, debris, solid waste and other discarded matter, goods and material. 
E.  This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws. If any federal or state agency shall hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over any specific provisions of this chapter, that paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the city. Modification of a federal or state law or regulation shall, to the extent applicable to the city, be deemed a part of this chapter as of the effective date of the modification. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.030 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, for the purposes of this chapter, are defined and shall be construed as hereunder set forth: 
"Act" means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, as amended, Public Resources Code Sections 40000, et seq. 
"Bulky items" means furniture, household or industrial appliances, shipping crates and containers and other large bulky or heavy objects not normally discarded on a regular basis at residential, commercial or industrial premises. 
"City" means the City of Calabasas, a municipal corporation, and all of the territory lying within the municipal boundaries of the city as presently existing or as such boundaries may be modified. 
"City employee" means an employee or authorized agent of the City of Calabasas. 
"Collection" means collection of municipal solid waste and its transportation to a disposal site, collection of recyclable materials and their transportation to a processing facility or market and collection of green waste and its transportation to a mulching or composting facility. 
"Commercial, industrial/institutional business owner" means any person, firm corporation or other enterprise or organization holding or occupying, alone or with others, commercial, industrial or institutional premises, whether or not it is the holder of the title or the owner of record of the commercial, industrial or institutional premises. 
"Commercial premises" means any property or premises occupied for or devoted to a use permitted in the commercial, institutional and public zones pursuant to the provisions of the Calabasas zoning ordinance, or whose occupant or owner holds a valid business license from the city. 
"Construction and demolition waste" includes but is not limited to waste building materials, asphalt, concrete, drywall, metals, roofing materials, soils, wood, packaging, and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavement, houses, commercial, industrial or institutional buildings and other properties or structures. 
"Container" means any wheeled cart, vessel, tank, receptacle, dumpster, bin, or box used or intended to be used for the purpose of holding municipal solid waste or recyclable materials for collection. 
"Container owner" means any person appearing to own or control a container. If there is no such person, then the owner of the property at or on which a container or unauthorized container is located. 
"Delivery" of municipal solid waste by a waste generator shall be deemed to occur when municipal solid waste is deposited in a receptacle or at a designated collection location pursuant to the city's Municipal Code, or is otherwise discarded. "Delivery" of recyclable materials by a waste generator shall be deemed to occur when recyclable materials are deposited in a receptacle or at a designated collection location that is designated for collection pursuant to the city's Municipal Code or is otherwise discarded. 
"Designated disposal location" means the place where the residential householder or commercial, industrial or institutional occupant shall place, and from where the permittee is to collect municipal solid waste and recyclable materials in containers designated for that purpose. 
"Disposal" means the complete operation of treating and/or disposing of municipal solid waste after the collection thereof. 
"Disposal charge" means the portion of the rates included to cover payment of landfill or transfer station tipping fees. 
"Disposal site" means the municipal solid waste facility or facilities designated by the city for the ultimate disposal (by the franchisee or permittee) of municipal solid waste collected by the franchisee or permittee. The disposal site may include, but is not limited to, a municipal solid waste landfill, a municipal solid waste transfer or processing station, or a combination thereof. 
"Electronic waste" means intact, discarded cathode ray tube materials including televisions, computers and laptop computers. 
"Enforcement costs" means the cost of enforcing the requirements of this chapter regarding unauthorized containers and includes, but is not limited to, court costs; attorneys' fees; and other costs and expenses associated with site inspections, investigations, obtaining warrants, preparing for and conducting hearings, removal, transportation, storage, handling, disposal, and destruction of any unauthorized container and its contents. 
"Enforcement officer" means any city official, agent or employee authorized to enforce this chapter. 
"Environmental laws" means all federal and state statutes and county and city ordinances concerning public health, safety and the environment including, by way of example and not limitation, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C. Section 9601 et seq.; the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et seq.; the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1351 et seq.; the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 29 U.S.C. Section 651 et seq.; the California Hazardous Waste Control Act, California Health and Safety Code Section 25100 et seq.; the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.; the Safe Drinking Water and Toxic Enforcement Act, California Health and Safety Code Section 25249.5 et seq.; as currently in force or as hereafter amended and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
"Franchisee" means a solid waste enterprise which has an agreement approved by the city council authorizing it to collect, transport, and remove municipal solid waste within and from the city. 
"Garbage" means all kitchen and table food waste and animal or vegetable waste that attends or results from the storage, preparation, cooking or handling of food stuffs. Garbage does not include market refuse or rendering waste. 
"Green waste" means non-contaminated material composed of organic matter or plant matter which is the result of seasonal variations or landscape and gardening activities. Green waste includes, without limitation, grass clippings, shrubbery, leaves, tree trimmings, branches, flowers, plant stalks, wood and other plant material. 
"Hazardous waste" means a waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may do either of the following: (1) cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; (2) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or otherwise managed. "Hazardous waste" includes all substances defined as hazardous waste, extremely hazardous waste or acutely hazardous waste in California Health and Safety Code Sections 25110.02, 25115 and 25117 or in future amendments to or recodifications of such statutes or identified and listed as hazardous waste by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et seq.). 
"Holiday" means New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Veteran's Day and Christmas Day. Holiday also means any other day designated as such in a contract between a permittee and the labor union serving as the exclusive representative of that permittee's employees provided the holiday is established or recognized by resolution of the city council. 
"Impound period" means the period commencing on the date the city, or its agents, take possession of an unauthorized container and ending thirty (30) days from that date. 
"Industrial premises" means any property occupied or used for any purpose (other than residential or commercial uses) authorized or permitted in the industrial zones under the provisions of the Calabasas zoning ordinance. 
"Institutional premises" means premises occupied by educational, health care, correctional, research and other similar facilities. 
"Manager" or "city manager" means the city manager of Calabasas or his/her designee of the city. 
"Manure" means the waste droppings from any animal not disposed of through sewers or on-site waste water systems. 
"Market refuse" means vegetable or animal waste resulting from the preparation of vegetables, fruit, or meat in markets or packing houses for public sale. 
"Materials recovery facility" means a facility operated to sort incoming municipal solid waste or commingled recyclable materials for the purpose of segregating certain types of recyclable materials, processing said recyclable materials to prepare them for market, and marketing the segregated and processed recyclable materials. 
"Medical waste" means any waste generated from any laboratory or medical facility which requires special handling or a specific permit for the collection and transportation of this waste category. 
"Miscellaneous debris" means any and all trash, rubbish, debris or other abandoned or discarded materials not otherwise defined as rubbish, garbage, market refuse, rendering waste, recyclable material or manure. 
"Multi-family premises" means any residential property in the city containing five or more dwelling units. 
"Municipal solid waste" means all discarded putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semi-solid and liquid wastes including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, construction and demolition wastes, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid or semi-solid wastes and other discarded substances or materials. 
Municipal solid waste does not include (1) hazardous waste, (2) low-level radioactive waste regulated under California Health and Safety Code Section 25800 et seq., (3) untreated medical waste which is regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management Act, California Health and Safety Code Section 25015 et seq., or (4) recyclable materials which have been segregated from waste material by the waste generator. 
"Officer" means the president, vice president, treasurer or other duly designated representative of a franchisee or permittee. 
"Owner" or "property owner" means the person or persons who owns, occupies or controls real property to which municipal solid waste collection services are provided. 
"Parcel of real property" means a parcel of real property as shown on the local secured tax rolls of the county of Los Angeles. 
"Permittee" means a municipal solid waste collector who has obtained a permit to collect transport and remove municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials within and from the City of Calabasas. 
"Person" means, without limitation, an individual, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever. 
"Premises" means any land or building in the city where municipal solid waste is generated or accumulated. 
"Public agency" means any governmental agency or department thereof, whether federal, state or local. 
"Recyclable materials" means materials which are capable of being recycled and which are segregated from waste material for collection and recycling, rather than collection and disposal. Recyclable materials includes, without limitation, glass, plastic or metal food or beverage containers (excluding ceramics and chemical containers); aluminum cans, foil, pie tins and similar items or bi-metal cans; PET plastic soda or water bottles or other bottles with the designated "PET" symbol; HDPE plastic milk and water bottles with the designated "HDPE" symbol; LDPE shrink wrap, plastic bags with the "LDPE" symbol; newspaper, cardboard, computer print out (excluding carbon paper); white ledger paper, junk mail, office paper and such additional materials as the city council may designate from time to time. 
"Recycle" and "recycling" mean the process of collecting, sorting, cleaning, treating and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become municipal solid waste and returning these materials to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials for new, reused or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards to be used in the marketplace. Recycling does not include transformation as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40201. 
"Recycling container" means a container provided to residential premises for use in collecting and moving recyclable materials to curbside for collection. Said container shall have a capacity of at least thirty-four (34) gallons and shall be marked with the city recycling logo. The type, color and design of the container provided shall be subject to approval by the city manager. "Recycling container" shall also refer to a container used by commercial, institutional and industrial premises for storing and collecting recyclable materials. 
"Refuse" includes garbage and rubbish. 
"Rendering waste" means dead animals, hides, fat or bones of animals, grease, meat scraps, and other similar materials being stored, collected or transported to a rendering plant for processing. 
"Residential householder" means any person owning or occupying residential premises, whether or not the owner, singly or with his or her family, within the city. 
"Residential owner" means the owner of any residential premises in the city. 
"Residential premises" means any residential property in the city, except multiple dwellings containing five or more dwelling units. 
"Rubbish" means, without limitation, the following items: waste and refuse capable of burning readily, including straw, packing materials, leather, rubber, clothing, bedding, books, rags and all similar articles which will burn by contact with flames or ordinary temperatures; and ashes, crockery, china, pottery, metal wire and other similar materials which are rejected by the owner or producer thereof. 
"Segregated from waste material" means (1) the placement of recyclable materials in separate containers by the waste generator, (2) the binding or bundling of recyclable materials separately from waste material by the waste generator, (3) the physical separation of recyclable materials from waste material by the waste generator. 
"Solid waste enterprise" means any individual, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated private organization, or private corporation regularly engaged in the business of providing municipal solid waste collection and disposal services. 
"Ton" means a short ton of two thousand (2,000) pounds avoirdupois. 
"Tonnage form" means the document designated by the city which is used to determine the net amount of municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials delivered to a disposal site or a processing facility. 
"Tonnage report" means a tonnage form or a copy of such form prepared by a permittee, or an officer or agent of the permittee. Tonnage reports shall also include necessary information to verify the report or supplied information. 
"Transformation" means the burning, combusting, pyrolisis or other type of incineration of municipal solid waste as described in Public Resources Code Section 40201. 
"Transportation" means the process of moving municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials through the city by means of a motor vehicle. 
"Unauthorized container" means any container which is deposited, placed, or left in violation of this chapter. 
"Unauthorized solid waste enterprise" means any solid waste enterprise without a valid permit or franchise or a permittee or franchisee acting outside the scope of its permit or franchise. 
"Waste generator" means the owner or occupant of premises which initially produce municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials. 
"Weight tickets/invoices" means receipts provided by a disposal site, a composting facility or a material recovery facility reflecting the net amount of municipal solid waste, green waste or recyclable materials delivered by a permittee. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998) 
(Ord. No. 2009-266, §§ 1, 2, 10-28-2009)  
8.16.040 - Permit requirements. 
No person shall collect and/or dispose of municipal solid waste or recyclable materials in the city without having first been issued a solid waste collection permit. Such permit shall be in addition to any business license or permit otherwise required by the City of Calabasas. No permit issued by any other local governmental agency authorizing collection of municipal solid waste or recyclable materials shall be valid in the city. persons performing municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials collection on January 1, 1999 may continue to operate only until the right to do so is terminated or revoked, or until the expiration of the notice provided to them in compliance with Public Resources Code Sections 49520 and 49521 or any extension of that time period approved by the city, and only if such persons have obtained all applicable licenses and permits from the city. All such permittees shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.050 - Permit application. 
Applications in a format specified by the city shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Name and home address of applicant. 
B.  Business address and addresses where all vehicles will be stored. 
C.  Form of organization such as proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, or corporation, and the names and home addresses of owners and officers and their percentage of ownership, if greater than five percent. 
D.  A description of each vehicle and other equipment that the applicant owns or has under its control, including the age and mechanical condition of each vehicle, a statement as to whether said vehicle is self-loading, leakproof, meets the requirements contained in Sections 8.16.340 and 8.16.350 of this chapter, the service in which each vehicle shall be placed and evidence that the applicant owns or has the right to the use of said vehicles. 
E.  A statement of applicant's experience and a list of other jurisdictions where applicant collects municipal solid waste and recyclable materials. 
F.  Any additional facts, which demonstrate that the applicant is able, at all times, to comply with city laws and to provide service in a safe and efficient manner and to render efficient service. 
G.  A copy of applicant's current financial statement. 
H.  A list of clients which the applicant will service in the city and a map of the applicant's service area. 
I.  The classification of property to be serviced by the applicant and the classification of municipal solid waste and recyclable materials to be collected by the applicant. 
J.  Proposed rates to be charged by applicant. 
K.  A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor, inclusive of traffic violations not constituting a felony. 
L.  Detailed information regarding the method by which the applicant will provide recycling services as required by this chapter, and a listing of all customers in city currently receiving recyclable material collection service from applicant. 
M.  Requested tipping receipts, weight tickets/invoices and supporting documentation. 
N.  A statement signed and dated by an authorized representative of the applicant stating that applicant has read and reviewed the requirements of this chapter and agrees to abide by all the requirements herein if issued a permit by the city. 
O.  Any other information requested by the city manager. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.060 - Permit fees. 
Each permittee shall pay a yearly fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.070 - Permit term. 
Any permit issued under this chapter shall be for a term of three years. All three-year permits issued on or after January 1, 2001 are subject to early termination by the city on or after December 31, 2003 which is the date that the five-year notice period given pursuant to Public Resources Code Sections 49520 and 49521 expires. Upon expiration of the five-year notice period on December 31, 2003, the city reserves the right to either continue to issue permits and allow existing permittees to continue to operate in the city, or to enter into one or more exclusive or non-exclusive franchise agreements for collection of municipal solid waste, recyclable materials and/or green waste in the city. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.075 - Permit extension. 
Valid permits issued under this chapter may be eligible for an extension of time based on criteria established by city council resolution. Criteria for permit extensions may include, but are not limited to the following: 
A.  Diversion performance; 
B.  Customer satisfaction; 
C.  Timely and accurate reporting; 
D.  Public education service; 
E  Coordination with street sweeping; 
F.  Clean air vehicle use. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004)  
8.16.080 - Transfer of permit. 
A permit issued under this chapter shall not be transferred, delegated, subcontracted or assigned. No permittee shall sell, assign, hypothecate, relinquish, surrender or transfer its interest in a permit to any person or allow another person or entity to use its permit in any act for which a permit is required without the written consent of the city council. The restriction includes the transfer of ownership or the majority of ownership or control of the permittee, or a transfer of a majority of the permittee's stock to another person or entity. The restriction includes the transfer of a permit by merger, acquisition or any other means which results in any moneys derived from collection operations in the city being received by any person or entity not listed as an owner in the permit application on file with the city, as submitted by a permittee pursuant to Section 8.16.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.090 - Denial of permit. 
After review of the permit application, the city manager may deny the issuance of a permit based on information disclosed in the permit application. Denial of a permit may be based on an incomplete application, failure to demonstrate qualifications or financial responsibility necessary to comply with the requirements of this chapter, failure to supply required reports, or previous violations of any provision of this chapter. Upon denial, the city manager shall provide the applicant written notification of the reasons therefor and shall include the effective date of such denial. Written notification of denial shall be delivered in person or by certified first class mail to the applicant. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.100 - Revocation of permit. 
After a hearing as provided for in this chapter, the city manager may revoke or suspend any permit if the permittee has violated a provision of this chapter or of the permit agreement or any other applicable law, ordinance or regulation of any public agency. It is unlawful for any permittee to operate under a permit which has been revoked or suspended. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.110 - Interim suspension. 
The city manager, without a hearing, may suspend a permit for not more than sixty (60) days, if the city manager finds that continued operation by the permittee will constitute a threat to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.120 - Notice of hearing. 
The city manager, or his or her agent, shall serve a notice of the hearing of revocation of permit on the permittee by first class mail not less than fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.130 - Notice of ruling. 
In the event of the revocation of a permit, the city manager shall notify the permittee in writing of the reasons therefor. Such notification may be made in person or by registered/certified mail. The notice of ruling shall include, without limitation, the effective date of any revocation of a permit to collect municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials in the city. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.140 - Appeals. 
A permittee may appeal the revocation or denial of a permit, provided written notice is received by the city clerk of Calabasas within fifteen (15) calendar days after notice by the city manager of revocation or denial or any notice of ruling from the city manager advising of the revocation or denial of a permit. Written notice sent to the city clerk requesting an appeal shall address specific reasons why an appeal should be granted and shall address the issues brought forth in the notice of ruling. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.150 - Council action. 
The city council may either affirm the action of the city manager, refer the matter back to the city manager for further consideration, or set the matter for hearing before itself. If the council sets the matter for hearing, and a hearing has been conducted, the city council may uphold the decision of the city manager to revoke, deny or suspend a permit, award a permit, refer the matter back to the city manager for further review or issue a conditional or probationary permit. If the council sets the matter for hearing, it shall base its action upon the standards delineated in Section 8.16.090 of this chapter. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to the applicant or permittee not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.160 - Customer notification. 
Upon revocation or denial of a permit by the city manager or the city council on appeal, the permittee shall cease operations in the city within the period of time determined by the city manger or city council on appeal but in no event shall the permittee operate for more than forty-five (45) days after notice of revocation or denial. 
The permittee shall provide each of its customers written notification by certified mail of termination of service within ten (10) days of revocation or denial of permit. Such notice shall have attached a listing of current permittees in the city. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.170 - Franchise requirement. 
The city council may authorize, by franchise, a solid waste enterprise to provide solid waste handling services for residential, commercial, industrial and institutional users or customers. In the sole discretion of the city council, the solid waste handling services may be authorized on an exclusive or non-exclusive basis, and with or without competitive bidding, and may relate to any class or type of solid waste within all or any part of the territory of the city. Except for permittees authorized as provided herein, no person shall collect and/or dispose of municipal solid waste or recyclable materials in the city without having first been awarded a solid waste collector franchise and having entered into a franchise agreement with the city. Such franchise may be in addition to any business license or permit otherwise required by the city. 
Except for the provisions relating to application for permits, all such franchisees shall comply with all of the requirements of this chapter unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.180 - Revocation of franchise. 
After a hearing as provided for in this part, the manager may revoke or suspend any franchise if the franchisee has violated a provision of this chapter or of the franchise agreement or any other applicable law, ordinance or regulation of any public agency. It is unlawful for any person to operate under a franchise which has been revoked or suspended. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.190 - Interim suspension. 
The city manager, without a hearing, may suspend a franchise for not more than sixty (60) days, if the city manager finds that continued operation by the franchisee will constitute a threat to the public health, safety or general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.200 - Notice of hearing of revocation of franchise. 
The city manager or his/her agent shall serve a notice of revocation of franchise on the franchisee by first class certified mail not less than fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.210 - Revocation. 
In the event of the revocation of a franchise, the city manager shall notify the franchisee within forty-eight (48) hours in writing of the reasons therefor. Such notification may be made in person or by registered/certified mail. The notice shall include, without limitation, the effective date of any revocation of franchise to collect municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.220 - Appeals. 
A person may appeal the revocation of a franchise provided written notice is received by the city clerk of the City of Calabasas within fifteen (15) calendar days after notice by the city manager of revocation or any notice of ruling from the manager advising the revocation of a franchise. Appeals requesting a hearing should address the reasons for the appeal. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.230 - Council action. 
The city council may either affirm the action of the city manager, refer the matter back to the city manager for further consideration, or set the matter for hearing before itself. If the council sets the matter for hearing, and a hearing has been conducted, the council may uphold the decision of the city manager to revoke, deny or suspend a permit, award a permit, refer the matter back to the city manager for further review or issue a conditional or probationary permit. If the council sets the matter for hearing, it shall base its action upon the standards delineated in Section 8.16.090 of this chapter. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to the franchisee not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.240 - Customer notification. 
Upon revocation or denial of a franchise by the city manager or city council on appeal, the franchisee or collector shall cease operations in the city within the time period determined by the city manager or council on appeal, but in no event shall the franchisee or collector operate for more than forty-five (45) days after notice of revocation or denial. 
The franchisee shall provide each of its customers written notification by certified mail of termination of service within ten (10) days of revocation or denial of franchise. Such notice shall have attached a list of all current permittees and franchisees in the city. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.250 - Permittee's liability insurance. 
Each permittee shall, at permittee's sole cost and expense, obtain and maintain in full force and effect each of the following minimum insurance requirements: 
A.  A comprehensive general liability policy with a minimum limit of not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage, providing at least all of the following minimum coverages, with any self-insured retention not exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence: 
1.  Premises operation; 
2.  Blanket contractual; and 
3.  Completed operations. 
B.  A comprehensive automobile liability policy with minimum limit of not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage, providing coverage for at least any and all leased, owned, hired or non-owned vehicles used by the permittee in performing services in or for the City of Calabasas, with any self-insured retention not exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). Any and all mobile equipment which is not covered under this comprehensive automobile policy shall have said coverage provided for under the comprehensive general liability policy. 
C.  Each of the following endorsements shall be made a part of the above required policies as stipulated below: 
1.  "The City of Calabasas, its employees, officers, agents and contractors are hereby added as additionally insured." 
2.  "This policy shall be considered primary insurance as respects any other valid and collectable insurance the City of Calabasas may possess, including any self-insured retention the City may have, and any other insurance the City does possess shall be considered excess insurance only." 
3.  "The insurance shall act for each insured, and additional insured, as though a separate policy had been written for each. This, however, will not act to increase the limit of liability of the insuring company." 
4.  "Thirty (30) days prior written notice shall be given to the City of Calabasas in the event of cancellation, reduction in coverage, or non-renewal of this policy for whatever reason. Such notice shall be sent to: City Manager, City of Calabasas, 26135 Mureau Road, Calabasas, CA 91302-3172." 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.260 - Worker's compensation and employer's liability. 
Each permittee shall, at permittee's sole cost and expense, obtain and maintain in full force and effect for the term a worker's compensation and employer's liability policy written in accordance with the laws of the state of California and providing coverage for any and all employees of permittee. This policy shall provide for: 
A.  Coverage for worker's compensation (Coverage A). 
B.  Coverage for one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) employer's liability. 
C.  An excess umbrella liability policy with a minimum of not less than three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) per occurrence. 
Prior to the issuance or renewal of a permit from the city, each permittee shall furnish the city certificates of each policy of insurance required herein in form and substance satisfactory to the city attorney. Such certificates shall show the type and amount of coverage, effective dates, and dates of expiration of policies, and shall have all required endorsements attached. Renewal certificates shall be furnished periodically to the city to demonstrate maintenance of the required coverages. 
Any insurance company providing insurance or any surety providing a bond required herein shall be an admitted insurer/surety in the state of California with a best rating of at least "A," Class VIII or larger. No change in these requirements may be made without the prior written approval of the city, which it is under no obligation to provide. 
If the permittee fails to maintain any insurance required herein, the city may immediately revoke permittee's permit and permittee shall immediately cease municipal solid waste and recycling collection operations within city. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.270 - Indemnification. 
A.  Indemnification by Permittee. 
Each permittee shall indemnify, defend with counsel approved by city and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees and agents (collectively, "indemnitees"), from and against any and all loss, liability, penalty, fine, forfeiture, claim, demand, action, proceeding or suit, of any and every kind and description, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, legislative or administrative in nature including, but not limited to, injury to and death of any person and damage to property or for contribution or indemnity claimed by third parties (collectively, the "claims"), arising out of or occasioned in any way by, directly or indirectly, (1) the negligence or willful misconduct of permittee, its officers, employees, agents, affiliates and/or subcontractors in performing services in city; (2) the failure of permittee, its officers, employees, agents, affiliates and/or subcontractors to comply in all respects with the provisions of Article V, Chapter 2 of the Calabasas Municipal Code, applicable laws (including, without limitation, the environmental laws) and regulations, and/or applicable permits and licenses; and/or (3) the acts of permittee, its officers, employees, agents, affiliates and/or subcontractors in performing services in city for which strict liability is imposed by law (including, without limitation, the environmental laws). The foregoing indemnity shall apply regardless of whether such loss, liability, penalty, forfeiture, claim, demand, action, proceeding, suit, injury, death or damage is also caused in part by the negligence of others, including that of any of the indemnitees; provided, however, that this indemnity does not extend to claims to the extent that they are caused solely by the active negligence of the city, its officers, employees or agents, or that they are caused by the intentional misconduct of or breach of contract by the city, its officers, employees or agents. 
Upon the occurrence of any claim, permittee, at permittee's sole cost and expense, shall defend the city, its officers, employees, and agents, provided, however, that in the event the named parties to any such claim (including any impleaded parties) include both the permittee and the city, and if the city has one or more legal defenses available to it which are in direct conflict with the best interests of the permittee and which therefore preclude the same counsel from representing the city and permittee jointly, then the city shall have the right to select separate counsel, with the consent of permittee which will not be withheld unreasonably, at the sole cost and expense of permittee to pursue such legal defenses and to otherwise participate in the defense of such action on behalf of the city to the extent that joint representation of the city and permittee is not permissible because of conflicts of interest between the city and permittee. 
B.  Hazardous Substances and CERCLA Indemnification. 
Permittee shall indemnify, defend with counsel approved by city, protect and hold harmless city, its officers, employees, agents, assigns, volunteers and any successor or successors to city's interest (collectively, "indemnitees") from and against all claims, actual damages (including but not limited to special and consequential damages), natural resources damages, punitive damages, injuries, costs, response remediation and removal costs, losses, demands, debts, liens, liabilities, causes of action, suits, legal or administrative proceedings, interest, fines, charges, penalties, and expenses (including but not limited to attorneys' and expert witness fees and costs incurred in connection with defending against any of the foregoing or in enforcing this indemnity) of any kind whatsoever paid (collectively, "claims"), incurred or suffered by, or asserted against, city or its officers, employees, agents, or permittee arising from or attributable to any pickup, repair, cleanup, or detoxification, or preparation and implementation of any removal, remedial, response, closure or other plan (regardless of whether or not undertaken due to governmental action) concerning any hazardous substances or hazardous wastes including the release of such substances or wastes at any place where permittee stores or disposes of municipal solid waste, provided that this indemnity does not extend to claims to the extent that they are caused solely by the negligence or willful misconduct by an indemnitee. The indemnity provided in this section shall apply to claims arising from acts or omissions of permittee. The foregoing indemnity is intended to operate as an agreement pursuant to Section 107(e) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, ("CERCLA"), 42 U.S.C. Section 9607(e) and California Health and Safety Code Section 25364, to insure, protect, hold harmless, and indemnify city from all liability. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.280 - Bonds. 
Prior to the issuance or renewal of the permit, permittees shall secure and deliver to the satisfaction of the city a performance or cash bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Said performance or cash bond shall serve as security for the faithful performance of all conditions and provisions of this chapter and shall be on terms acceptable to the city attorney. The bond shall remain in force during the life of the permit and all renewals thereof. 
The bond shall be in favor of the city and shall not extend to the right of recovery against the sureties by third persons. After any recovery against the bond by the city, the bond amount shall be restored to the required sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The bond may contain a provision giving the sureties the option to cancel the bond upon first giving notice in writing, not less than thirty (30) days before the effective date of the cancellation to the city manager; provided, however, such cancellation shall not impair the right of the city to reimbursement for the correction of conditions resulting from the violation of this chapter or any contract or resolution made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which violations occurred before the effective date of the cancellation of the bond, whether the work of correction was performed before or after such effective date. In the event of suspension, cancellation, or termination of the bond by the provider, the permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be immediately suspended until a new bond is provided, and the permittee shall be liable to the city for any and all damages suffered by the city arising out of such suspension, cancellation or termination. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.290 - Office for inquiries and complaints. 
Permittees shall maintain an office at a fixed place and shall maintain a telephone at the office listed in the current telephone directory in the name under which it conducts business in the city and shall have a knowledgeable representative of permittee available during office hours to communicate with the city and members of the public in person and by telephone between the hours of eight p.m. and five p.m. Monday through Friday, except for holidays. Permittees shall maintain a telephone system in operation at their office during business hours. Permittee shall arrange for its telephone number to be printed on all of permittees' bills and invoices. The telephone shall be on a toll-free exchange for all residents of the city. Permittee's telephone system may employ a voice mail system, however, callers must be able to reach a customer service representative in less than two minutes. Callers shall not be placed "on hold" or in the voice mail system for a period of time exceeding two minutes. 
Permittees shall be responsible for the prompt and courteous attention to, and prompt and reasonable resolution of, all customer complaints relevant to service and billing. Complaints shall be investigated within twenty-four (24) hours and appropriate action taken. Permittees shall record in a separate log, the form of which is approved by the city, all complaints, noting the name and address of the complainant, the date and nature of the complaint and the date and nature of resolution. The complaint log shall be available for inspection by the city during normal business hours. In addition, permittees shall submit, by the twentieth (20th) day of January, April, July and October, a copy of the complaint log for the preceding month. Compliance with the requirements of this section are conditions to any permit or franchise awarded by the City of Calabasas. 
A.  Authority of City. 
The city or the city's agent shall have the right, but not the duty, to inspect at any reasonable time each permittee's operations, equipment and performance of services to determine whether the permittee is performing in compliance with the laws of the state of California, city ordinances, and the laws and regulations of any other governmental agency. Permittees shall fully cooperate with the city in such inspections. 
B.  Quantity of Municipal Solid Waste. 
In the event of a dispute between a permittee and a customer as to the quantity of municipal solid waste that such customer has placed for collection, the city shall investigate and make a determination and such determination shall be binding on the permittee. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.300 - Permits, licenses, taxes and compliance with laws. 
Permittees shall obtain, and maintain any and all permits and licenses required by law from the appropriate city, state or federal governing agency or body. 
Permittees shall conform to and abide by all of the rules, regulations and ordinances of the city, and all laws of the state of California or the federal government, governing the collection, hauling and disposal of municipal solid waste and recyclable materials. 
Permittees shall conform to and abide by all the valid rules, regulations and ordinances of any governmental entity through which municipal solid waste may be hauled or in which municipal solid waste may be disposed of governing the collection, hauling and disposal of municipal solid waste. 
Permittees shall pay all federal, state and local taxes, including sales taxes, social security taxes, etc., which may be chargeable against the labor, material, equipment or other items necessary in the performance of municipal solid waste and recyclable materials collection in city. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.310 - Rates. 
A.  Rates to Be Charged. 
The city council may, by resolution, establish maximum rates to be charged to residential owners and householders and commercial, industrial and institutional business owners by permittees for providing municipal solid waste, green waste and recyclable materials collection services. The city council may, as part of the establishment of maximum rates to be charged, establish a variable or graduated rate for residential solid waste collection service such that waste generators generating smaller quantities of municipal solid waste and using smaller solid waste storage containers are charged less than those waste generators generating larger quantities of municipal solid waste and using larger solid waste storage containers. No permittee shall charge any rate or fee which is greater than the rate established by the city council, unless otherwise authorized in this chapter. 
B.  Notification. 
Prior to implementing a rate increase, permittees shall provide written notification to customers of the rate increase thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the rate increase. The written notice shall include the amount of the rate increase, the effective date of the rate increase, and the reason for the rate increase. The written notification shall be sent to customers by first class mail, with a copy sent to the city manager. Permittees shall provide the city with the modified rate schedule within forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the rate increase. 
C.  Fees for AB 939 Surcharge. 
The city council may, by resolution, establish a city surcharge, to cover the cost of implementing source reduction and recycling programs in order to comply with the act, to be charged to residential owners and householders and commercial, industrial and institutional business owners by permittees. 
D.  Fees Collected by Permittees on Behalf of City. 
City may impose certain fees as part of the rates established for municipal solid waste and recyclable materials collection service to fund recycling, source reduction, household hazardous waste or other similar programs. City may also find it necessary to impose fees as part of the rates established for municipal solid waste and recyclable materials collection service due to new or existing federal or state laws or regulations. If and when the rate schedule is modified to include such fees, each permittee shall collect said fees as part of the billing process and shall remit said fees to the city on a quarterly basis by the twentieth (20th) day of January, April, July, and October for the preceding quarter's fees. In the event of permit revocation, the balance due for the quarter during which revocation occurs shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the date of revocation. Each permittee shall submit a report to the city on the fifteenth (15th) day of each month describing the amount of such fees billed and collected during the preceding month. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.320 - Collection of charges. 
A.  Billing. 
The billing and collection of the rates, fees and charges authorized by the city council for municipal solid waste and recyclable materials collection, processing and disposal services shall be the responsibility of the permittee, and the city shall have no liability or responsibility therefor. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.330 - Records and reports. 
A.  Municipal Solid Waste Collection Operations. 
1.  Daily Records. 
Permittees shall compile, on a daily basis, records of all municipal solid waste collection operations covering those aspects of the operations, and in such detail, as the city may prescribe. Such records shall include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Quantities of municipal solid waste collected, by customer category (e.g., residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, multi-family); 
b.  Number and categories of accounts served by each route, with each route identified by route number on a map provided to the city; 
c.  Labor allocation information (e.g., amount of time spent in the city by service); 
d.  Production data (e.g., tons of municipal solid waste collected per route, per worker hour, per worker day); 
e.  Customer complaints; 
f.  General information, such as annual tons collected per residential household or per type of business; 
g.  Tons delivered to the disposal site(s), per day, per week, per month, per year; 
h.  Rates charged for collection of municipal solid waste from residential, commercial, industrial and institutional customers in city. 
Permittees shall also provide to the city similar information which the city may request in order to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the municipal solid waste collection and disposal program. Permittees shall submit a report, giving the information required by city, in the format and at such time as specified by city, and shall prepare such other expanded or detailed reports utilizing the information it is required to compile, which the city may require from time to time. 
2.  Quarterly Reports. 
At a minimum, each permittee shall report monthly on or before the twentieth (20th) day of January, April, July and October, the following information to the city: 
a.  Total tons of municipal solid waste collected in city and delivered to the disposal site by permittee during the preceding month and the disposal charge paid for all tons landfilled and corresponding disposal site weight slip information, including the weight slip number, total tons per weight slip, and weight slip issuance date. 
b.  The name, address, and telephone number and number of tons delivered for each municipal solid waste disposal site, composting facility and material recovery facility that received solid waste, green waste or recyclable materials collected in city by permittee during the preceding month. 
c.  A list of all equipment deliveries, a customer listing of all new account start-ups, and a customer listing of all cancelled/closed accounts. 
3.  Annual Reports. 
On or before January 30 of each year, each permittee shall furnish the city with an annual report on municipal solid waste collection operations which includes the following: 
a.  Total tons of municipal solid waste collected in city and delivered to the disposal site by permittee during the preceding year including the disposal charges paid for all tons landfilled and corresponding disposal site weight slip information, including the weight slip number, total tons per weight slip, and weight slip issuance date. 
b.  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of each disposal site, composting facility and material recovery facility that received municipal solid waste, green waste or recyclable materials collected in city by permittee, including the total tons of each material delivered to each listed facility. 
c.  A current customer service identification list which identifies the name and address of each residential, commercial, industrial and institutional customer receiving collection and/or recycling services from permittee, along with a detailed notation as to the level and type of service provided and the collection day(s) for each customer. 
d.  Current route maps of all residential, commercial, industrial and institutional routes of permittee for each day of the week that permittee operates in city. 
e.  A complete rate sheet describing and listing the rates charged for each and every type of residential, commercial, industrial and institutional solid waste collection and recyclable materials collection service offered or provided by permittee within city. 
B.  Recycling Operations. 
Each permittee shall file with the city written reports of permittee's recycling collection and processing operations including the following reports, in formats approved by the city. 
1.  Quarterly Reports. 
On or before the twentieth (20th) day of January, April, July and October, permittees shall submit a quarterly recycling report to include at least all of the following: 
a.  Summaries of tonnages of, and total value received for, all recyclable materials, by material type collected by permittee in the programs enumerated in Section 8.16.500 of this chapter including residential curbside recycling program, residential multi-family recycling program, commercial, industrial and institutional recycling program, city facility recycling program, holiday greenery recycling program, special event recycling program and green waste collection and recycling program including corresponding materials recovery facility weight slip information with weight slip number, total tons per weight slip, and weight slip issuance date. 
b.  Summaries of tonnages of all recyclable materials sold, by material for all the programs, listed by program and corresponding materials recovery facility weight slip information with weight slip number, total tons per weight slip, and weight slip issuance date. 
c.  Market prices for all recyclable materials collected in all programs. The weight receipts and sales receipts shall be available for inspection and copying by the city or city's agent upon request. 
d.  Resident participation rates, by route, in terms of weekly set out counts for the residential curbside recycling program and the residential green waste program (participation rates shall be calculated as prescribed by city). 
e.  A customer complaint log including a summary of complaints, missed pickups and recycling container and green waste container replacement, by route, an explanation of noteworthy experiences, and a summary of telephone calls received by category, including inquiring about the program missed pickups, and container replacement for all recycling programs listed in Section 8.16.500 of this chapter. 
f.  Presentations or contacts made during the prior quarter to homeowners associations or community groups. 
g.  Total number of residential, multi-family, commercial, industrial and institutional containers delivered broken down by municipal solid waste, recyclable materials and green waste. 
C.  Annual Recycling Reports. 
Within sixty (60) working days from the end of each calendar year, Each permittee shall submit an annual recycling status report to the city, which includes at least all of the following data for the preceding calendar year: 
1.  Summary of all revenues and tonnages recovered by material type and by program, including participation rates for all programs listed in Section 8.16.500 of this chapter. 
2.  Overall assessment of operational performance of the programs during the year. 
3.  Detailed data to allow analysis of collection and processing equipment handling capabilities. 
4.  Discussions of problems and noteworthy experiences in program operation. 
5.  Description of permittee's effort to add number 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 plastics to all recycling programs. 
6.  A schedule of rates and charges for the commercial, industrial and institutional recycling programs. Permittee shall provide periodic updates to the schedule of rates and charges upon request of the city. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.340 - Vehicle identification. 
No permittee may operate any vehicle for the collection of municipal solid waste or recyclable materials in the city unless the owner of the vehicle is a permittee as defined in this chapter. Each vehicle used by a permittee in the city shall have an identification number printed or painted in legible numbers not less than five inches in height on both sides of the vehicle. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.350 - Vehicle standards. 
Any vehicle utilized for the collection, transportation or disposal of municipal solid waste or recyclable materials in or from the city shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Each vehicle shall at all times be maintained and/or operated in such a manner to ensure that no municipal solid waste, recyclable materials, oil, grease, or other substances will blow, fall out, escape or leak out of the vehicle with the exceptions of vehicle emissions. 
B.  A broom and shovel shall be carried on each vehicle at all times. 
C.  Each vehicle shall comply, at all times, with all applicable statutes, laws or ordinances of any public agency. 
D.  Routine inspections by the California Highway Patrol will be required annually and certificates for said inspection shall be filed with the city manager. 
E.  All vehicles shall at all times be kept clean and sanitary, in good repair and well and uniformly painted to the satisfaction of the city manager. 
F.  Each vehicle shall be equipped with watertight bodies fitted with close-fitting metal covers. 
G.  The permittee's name or firm name and its telephone number shall be printed or painted in legible letters not less than five inches in height on both sides of all vehicles used in the city. 
H.  All equipment shall be maintained at all times in a manner to prevent unnecessary noise during its operation. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.360 - Amount of equipment. 
No person shall be awarded a franchise or issued a permit for the collection and transportation of municipal solid waste or recyclable materials unless the city manager determines that the person has sufficient equipment available to meet the dates and times of regularly scheduled pick-ups without interruption due to equipment failure. This requirement shall be maintained throughout the term of any franchise agreement given pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.370 - Operation of equipment. 
All permittees operating municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials collection and transportation equipment shall do so in compliance with all federal, state and local laws and/or ordinances. Collection vehicles shall not be operated in a manner which results in undue interferences with normal traffic flows or violation of any traffic laws, and loaded collection vehicles shall not be parked or left unattended on the public streets. No collection vehicle shall be parked on a public street or thoroughfare in the city. All collection vehicles shall comply with the vehicle code. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.380 - Compliance with vehicle standards. 
Any vehicle used in the collection or transportation of municipal solid waste or recyclable materials in the city, shall at all times be maintained in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 8.16.350 of this chapter. The use of a vehicle which fails to comply with each of the standards set forth in Section 8.16.350 of this chapter is prohibited. A permittee shall immediately remove any vehicle from collection service which fails, at any time, to conform to any of the standards recited in Section 8.16.350 of this chapter and shall not use that vehicle until it is repaired. Should the city manager give notification at any time to a permittee that any of the permittee's vehicles are not in compliance with the standards of this chapter, the vehicle(s) shall be immediately removed from service from the permittee. The vehicle shall not again be utilized in the city until it has been inspected and approved by the city manager. The permittee shall maintain its regular collection schedule regardless of the repair of any vehicle. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.390 - Mandatory service. 
A.  All municipal solid waste collected from residential, commercial, industrial and institutional premises for a fee, service charge or other consideration, shall be collected by a solid waste enterprise under the provisions of a franchise awarded by the city council or pursuant to a permit. 
B.  No person, firm, corporation, or solid waste enterprise, other than those referenced in subsection A shall negotiate or contract for, or undertake to receive, collect or transport municipal solid waste from within city for a fee, service charge or other consideration therefor, except as specifically provided herein. 
C.  Each residential property owner and householder in the city shall, at all times subscribe to and utilize the services of a franchisee or if none, a permittee and pay the fees approved by the city council or established by permittee(s) for the collection of municipal solid waste, recyclable materials, and green waste from such premises as shall be owned by said owner and shall, at all times comply with city policies and programs with regard to municipal solid waste recovery, reduction of municipal solid waste and recycling of municipal solid waste. Each business owner of a commercial, industrial, or institutional business in the city shall, at all times subscribe to and utilize the services of a franchisee or if none, a permittee and pay the fees approved by the city council for the collection of municipal solid waste and recyclable materials from such premises as shall be owned by said owner and shall, at all times comply with city policies and programs with regard to municipal solid waste recovery, reduction of municipal solid waste and recycling of municipal solid waste. Owners of multifamily residential complexes need not subscribe to green waste collection or recyclable materials collection services but must subscribe to municipal solid waste collection service. No person shall enter into an agreement for municipal solid waste, green waste or recyclable materials collection services with any person, firm or corporation which is not a franchisee or permittee, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. At such time as the rights of a permittee or franchisee to operate in the city are terminated, revoked or expired, residential property owners and commercial, industrial and institutional business owners shall cease utilizing the services of permittee or franchisee and shall utilize a permittee with a permit issued by the city or a franchisee with a valid franchise awarded by the city. 
D.  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a commercial, industrial or institutional business which has its own recycling or resource recovery program for recyclable materials and/or green waste generated by such business, and not utilizing a solid waste enterprise which provides collection services for a fee or service charge from continuing such recycling or resource recovery program, and the recyclable materials and/or green waste included in such program are exempted from the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  Any residential property owner or householder that does not generate green waste, as defined in this chapter, may apply to the city manager for an exemption from the requirement in this subsection for mandatory residential green waste collection services. A residential property owner or householder seeking such an exemption shall submit a written request for exemption which includes, without limitation, the following: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking the exemption. 
2.  In the case of a homeowner's association, a list of the addresses of residences included in the exemption request. 
3.  The quantity of green waste generated weekly at the residence. 
4.  The reason for the lack of green waste (if applicable) e.g., backyard composting, landscaper service handling green waste, etc. 
5.  Documentation showing the absence of green waste generation or green waste handling by another party (e.g., bill from landscape company, photograph of backyard composting system, photograph of xeriscape landscaping, etc.) 
In the case of a homeowners association where green waste landscape services may be contracted for by the association, the association may apply for an exemption on behalf of all of the residential property owners and householders represented by the association. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.400 - Frequency of collection. 
A.  Each permittee shall collect and deliver to a disposal site, composting facility and/or recycling processing facility all municipal solid waste, green waste and recyclable materials placed for collection in compliance with this chapter from each customer at least once during each calendar week. Routes of collection shall be arranged such that collection from any premises will be made routinely on the same day of the week. Collection of residential recyclable materials and green waste shall be completed on the same day as the collection of municipal solid waste. Each permittee shall possess a sufficient number of vehicles including spares to maintain the collection schedule at all times. Collection from commercial, industrial and institutional premises shall occur as often as necessary to avoid an accumulation of municipal solid waste in violation of this chapter. 
When a collection day falls on a holiday, permittees shall choose one of the following options and give two weeks prior notice thereof to the city and the local newspapers: 
1.  Collect on the holiday. 
2.  Collect one day prior to or one day after the holiday, providing regular collection is postponed by a maximum of one day for that week. 
B.  Each permittee providing residential collection shall offer municipal solid waste, green waste and recyclable collection in addition to the minimum one time per calendar week if requested by customer. Permittee may establish a fee to be charged to residents for the additional collection. 
C.  Collection of municipal solid waste, recyclables, and green waste materials shall be coordinated to the satisfaction of the city's solid waste representative so as to eliminate multiple hauling days within residential neighborhoods. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.410 - Hours of collection. 
A.  No collection of municipal solid waste, green waste or recyclable materials shall be made within the city between the hours of six p.m. and seven a.m. during Pacific Standard Time or six p.m. and six a.m. during Pacific Daylight Savings Time Monday through Saturday or at any time on Sunday. 
B.  No delivery or removal of wheeled carts, recycling containers or any other containers by a permittee may be made between the hours as stated in subsection A of this section. 
C.  The city manager may waive the requirements of this section when necessitated by conditions beyond the control of permittees. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.420 - Litter. 
Any permittee who releases, or permits or causes the release of any municipal solid waste, recyclable materials or green waste on public or private property in the city at any time shall immediately clean up, contain and collect and remove same. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.430 - Employees. 
Permittees shall furnish such competent and qualified drivers, mechanical, supervisory, clerical and other personnel as may be necessary to provide solid waste and recyclable materials collection in a safe and efficient manner and to serve the public in a courteous, helpful and impartial manner. 
All of permittee's employees, while collecting refuse, recyclable materials or green waste, shall be required to wear a uniform type of clothing approved by the city. Employees shall begin their shift with a uniform that is freshly cleaned and pressed. Each employee shall at all times carry a valid operator's license for the type of vehicle he or she is driving. Each employee shall, at all times he/she is on duty, carry employment identification which shall be presented to city staff, customers, security guards and law enforcement officers upon request. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.440 - Trespass. 
No person authorized to collect or transport municipal solid waste, recyclable materials or green waste shall enter on private property beyond the extent necessary to collect the municipal solid waste, recyclable materials and/or green waste, properly placed for collection. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.450 - Noise. 
A permittee shall so conduct its operations as to offer the least possible obstruction and inconvenience to the public traffic or disruption to the existing noise levels of the area within which collections are made. Noise emitting from any collection vehicle shall not exceed the limits provided in the city's noise ordinance. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.460 - Ownership. 
At such time as the municipal solid waste, green waste or recyclable materials are collected by a permittee, said materials or municipal solid waste are the property of the permittee; provided however, that permittees shall comply with the provisions of Section 8.16.500 of this chapter with regard to direction from the city as to where said municipal solid waste, green waste and recyclable materials are to be delivered for disposal or processing or composting. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.470 - Disposal. 
It shall be unlawful at any time for any person, including permittees, to burn any municipal solid waste, green waste or recyclable materials within the city. It shall be unlawful at any time for any person, including permittees, to bury or dump any municipal solid waste, recyclable materials or green waste within the city without first obtaining city approval to do so. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.480 - Transfer of loads on public streets. 
No person shall transfer municipal solid waste, green waste or recyclable materials from one collection vehicle to another on any public street or road unless such transfer is essential to the method of operation and is approved by the city manager, or is necessary owing to mechanical failure or accidental damage to a vehicle. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.490 - Source reduction and recycling. 
Every permittee shall at all times comply with city policies and programs regarding municipal solid waste recovery, source reduction and recycling, including the city's source reduction and recycling element. Such policies and programs include those provided in Section 8.16.500 of this chapter and those established by resolution of the city council. Compliance with such policies and programs shall be a condition of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.500 - Collection of municipal solid waste and recyclable materials. 
Holders of refuse collection permits shall comply with the following requirements for the provision of municipal solid waste collection and recyclable materials collection services within the city. Acceptance of a municipal solid waste collection permit from the City of Calabasas signifies a permittee's agreement to comply with the requirements of this section. 
A.  Collection of Municipal Solid Waste. 
Permittees shall collect, transport and dispose of municipal solid waste generated at residential, commercial, industrial and institutional premises located within and under the jurisdiction of the city. Permittees shall furnish all labor, supervision, equipment, materials, supplies and all other items necessary to perform municipal solid waste collection in a thorough, workmanlike and efficient manner to the reasonable satisfaction of the city, so that residents, businesses and institutions within the city are provided reliable, courteous and high quality municipal solid waste collection and recycling services at all times. Permittees shall coordinate collection of residential municipal solid waste, recyclable materials and green waste from residential premises to the satisfaction of the city's solid waste representative. 
Permittees shall provide one or more containers for storage of municipal solid waste to each residence permittee serves in the city. Residents shall be offered a choice of container sizes as set forth in a resolution of the city council. Permittees may offer additional sizes of residential municipal solid waste storage containers. The prices permittee charges for residential municipal solid waste collection shall be structured so as to encourage recycling by residents. Permittees shall charge a lower price for smaller municipal solid waste storage containers and a higher price for larger municipal solid waste storage containers. The prices charged by permittees shall not exceed those established by the city council pursuant to this chapter. Permittee shall make every effort to complete collection with two hours per residential premise. 
Permittee shall repair and provide replacement municipal solid waste containers to residents served by permittee that report lost, stolen, broken or defaced containers with seven days of customer's request. 
B.  Transportation and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste. 
Permittees shall transport and deliver all municipal solid waste collected within the city to the disposal site (which may include a transfer station or materials recovery facility) designated by the city. Municipal solid waste shall become the property of the operator of the disposal site (or other designee of the city as the city may determine from time to time) once it is delivered to the disposal site. 
Permittees shall maintain accurate records of the quantities of municipal solid waste delivered to each disposal site and shall cooperate with the city or its agents in any audits or investigations of such deliveries. Permittees shall cooperate with the operator of the disposal site with regard to operations therein, including by way of example, complying with directions from the operator to unload collection vehicles in designated areas, accommodating to maintenance operations and construction of new facilities, cooperating with the operator's hazardous waste exclusion program, and cooperating with the operator's tonnage tracking system. 
Unless and until the city designates in writing a different disposal site, or approves a written request by a permittee to change the disposal site, contractor shall continue to deliver all municipal solid waste to the Calabasas landfill. City shall have sole and absolute discretion to grant or deny contractor's written request for a change of disposal site. 
Unless and until the city has directed permittees to deliver the municipal solid waste collected to (1) a transfer station where recycling and sorting of the incoming municipal solid waste to recover recyclable materials will occur, or (2) a materials recovery facility where all or some portion of the municipal solid waste will be sorted to recover recyclable materials, permittees may salvage materials from the municipal solid waste they collect and shall be entitled to retain all revenues they receive from the sale of such recovered materials. Upon receiving direction from the city to deliver municipal solid waste to a transfer station, and/or to a materials recovery facility, permittees shall cease any such salvage efforts. 
C.  Residential Curbside Recycling (Up to Four Units). 
1.  Collection. 
Permittees shall provide a residential curbside recycling program to each residence where permittee provides municipal solid waste collection services. The curbside collection program shall include all of the features described herein. Permittees shall collect and remove all recyclable materials, which are segregated and placed in or adjacent to recycling containers at the curbside, from all single-family residences and all residential developments of four or fewer units located in the city where municipal solid waste collection service is individual can collection (as opposed to bin or dumpster collection). For those single-family residences and residential developments that are walled or gated communities with private streets, alternative recycling methods shall be offered to the homeowners' associations and to individual homeowners. Examples of recycling methods are curbside, walk-in or backyard, central location containers, or others that may be approved by the city. Recycling collection methods utilized within walled or gated communities shall comply with the CC&R's for each such community. If a permittee's activities in providing the residential curbside recycling program are in violation of the CC&R's for a gated community, permittee shall comply with the city's direction to comply with the applicable CC&R's. 
2.  Curbside Recyclable Materials. 
Recyclable materials collected shall include newspapers, glass, metal cans (aluminum and tin), plastic containers (numbers #1-#7), magazines, catalogs, junk mail, and cardboard. 
3.  Time of Collection. 
Permittees shall collect the recyclable materials once each week, regardless of weather conditions. Collection will be on the same day of the week as collection of municipal solid waste. Permittee shall make every effort to complete collection within two hours per residential premise. 
4.  Missed Pickups. 
In case of a missed pickup called in by a resident or the city, permittees shall collect the recyclable materials from such resident within twenty-four (24) hours. All calls relating to missed pickups shall be logged in by the permittee and such log shall be available for inspection by the city upon reasonable notice. 
5.  Recycling Containers. 
Permittees shall provide each single family residence, duplex and triplex and fourplex with a thirty-four (34) gallon recycling container. Permittees shall distribute said containers to each new residential customer. 
Permittees shall repair and provide replacement recycling containers to residents served by permittee that report lost, stolen, broken or defaced recycling containers within seven days of the customer's request. 
6.  Sale or Disposition of Recyclable Materials. 
Permittees shall process, segregate, prepare for market, transport and deliver the collected recyclable materials to a purchaser, a licensed, permitted or certified material recovery facility, or a person who will use the materials in a process or product and who will not landfill the recyclable materials. Permittees shall obtain a certificate of purchase or end use, establishing that the materials delivered have in fact been recycled. No recyclable materials collected shall be disposed of on land or through transformation without the prior written consent of the city. Said consent shall not be unreasonably withheld by city. 
7.  Public Education. 
a.  Accompanying the distribution of containers shall be a public education brochure, approved by the city, which describes the curbside recycling program, the days of collection, recyclable materials accepted, the requirements of the act and the need to conserve natural resources through recycling. 
b.  Permittee shall mail one public education brochure to all residents of single family homes, duplexes, triplexes, and fourplexes annually on or before April 1, thanking residents for participation in the curbside recycling program, listing the pounds and tons of recyclable materials recycled in the prior year, and urging residents to continue to participate in the curbside recycling program. Sixty (60) days prior to mailing the brochure, each permittee shall submit a draft of its brochure to city staff for review and comment. Upon receipt of approval of the brochure by city, permittee shall proceed to mail brochure to all residents served by permittee as described above at permittees sole expense. 
c.  Permittees shall mail two billing inserts to all residential premises annually promoting a subject matter to be approved by the city's solid waste representative. Sixty (60) days prior to mailing the insert, each permittee shall submit a draft to the city for review and comment. Upon receipt of approval of the insert by city, the permittees shall proceed to mail the insert to all residents served by permittee at the permittees sole expense. 
D.  Multi-Family Residential Recycling (Five Units and Above). 
1.  Collection. 
Permittees shall provide a multi-family residential recycling program to each multi-family complex where permittee provides municipal solid waste collection services. The multi-family recycling program shall include all of the features described herein. Permittees shall collect and remove all recyclable materials which are segregated and placed in, or adjacent to, multi-family complexes with five or more residential units located in the city and all such complexes with two or more units where municipal solid waste collection service is bin or dumpster collection. 
2.  Multi-Family Residential Recyclable Materials. 
Recyclable materials collected shall include newspaper, glass, metal and tin cans, plastic containers (numbers #1-#7), magazines, catalogs, junk mail, and cardboard. Permittees shall provide a report to the city each year on February 1 describing the status of permittee's efforts to add number 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 plastics to the multi-family residential recycling program. 
3.  Time of Collection. 
Permittees shall collect the recyclable materials on a regular basis, no less frequently than the time required to fill the bin or dumpster and at least weekly for crates or boxes. Permittee shall make every effort to complete collection within two hours per residential premise. 
4.  Requested Pickups. 
In the event permittees miss a normal pickup or the bin or dumpster fills prior to a normal pickup, permittees shall collect the recyclable materials from such complex within twenty-four (24) hours of notice by the city or property manager/owner/tenant. All calls relating to missed or additional pickups shall be logged in by permittees and such log shall be available for inspection by the city upon reasonable notice. 
5.  Recycling Containers. 
Permittees shall provide storage containers for recyclable materials to each multi-family complex containing five or more residential units. The type and number of storage container(s) selected for each complex shall suit the space, permit requirements, size and logistical requirements of the complex. Containers to be provided by permittees may include crates, plastic boxes, wheeled carts and bins. Recycling containers shall be a different color than municipal solid waste storage containers and shall be labeled "Recyclable Materials Only" and shall state the type of recyclable materials to be stored in the containers. Permittees shall consult with the owner/manager of each complex to determine the correct type of storage container to be provided and to agree upon the placement of the container(s) in a specified area(s) of the complex. The containers and bins will remain the property of the permittee, who is responsible for maintaining them in proper condition. 
6.  Sale or Disposition of Recyclable Materials. 
Permittees shall process, segregate, prepare for market, transport and deliver the collected recyclable materials to a purchaser, a licensed, permitted or certified material recovery facility, or a person who will use the materials in a process or product and who will not landfill the recyclable materials. Permittees shall obtain a certificate of purchase or end use, establishing that the materials delivered have in fact been recycled. No recyclable materials collected shall be disposed of on land or through transformation without the prior written consent of the city. Said consent shall not be unreasonably withheld by city. 
7.  Public Education. 
a.  At such time a recycling container is distributed, each permittee shall mail an informational brochure describing the recycling program, listing in detail all types of recyclable materials that will be collected and how they are to be prepared, days of collection and other pertinent information. 
b.  Said brochure shall be submitted to city for approval twenty (20) days after the renewal of permit. Each permittee shall submit a draft of its brochure to city staff for review and comment. Upon receipt of approval of the brochure by city, permittee shall proceed to mail brochure to all multi-family customers served by the permittee as described above at the permittees sole expense. 
c.  Permittees shall mail two billing inserts to all commercial, industrial, and institutional premises annually promoting a subject matter to be approved by the city's solid waste representative. Sixty (60) days prior to mailing the insert, each permittee shall submit a draft to the city for review and comment. Upon receipt of approval of the insert by city, the permittees shall proceed to mail the insert to all multi-family residents served by permittee at the permittees sole expense. 
E.  Commercial, Industrial and Institutional Recycling. 
1.  Collection. 
Permittees shall provide a recycling program to each commercial business, industrial business and institution where permittee provides municipal solid waste collection services. The commercial, industrial and institutional recycling programs shall include all of the features described herein. Permittees shall collect and remove designated recyclable materials, which are segregated and placed in separate bins, from all businesses located in the city which elect to participate in permittee's recycling program. 
2.  Recyclable Materials. 
Permittees shall offer commercial, industrial and institutional recycling programs that include the following recyclable materials: newspaper, glass, metal and tin cans, plastic containers (numbers #1- #7), magazines, catalogs, junk mail, and cardboard. Permittee and the customer may mutually agree to add other materials to the recycling program. 
3.  Time of Collection. 
Permittees shall collect the recyclable materials on a regular basis, no less frequently than the time required to fill the bin or dumpster and at least weekly for crates or boxes. 
Permittees shall collect the recyclable materials regardless of weather conditions. 
4.  Missed Pickups. 
In case of a missed pickup or full bin or dumpster called in by a business, industry or institution, permittees shall collect the recyclable materials from such business, industry, institution within twenty-four (24) hours. All calls relating to missed or extra pickups shall be logged in by permittees and such log shall be available for inspection by the city upon reasonable notice. 
5.  Recycling Containers. 
Permittees shall provide suitable sized bins to store recyclable materials generated at commercial premises. At permittee's option, permittee shall provide either a commingled bin for all recyclable materials, or separate bins for fiber and for commingled glass, cans and plastics. At permittee's option, permittee may provide separate bins for each type of material (e.g., glass, plastic, metals). For small businesses permittees may provide one or more wheeled carts or one or more stacking crates for storage of recyclable materials. Permittees shall paint the bins, crates or wheeled carts for storage of recyclable materials a different color than the municipal solid waste bins and shall clearly label the bins, crates and carts that they are for storage of "Recyclable Materials Only" with the type of material listed on the bin, crate or cart. Bin, crate and cart color, placement and signage shall be subject to customer approval. Permittee shall, upon customer request, provide suitable storage containers for recyclable materials inside commercial, industrial and institutional facilities. Said containers may include plastic or metal boxes, cartons, cans or other aesthetically pleasing containers that meet with customer approval and conform to the city Fire Code. 
6.  Sale or Disposition of recyclable materials 
Permittees shall process, segregate, prepare for market, transport and deliver the collected recyclable materials to a purchaser, a licensed, permitted or certified material recovery facility, or a person who will use the materials in a process or product and who will not landfill the recyclable materials. Permittees shall obtain a certificate of purchase or end use, establishing that the materials delivered have in fact been recycled. No recyclable materials collected shall be disposed of on land or through transformation without the prior written consent of the city. Such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld by the city. 
7.  Fee to Be Charged. 
Permittees may establish a fee to be charged to businesses for the recycling programs. The fee to be charged must be less that the fee charged by permittee for collection of municipal solid waste from a similar sized container. For example, permittee must charge less for providing a three cubic yard bin for collection of cardboard and for emptying the bin and recycling the cardboard, than permittee would charge for providing a three cubic yard bin for municipal solid waste and for collection and disposing of the municipal solid waste. Permittee shall submit to the city a schedule of rates and charges for commercial, industrial, institutional and multi-family recycling programs annually on a date specified by the city and shall provide periodic updates to the schedule of rates and charges at the request of the city. 
8.  Public Education. 
a.  At such time a recycling container is distributed, each permittee shall mail an informational brochure describing the recycling program, listing in detail all types of recyclable materials that will be collected and how they are to be prepared, days of collection and other pertinent information. 
b.  Said brochure shall be submitted to city for approval twenty (20) days after the renewal of permit. Each permittee shall submit a draft of its brochure to city staff for review and comment. Upon receipt of approval of the brochure by city, permittee shall proceed to mail brochure to all commercial, industrial and institutional customers served by the permittee as described above at the permittees sole expense. 
c.  Permittees shall mail two billing inserts to all commercial, industrial, and institutional premises annually promoting a subject matter to be approved by the city's solid waste representative. Sixty (60) days prior to mailing the insert, each permittee shall submit a draft to the city for review and comment. Upon receipt of approval of the insert by city, the permittees shall proceed to mail the insert to all commercial, industrial, and institutional customers served by permittee at the permittees sole expense. 
F.  City Facility Recycling Program. 
1.  Collection. 
At the request of the city, permittees shall collect and remove all recyclable materials which are segregated and placed in, or adjacent to, recycling storage containers at all city facilities listed herein. 
2.  City Recyclable Materials. 
Recyclable materials to be collected by permittees from city facilities include glass, corrugated cardboard, metal and tin cans, plastic containers (numbers #1-#7), newspaper, and mixed office paper (including white paper, computer paper, magazines, junk mail, file folders and "post it" notes). 
3.  Time of Collection. 
Permittees shall collect the recyclable materials placed in a designated location for periodic collection regardless of weather conditions. Collections shall be made with sufficient frequency that recyclable materials do not overflow the storage containers. 
4.  Missed Pickups. 
In case of a missed pickup or full container reported by city, permittees shall collect the recyclable materials from the city facility within twenty-four (24) hours. All calls relating to missed or extra pickups shall be logged in by permittees and such log shall be available for inspection by city upon reasonable notice. 
5.  Recycling Storage Containers. 
Permittees shall provide suitable sized bins to store recyclable materials generated at city facilities. Separate bins shall be provided for fiber and for commingled glass, cans and plastics. At permittees' option, permittees may provide separate bins for each type of material (e.g., glass, plastic, metals). Permittees shall paint the bins for storage of recyclable materials a different color than the refuse bins and shall clearly label the bins that they are for storage of "Recyclable Materials Only" with the type of material listed on the bin. Bin color, placement and signage shall be subject to city approval. Permittees shall, upon city request, provide suitable storage containers for recyclable materials inside city facilities. Said containers may include plastic or metal boxes, cartons, cans or other aesthetically pleasing containers that meet with city approval and conform to the Fire Code. 
G.  Residential Green Waste Collection and Recycling Program. 
1.  Green Waste Program. 
All permittees that provide municipal solid waste collection service to one or more residences in city shall provide an automated or semi-automated green waste collection and recycling program as described herein. Automated or semi-automated green waste collection services shall be provided to all single family, duplex, triplex and fourplex residences in city from which permittee collects municipal solid waste. Permittee shall provide each residence with one or more ninety-six (96) gallon wheeled carts for green waste storage. Permittees shall provide all labor and equipment required to conduct the automated or semi-automated green waste collection and recycling program. Permittees may collect all green waste at curbside unless backyard or side yard service is requested by a resident. In the event backyard or side yard service is requested, permittees may charge an appropriate additional charge for the additional service. Permittee shall make every effort to complete collection within two hours per residential premises. 
2.  Public Education Program. 
a.  Accompanying the distribution of containers shall be a public education brochure, approved by city, which describes the curbside green waste program, the days of collection, materials accepted, the requirements of the act and the need to conserve natural resources through recycling. 
b.  Permittee shall mail one public education brochure to all residents of single family homes, duplexes, triplexes, and fourplexes annually on or before April 1, thanking residents for participation in the curbside recycling program, listing the pounds and tons of recyclable materials recycled in the prior year, and urging residents to continue to participate in the curbside recycling program. Sixty (60) days prior to mailing the brochure, each permittee shall submit a draft of its brochure to city staff for review and comment. Upon receipt of approval of the brochure by city, permittee shall proceed to mail brochure to all residents served by permittee as described above at the permittees sole expense. 
3.  Replacement of Lost, Damaged or Stolen Carts. 
Permittees shall provide residents who report damaged wheeled carts with a replacement cart within seventy-two (72) hours of resident's request. Permittees shall also provide wheeled carts to all new residents that move into city or change residences within city that subscribe to municipal solid waste collection service from permittees. Permittees shall maintain complete and accurate records of all wheeled carts delivered to new residents and to residents reporting lost, stolen or damaged carts and shall submit a report to city by the tenth (10th) day of each quarter, beginning in March 1999, listing the number of carts so provided. 
4.  Automated or Semi-Automated Collection Vehicles. 
Permittees shall utilize either automated refuse collection vehicles fitted with a mechanical "arm" or semi-automated collection vehicles fitted with a "tipper." Said vehicles shall be suitable in size and design to perform automated or semi-automated green waste collection services. Permittees shall operate said trucks in a safe and efficient manner so as to minimize the blowing or spilling of green waste during the collection process. If green waste is spilled or blown by the wind, permittees shall make all reasonable efforts to clean up and collect all spilled and blown green waste. 
5.  Recycling of Green Waste. 
All green waste collected by permittees shall be delivered to a facility for recycling, mulching, composting or use as alternative daily cover (as defined in state regulations). If it becomes known that the green waste processing facility utilized by one or more permittees is not recycling, mulching or composting the green waste collected in city, or is out of compliance with local, state or federal operating permits, laws or regulations, or is processing and/or using green waste in such a way that the green waste collected from within city will not count as municipal solid waste diverted for purposes of AB 939, and any other applicable state or federal law, city reserves the right to direct permittees to deliver the green waste to another processing facility. 
H.  Collection of Holiday Greenery. 
1.  Curbside Collection. 
Permittees shall collect Christmas trees and other holiday greenery on regular municipal solid waste collection days during the period immediately following December 25 for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) collection days. The specific dates for the program shall be as specified annually by the city. Permittees shall instruct residents to remove tinsel, lights and ornaments. Flocked trees shall be collected and handled by permittees as municipal solid waste. Greenery must be placed at regular refuse collection points (curbside or back or side yard) by seven a.m. on refuse collection day. The greenery collected by permittees shall be mulched, chipped or composted and recycled or reused. On or before November 1 each year, permittees shall notify city in writing of the recycling or composting or mulching facility where the holiday greenery will be delivered for composting, mulching, chipping and recycling or reuse. City reserves the right to direct permittees to use another composting, mulching or chipping facility in the event it becomes known that the green waste processing facility proposed or utilized by permittees is not recycling, mulching or composting the green waste collected in city, or is out of compliance with local, state or federal operating permits, laws or regulations, or is processing and/or using green waste in such a way that the green waste collected from within city will not count as municipal solid waste diverted for purposes of AB 939, and any other applicable state or federal law. 
At the request of city, permittees shall provide weekly collection of holiday greenery from multi-family residential complexes where the complex owners and management so request and where space is available for storage of holiday greenery. 
2.  Publicity. 
Permittees shall prepare a flyer, brochure or postcard informing residents of the holiday greenery collection and instructing residents concerning preparation of Christmas trees for set out. Permittees shall obtain city approval of the flyer, brochure or postcard and shall direct mail same to all residents in city on or before December 15 of each year. Permittees shall also provide copies of a flyer containing similar information, approved by city, at up to five Christmas tree stands or stores selling Christmas trees within city. Permittees shall make a courteous request to retailers that the flyers be given to residents and businesses purchasing Christmas trees. 
3.  Reporting. 
Permittees shall list the pounds/tons of holiday greenery collected at curbside in their regular quarterly report on recycling programs submitted to the city. Said report shall also include a copy of the weight ticket(s) from the recycling, mulching or wood chipping operation where the holiday greenery was recycled or reused. 
I.  Special Event Recycling Programs. 
1.  Recycling Program. 
Periodically the city may require, or special event coordinators or sponsors may desire, to implement a recycling program to divert municipal solid waste generated at special events from the landfill. Special events may include concerts, building dedications, conferences, trade shows, conventions, cultural events and the like. At the request of city, permittees shall assist the special event coordinator(s) in designing and implementing a recycling program for their special event. Reimbursement to permittees shall be agreed upon by city and the permit applicant prior to permittees commencing work on design and implementation of said special event recycling program. 
J.  Public Education for Household Hazardous Waste Program. 
1.  Household Hazardous Waste Collection Events. 
Permittees shall publicize Calabasas household hazardous waste collection events at least once per year through one of the following methods: (1) notices on customer's bill or an insert stuffed in envelope with bill; (2) press releases and public service announcements; (3) submitting an article for inclusion in city's newsletter; and (4) distribution of informational flyers to the general public at appropriate events and through the mail. The method of publicity shall be selected by each permittee and approved by city. 
2.  Calabasas "ABOP" Disposal Centers. 
Permittees shall publicize each public disposal center for antifreeze, batteries, motor oil and latex/water-based paint in the Calabasas area one time per year through one of the following methods: (1) insert stuffed in envelope with customer's bill; (2) press releases and public service announcements; (3) submitting an article for inclusion in the city's newsletter; (4) distribution of informational flyers to the general public at appropriate events and through the mail. The method of publicity shall be selected by each permittee and approved by city. 
K.  Electronic Waste Recycling Collection. 
Permittees shall collect, transport and recycle electronic waste generated at residential, commercial, industrial and institutional premises located within and under the jurisdiction of the city. Permittees shall furnish all labor, supervision, equipment, materials, supplies and all other items necessary to perform electronic waste collection in a thorough, workmanlike and efficient manner to the reasonable satisfaction of the city, so that residents, businesses and institutions within the city are provided reliable, courteous and high quality collection and recycling services at all times. 
1.  Sale or Disposition of Recyclable Materials 
Permittees shall process, segregate, prepare for market, transport and deliver the collected electronic waste to a purchaser, a licensed, permitted or certified material recovery facility, or a person who will use the materials in a process or product and who will not landfill the electronic waste. Permittees shall obtain a certificate of purchase or end use, establishing that the materials delivered have in fact been recycled. No electronic waste collected shall be disposed of on land or through transformation without the prior written consent of the city. Such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld by the city. 
2.  Fees to Be Charged. 
Permittees may establish a fee to be charged for the collection of electronic waste. The prices charged by permittee shall not exceed those established by the city council pursuant to this chapter. 
L.  Advisory Obligations of Permittees. 
Permittees shall provide, at no cost, technical assistance and supportive services to the city, and to residential, commercial, industrial and institutional premises occupied by waste generators and potential waste generators or their agents by providing the following services upon request: 
1.  General consulting services on integrated waste management issues and concerns. Examples are, but not by way of limitation, preparing a position paper on a municipal solid waste issue, providing a legal opinion or policy recommendation on a focused concern or reviewing and commenting on proposed legislation or state regulations and their impact on Calabasas. 
2.  Technical assistance services, such as the review of site plans, detailed drawings of enclosures for municipal solid waste containers and estimated volume and characterization of waste expected to be generated on a case-by-case basis, as may be required by the Municipal Code or conditions of approval for issuance of a development plan or building permit. Field trips to review subject property may be required to fulfill permittees' obligations. 
3.  Attendance of qualified, knowledgeable employees at meetings of the city council, city planning commission, city staff, the environmental standards commission, the AB 939 local task force, etc. Such attendance shall be coordinated between city and permittees. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.510 - Inspection by city. 
The city or the city's agent shall have the right, to observe and inspect all of the permittee's operations involved in providing services within city. The city may enter permittee's facilities, speak to any of permittee's employees and receive a response to any inquiries directed to such employees, and review and make copies of (at city's expense) all of permittee's operational records related to services provided in city. If city so requests, permittee shall make specified personnel available to accompany city employees on inspections. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.520 - AB 939 requirements. 
Permittees shall, at city request and at permittee's sole cost and expense: 
A.  Assist city in responding to inquiries from the board; 
B.  Assist city in preparing for, and participating in, the board's biannual and biennial reviews of the city's source reduction and recycling element pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 41825; 
C.  Assist city in applying for an extension under Public Resources Code Section 41820, if so directed by city; and 
D.  Assist city in any hearing conducted by the board, which may culminate in issuance of a compliance order, held under Public Resources Code Section 41825. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.530 - Collection from city facilities and city cleanup. 
A.  Regular Disposal Service. 
At city request permittees shall provide collection services, at no charge to the city, for refuse containers on all city-owned property and at those locations designated by the city at which city-sponsored events are held. The collections shall be made at a frequency acceptable to the city. 
The locations at which such collections are to be made include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  City hall and city corporation yard; 
2.  All city operated parks; 
3.  The tennis and swim center; 
4.  All city bus stops; and 
5.  As additional city facilities are developed, acquired or expanded, collection services may be requested by city and shall be provided by permittees at no charge to the city. 
B.  Annual City Cleanups. 
At the request of city, permittees shall provide annual city-wide cleanup events wherein residents (non-commercial) place out by appointment, or take to central collection points for collection, unlimited quantities of non-hazardous waste including tree and yard trimmings, bulky items, cleanout items, etc. Permittees shall cooperate with city in establishing dates and times for said cleanup events. 
C.  Disaster Debris Cleanup. 
At the request of the city, each permittee (with input from city's representative) shall provide city with information to be used in the event of a natural disaster such as an earthquake, flood, mudslide, fire, or other natural disaster. The information to be submitted to city is as follows: 
1.  Describe a plan for radio, cellular telephone, ham radio, and other methods of communication for use immediately after the disaster to coordinate the cleanup. 
2.  List key permittee contact persons, telephone numbers, and other information necessary for communications after a disaster. 
3.  Provide maps showing proposed sites for stockpiling disaster debris that cannot immediately be transported to a landfill or to a material recovery facility. 
4.  Provide a list of a minimum of three vendors that would be available to receive and recycle disaster debris in the event of an earthquake or other natural disaster. 
5.  Describe a plan to recycle the most material possible listing different types of materials and methods of recycling. 
In the event of a natural disaster, permittees shall cooperate with city staff, city and county emergency preparedness personnel, local law enforcement personnel, and federal and state emergency personnel in the cleanup of disaster debris. Permittees shall provide to city any and all records of permittee's disaster debris cleanup operations including costs, person hours worked, location of disaster debris, debris recycling efforts, and any other information requested by city. 
D.  Special Cleanups. 
Permittees shall provide roll-off bin service and operational assistance free of charge, excluding disposal fees, when the city participates in a regional cleanup (such as the streambed cleanup), in response to illegal dumping, or for large special events. Such assistance shall include up to ten (10) roll off trips annually and may be part of a single cleanup or special event or multiple cleanup or special events. Additional roll off trips may be requested by city and a cost for such additional work shall be negotiated between city and selected permittee(s). 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.540 - Air quality—Alternative fuel vehicles. 
The city has a long-term goal of reducing automobile and truck emissions to the extent feasible with commercially available technology. Permittees shall monitor developments in pollution control technology and shall implement the use of alternative fuel vehicles if and when the cost effectiveness and technical viability of such vehicles occurs. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.550 - Cooperation with subsequent providers. 
At the expiration of a permit term, or in the event of permit revocation, or in the event of award of one or more franchises by city, each permittee, at its own expense, shall cooperate fully with the city to ensure an orderly transition to any and all new service providers. Such cooperation shall include, but not be limited to, providing route maps, route lists, customer account lists and other similar information. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.560 - Mailing lists. 
Each permittee shall, upon city request, provide to city copies (electronically and hard copy) of its current mailing lists for all residential, commercial, industrial and institutional customers and accounts within city within ten (10) days of such request by city. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.570 - Care of containers. 
No person shall throw containers or recycling containers from any vehicle to the ground, or in any other way break or damage or roughly handle such containers. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.580 - Unauthorized use of containers. 
No person other than the permittee that provides collection services at the premises, or the owner or employee of the owner of the container, or the person upon whose premises such container is located, or a city employee, shall remove any material from a municipal solid waste or recyclable container. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.590 - Tampering with containers. 
No person other than the owner or occupant of the premises where a container is located, or the permittee who provides collection services at the premises where the container is located, or a city employee on city business, shall tamper with, or remove any container or other equipment used for the storage of municipal solid waste or recyclable materials. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.600 - Containers for garbage, market refuse and rendering waste. 
Any container to be placed for collection containing garbage, market refuse or rendering waste shall have a tightly fitting cover. Said cover shall be used at all times. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.610 - Unauthorized setting out of containers. 
No person occupying, using or in charge of any premises shall set out or cause to be set out for collection during any week any municipal solid waste or recyclable materials not originating on the premises. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.620 - Containers at residential premises. 
Permittees shall furnish all containers needed for municipal solid waste generated at residential premises. The number of containers furnished to individual residential waste generators shall be those determined to best meet the needs of the waste generator and shall be sufficient to contain, with the lid closed, all municipal solid waste generated between collections. Permittees shall offer a selection of solid waste container sizes to residential property owners and householders as set forth in a resolution of the city council. All containers used at any residential premise must meet applicable safety standards as outlined by the consumer product safety commission. 
In the event a residential property owner or householder has generated municipal solid waste not susceptible to placement in a wheeled cart, or an excess quantity of municipal solid waste that will not fit in the normal storage container, said residential property owner or householder shall contact the permittee and request special solid waste collection service for the extra solid waste. Said solid waste may be placed for collection at the same place and time as the wheeled cart if it is securely tied in bundles not heavier than is permitted by CAL-OSHA, not more than four feet in length, nor more than eighteen (18) inches in diameter. Wooden boxes, crates, pallets, or cardboard boxes are to be broken down and stacked neatly at the residence's municipal solid waste collection point. No cardboard box or paper bag may be used as a container for municipal solid waste. 
Permittees may charge a special fee, over and above the standard monthly charge, for the collection of additional municipal solid waste generated by a residential property owner or householder. The city council may establish a maximum rate to be charged for collection of such excess residential municipal solid waste. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.630 - Accumulation of municipal solid waste prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, managing or having the control of any premises or vacant lot or any person occupying a dwelling within the city to permit the accumulation of municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials to become or remain offensive, unsightly, or unsafe to the public health and safety or hazardous from fire, or to deposit, keep or accumulate, or permit or cause any municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials to be deposited, kept, or accumulated upon any property, lot or parcel of land, or any public or private place, street, lane, alley or driveway, except as provided in this chapter. No person occupying, owning or in control of any premises shall permit municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials to accumulate, or to blow about in a manner which creates an unsightly appearance, safety or a health hazard. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of their municipal solid waste into containers at locations other than those that may be located upon their property which they own, lease, rent, or at their own place of business. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.640 - Placement of containers at residential premises. 
In the case of residential premises, wheeled carts, recycling containers and bundles shall be stored in the garage, side yard, or rear yard prior to the time designated for collection. On the appropriate day, the wheeled carts, recycling containers and bundles shall be placed for collection on the curb in front of the premises or on the curb at the side of the premises where the premises are adjacent to more than one street as close to the curb line or edge of roadway as practicable. When the premises are adjacent to a paved alley of sufficient width to allow safe passage of collection vehicles, the wheeled carts, recycling containers and bundles may, upon approval of the manager, be placed within two feet of the rear of the property line of the premises and must be readily accessible for collection from the alley. Permittees and the homeowner may agree, for an additional fee, or the manager may require under unique circumstances, for collection to be made from another location on the premises. 
Permittees shall return all wheeled carts and recycling containers in an upright position to the approximate location where found by permittee and without any unnecessary noise or wear and tear or damage to said receptacles. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.650 - Residential municipal solid waste containers and recycling containers—Time of placement. 
No residential householder shall place or permit to be placed any municipal solid waste, recyclable material, recycling container, wheeled cart or municipal solid waste container at the place of collection at the residential premises before five-thirty p.m. of the day preceding the scheduled collection. No wheeled cart or recycling container may be left at the place of collection after eight p.m. on the day of collection. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.660 - Containers—Commercial and industrial. 
Permittees shall provide commercial, industrial and institutional customers with municipal solid waste storage containers that are metal and leak proof. Bins (1 through 6 cubic yards capacity) furnished by permittees shall be constructed with plastic lids that are in good repair and capable of being closed, with all hinges attached and operable. All containers used at commercial, industrial and institutional premises must meet applicable safety standards as outlined by the consumer product safety commission. Permittees shall provide locking bins upon customer request. Containers shall be painted and repainted as required to maintain the attractive appearance of the community. All municipal solid waste storage containers, bins and roll off boxes shall have permittee's name or firm name and telephone number painted in a contrasting color to the container color, in legible letters and numerals no less than one inch in height. Containers that have been painted or marked with graffiti shall be repainted or removed from the premises by permittees within twenty-four (24) hours of notification by the customer or city. At the same time as such containers are removed, they shall be replaced by like-sized containers without evidence of graffiti at no charge to the customer. Permittees shall clean and maintain all containers in a safe and sanitary condition and whenever the city determines that cleaning is required to abate a health concern or nuisance condition. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.670 - Exclusion of owners of residential property. 
A.  No provision of this chapter shall prevent owners of residential property from collecting, transporting and disposing of occasional loads of municipal solid waste generated in or on their property, or from composting green waste and food waste, or from selling or disposing of recyclable materials generated there; provided, however, that no such owner shall employ or engage any unauthorized solid waste enterprise. There is hereby established a rebuttable presumption that an owner of residential property employs an unauthorized hauler whenever he uses a container of over ninety-six-gallons to collect, transport, or dispose of occasional loads of municipal solid waste generated in or on his property. An owner may rebut this presumption by providing the city with written evidence (e.g., sales receipt) that he or she owns the container. 
B.  No provision of this chapter shall prevent residential householders or groups or associations of householders from contracting for hauling, disposal, and/or composting of lawn clippings, branches, leaves and similar material generated by gardening or landscaping services which are transported by a gardening, landscaping or composting company performing such service as an incidental part of such service and not as a solid waste enterprise. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998) 
(Ord. No. 2009-266, § 3, 10-28-2009)  
8.16.680 - Commercial industrial and institutional exclusion. 
A.  Source Separated Recyclable Materials. 
1.  No provision of this chapter shall prevent a commercial, industrial or institutional business owner from selling or donating any source separated recyclable materials, including without limitation, any saleable scrap, discard, reject, by-product, ferrous or non-ferrous metal, plastic, glass, wood, fiber, worn-out or defective part, pallet, packaging material, paper or similar item generated in, on or by a commercial, industrial or institutional premises or business. Provided, however, that no such materials are transported to a landfill or transfer station (as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40200) for disposition. Source separated recyclable materials within the meaning of this section shall mean recyclable materials separated on the commercial, industrial or institution premises from municipal solid waste for the purpose of donation or sale. 
2.  No provision of this chapter shall prevent a recycle, junk dealer, non-profit organization or other enterprise engaged in the business of accepting, buying or marketing recyclable materials in the stream of commerce from accepting free of charge or buying recyclable materials including, without limitation, materials mentioned in this subsection A provided such materials are not deposited in a landfill or at a transfer station (as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40200); nor shall any provisions of this chapter prevent such recycler, junk dealer, non-profit organization or enterprise who accepts or buys such materials from removing and transporting such materials to a destination for processing and/or marketing in the stream of commerce. No such recycler, junk dealer, non-profit organization or enterprise shall accept, buy or transport such material without prior authorization from the city, whether in the form of a permit or a franchise agreement. 
B.  Renovation, Rebuilding, Repairs. 
No provisions of this chapter shall prevent a commercial, industrial or institutional business owner from arranging for any used, worn, spent, defective, or other part of equipment used in such commercial, industrial or institutional business and requiring renovation, rebuilding, recharging, regeneration, reuse or repair, to be picked up, renovated, rebuilt, recharged, regenerated or otherwise restored and repaired and either returned to such commercial, industrial or institutional business owner or donated or sold to a person, business, organization for use; nor shall any provision of this chapter prevent any person engaged in the business of renovating, rebuilding, recharging, regenerating, or otherwise restoring, repairing or reusing such part or equipment from transporting same from a commercial, industrial, or institutional business or to another person, business or organization for use. No provision of this chapter shall prevent the removal, transporting or disposing of any part or equipment replaced as part of a repair or equipment service contract. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.690 - General exclusions. 
No provisions of this chapter shall prevent the collection or disposal of solid waste by other than permittees or franchisees in the following instances: 
A.  Municipal solid waste which is collected by city employees from city property and rights of way; 
B.  Debris caused by an earthquake or other disaster when assistance of other persons is deemed necessary by the city; 
C.  Materials which are not municipal solid waste (e.g., untreated medical waste); 
D.  Municipal solid waste generated by governmental entities, which may, by law, make independent arrangements for collection and disposal of municipal solid waste. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.695 - Unauthorized container and collections prohibited. 
A.  No solid waste enterprise, other than a permittee or franchisee acting within the scope of a permit or franchise, shall deposit, place, or leave any container on any private or public property within the city. Except as authorized by this chapter, no owner or property owner shall allow the placement of, or maintain, an unauthorized container on his, her or its property. 
B.  Violators of subsection A. of this section incur criminal and civil liability even if they voluntarily remove an unauthorized container from the city before the issuance of a notice of violation or within the period requested in a notice of violation served under this section. 
C.  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38771, the city council hereby declares a violation of subsection A. of this section to be a public nuisance. 
D.  Any container deposited, placed, or left in violation of this section, and its contents, may be removed, impounded, disposed of, or destroyed in the manner set forth herein. 
E.  1.  Notwithstanding any other nuisance abatement procedures in this Code, if an enforcement officer identifies a violation of subsection A. of this section, he or she may issue a notice of violation to a container owner and, if applicable, to an owner of property requiring the removal of the unauthorized container from the city within twenty-four (24) hours of the service of notice. 
2.  A notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The location of the unauthorized container; 
b.  A brief description of the violation and a reference to this section; 
c.  The time and date of discovery of the violation; 
d.  The time and date of the posting of the notice; 
e.  The expiration date and time of the twenty-four-hour removal period; 
f.  A statement that if the unauthorized container is not removed by the expiration of the twenty-four-hour voluntary removal period, the city may remove the unauthorized container to a city designated impound facility for the duration of the impound period. This statement shall include the address and telephone number of that facility; 
g.  A statement that any impounded container along with its contents will be deemed abandoned unless, before the expiration of the impound period, the container owner provides proof of ownership of the container, retrieves it from the impound facility at his, her or its expense and pays the enforcement costs; 
h.  A statement that any container and its contents, if not retrieved before the expiration of the impound period, will be disposed of or destroyed without regard to actual or salvage value; 
i.  The time by and manner in which a container owner or owner may contest the notice; 
j.  A statement that no person shall deposit any municipal solid waste in an unauthorized container; and, 
k.  Any other information that the city manager deems necessary or appropriate. 
3.  The city shall serve the notice of violation as follows: 
a.  Container owner. 
i.  Posted Notice. If an unauthorized container is located entirely on public property, the city shall serve the container owner alone by posting a copy of the notice of violation on the unauthorized container. If an unauthorized container is located entirely or partly on private property, an enforcement officer shall serve the container owner by posting a copy of the notice of violation on that portion of the container located on public property and shall also serve the property owner in the manner set forth in subsection E.3.b. of this section. If an unauthorized container is exclusively on private property, an enforcement officer may post a copy of the notice of violation on that container if consent to inspect it was obtained from a property owner. If the city cannot obtain this consent, a notice of violation may also be posted on an unauthorized container upon execution of an inspection warrant. A notice of violation shall be deemed served on the date and time it is posted on a container. 
ii.  Mailed Notice. Notwithstanding subsection E.3.a.i. of this section, the city may serve a notice of violation on a container owner by first class mail when a container is entirely located on private property; provided, an enforcement officer can identify the container owner from adjoining public or private property. A mailed notice of violation shall be served when mailed. 
b.  Property owner. If a container is located entirely or partly on private property, an enforcement officer may request the owner's consent to inspect the container. If an enforcement officer cannot obtain this consent, the city shall obtain an appropriate warrant to enter the property and inspect the container. Upon confirming a violation of this section, an enforcement officer shall serve the property owner with a copy of the notice of violation by personal delivery or by mail to the property owner at the address shown on the Los Angeles County Assessor's last equalized assessment roll. Notice shall be deemed served when mailed. 
4.  The twenty-four hour voluntary removal period starts when the notice of violation is served in the manner authorized in subsection E.3. of this section. Failure of the container owner or property to receive a notice shall not toll or extend that period, or invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this section. 
F.  If an unauthorized container poses an immediate threat to the public health, welfare, or safety, an enforcement officer may impound it without the notice otherwise required by this section. The enforcement officer shall attempt to provide notice of the removal and impoundment to the container owner and the property owner if their identity and address is actually known to the city. A notice of violation issued under this subsection shall contain all applicable information required under subsection E. of this section other than a time and date by which to remove the unauthorized container. 
G.  Upon notice and expiration of the time set forth in a notice of violation, an enforcement officer may impound unauthorized container, unless the container owner or owner timely appeals pursuant to paragraph J. of this section. 
H.  1.  If an unauthorized container is located entirely or partly on private property, an enforcement officer shall seek the consent of the property owner prior to entering the property or impounding the container. If the enforcement officer cannot secure this consent, he or she shall obtain an appropriate warrant. The city's preparation and procurement of a warrant shall not toll the impound period. 
2.  No delay by the city in impounding an unauthorized container shall alter the duties of the container owner or property owner pursuant to a notice of violation, or otherwise under this section or other applicable law. 
I.  Whether the city impounds an unauthorized container pursuant to subsections F. or G. of this section, the container owner and the property owner shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the enforcement costs to the city with respect to that unauthorized container. 
J.  1.  Any container owner or property owner may submit a written appeal of a notice of violation to the city clerk within twenty-four (24) hours of the service of the notice. The appeal shall state its grounds and be accompanied by any filing fee established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely request for an appeal and a filing fee constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal and the city may impound an unauthorized container for the duration of the impound period. If an unauthorized container is located entirely or partly on private property, the city may impound it only as set forth in paragraph H. of this section. 
2.  The city may not release an impounded container until the container owner pays the enforcement costs and provides reasonable proof that the person seeking release of the container is the container owner or an authorized agent of the container owner. The container owner shall pay the enforcement costs by cashier's check or money order. If no such payment and proof of ownership is received by the city, the city may dispose of, or destroy, the unauthorized container and its contents without regard to their actual or salvage value after the latest of (i) the expiration of the impound period; (ii) ten (10) days after service of the written decision of the city manager pursuant to paragraph K. of this section; or (iii) expiration of any stay or other judicial order issued upon judicial review of the city manager's denial of an appeal. Notwithstanding the disposal and destruction of an unauthorized container and its contents, violators of this section remain jointly and severally liable for the city's enforcement costs, which sums constitute a debt that may be collected in any manner allowed by law. 
K.  Within ten (10) days of the filing of an appeal, the city manager shall conduct a hearing on the appeal. Appeal hearings shall be informal and formal rules of evidence and procedure shall not apply. Within ten (10) days after conclusion of the hearing, the city manager shall provide a written decision to the appellant by first class mail. The decision of the city manager shall be a final decision of the city but shall be subject to judicial review as provided in California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.5. 
L.  If the city manager grants an appeal, the container shall not be removed or impounded unless later found in violation of this section. If the city manager denies the appeal the city shall only release the unauthorized container pursuant to subsection J.2. of this section. 
M.  No person shall deposit any municipal solid waste within any container on which a notice has been posted pursuant to paragraph E. of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-266, § 4, 10-28-2009)  
8.16.700 - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm partnership or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.710 - Civil remedies available. 
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. 
(Ord. 2004-192 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 98-134 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.16.720 - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies specified in this chapter shall be cumulative and the city may resort to any other remedy available at law or in equity; and resorting to any one remedy shall not cause an election precluding the use of any other remedy with respect to a violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-266, § 5, 10-28-2009)  
Chapter 8.17 - REGULATE THE USE OF PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAGS AND RECYCLABLE PAPER BAGS AND PROMOTE THE USE OF REUSABLE BAGS 
Sections: 
 
8.17.010 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this chapter: 
A.  "Customer" means any person purchasing goods from a store. 
B.  "Operator" means the person in control of, or having the responsibility for, the operation of a store, which may include, but is not limited to, the owner of the store. 
C.  "Person" means any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other organization or group however organized. 
D.  "Plastic carryout bag" means any bag made predominantly of plastic derived from either petroleum or a biologically-based source, such as corn or other plant sources, which is provided to a customer at the point of sale. "Plastic carryout bag" includes compostable and biodegradable bags but does not include reusable bags, produce bags, or product bags. 
E.  "Postconsumer recycled material" means a material that would otherwise be destined for solid waste disposal, having completed its intended end use and product life cycle. "Postconsumer recycled material" does not include materials and by-products generated from, and commonly reused within, an original manufacturing and fabrication process. 
F.  "Produce bag" or "product bag" means any bag without handles used exclusively to carry produce, meats, or other food items to the point of sale inside a store or to prevent such food items from coming into direct contact with other purchased items. 
G.  "Recyclable" means material that can be sorted, cleansed, and reconstituted using available recycling collection programs for the purpose of using the altered form in the manufacture of a new product. "Recycling" does not include burning, incinerating, converting, or otherwise thermally destroying solid waste. 
H.  "Recyclable paper carryout bag" means a paper bag that meets all of the following requirements: (1) contains no old growth fiber, (2) is one hundred (100) percent recyclable overall and contains a minimum of forty (40%) percent postconsumer recycled material; (3) is capable of composting, consistent with the timeline and specifications of the American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standard D6400; (4) is accepted for recycling in curbside programs in the city or the county of Los Angeles; (5) has printed on the bag the name of the manufacturer, the location (country) where the bag was manufactured, and the percentage of postconsumer recycled material used; and (6) displays the word "Recyclable" in a highly visible manner on the outside of the bag. 
I.  "Reusable bag" means a bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and meets all of the following requirements: (1) has a minimum lifetime of one hundred twenty-five (125) uses, which for purposes of this subsection, means the capability of carrying a minimum of twenty-two (22) pounds one hundred twenty-five (125) times over a distance of at least one hundred seventy-five (175) feet; (2) has a minimum volume of fifteen (15) liters; (3) is machine washable or is made from a material that can be cleaned or disinfected; (4) does not contain lead, cadmium, or any other heavy metal in toxic amounts, as defined by applicable state and federal standards and regulations for packaging or reusable bags; (5) has printed on the bag, or on a tag that is permanently affixed to the bag, the name of the manufacturer, the location (country) where the bag was manufactured, a statement that the bag does not contain lead, cadmium, or any other heavy metal in toxic amounts, and the percentage of postconsumer recycled material used, if any; and (6) if made of plastic, is a minimum of at least 2.25 mils thick. 
J.  "Store" means any of the following retail establishments located in the city: 
(1)  A full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual sales of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00), or more, that sells a line of dry grocery, canned goods, or nonfood items and some perishable items; 
(2)  A store of at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of retail space that generates sales or use tax pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law (Part 1.5 (commencing with Section 7200) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code) and that has a pharmacy licensed pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code; or 
(3)  A drug store, pharmacy, supermarket, grocery store, convenience food store, food mart, or other entity engaged in the retail sale of a limited line of goods that includes milk, bread, soda, and snack foods, including those stores with a Type 20 or 21 license issued by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
(Ord. No. 2011-282, § 2, 2-9-2011)  
8.17.020 - Plastic carryout bags prohibited. 
A.  No store shall provide to any customer a plastic carryout bag. 
B.  This prohibition applies to bags provided for the purpose of carrying away goods from the point of sale and does not apply to produce bags or product bags. 
(Ord. No. 2011-282, § 2, 2-9-2011)  
8.17.030 - Permitted bags. 
All stores shall provide or make available to a customer only recyclable paper carryout bags or reusable bags for the purpose of carrying away goods or other materials from the point of sale, subject to the terms of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter prohibits customers from using bags of any type that they bring to the store themselves or from carrying away goods that are not placed in a bag, in lieu of using bags provided by the store. 
(Ord. No. 2011-282, § 2, 2-9-2011)  
8.17.040 - Regulation of recyclable paper carryout bags. 
A.  Any store that provides a recyclable paper carryout bag to a customer must charge the customer 10 cents ($0.10) for each bag provided, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
B.  No store shall rebate or otherwise reimburse a customer any portion of the 10-cent ($0.10) charge required in Subsection A, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
C.  All stores must indicate on the customer receipt the number of recyclable paper carryout bags provided and the total amount charged for the bags. 
D.  All monies collected by a store under this chapter will be retained by the store and may be used only for any of the following purposes: (1) costs associated with complying with the requirements of this chapter, (2) actual costs of providing recyclable paper carryout bags, or (3) costs associated with a store's educational materials or education campaign encouraging the use of reusable bags, if any. 
E.  All stores must report to the city manager, or his/her designee, on a quarterly basis, the total number of recyclable paper carryout bags provided, the total amount of monies collected for providing recyclable paper carryout bags, and a summary of any efforts a store has undertaken to promote the use of reusable bags by customers in the prior quarter. Such reporting must be done on a form prescribed by the city manager, and must be signed by a responsible agent or officer of the store confirming that the information provided on the form is accurate and complete. For the periods from January 1 through March 31, April 1 through June 30, July 1 through September 30, and October 1 through December 31, all quarterly reporting must be submitted no later than thirty (30) days after the end of each quarter. 
F.  If the reporting required in Subsection E is not timely submitted by a store, such store shall be subject to the fines set forth in Section 8.17.080. 
(Ord. No. 2011-282, § 2, 2-9-2011)  
8.17.050 - Use of reusable bags. 
A.  All stores must provide reusable bags to customers, either for sale or at no charge. 
B.  Each store is strongly encouraged to educate its staff to promote reusable bags and to post signs encouraging customers to use reusable bags. 
(Ord. No. 2011-282, § 2, 2-9-2011)  
8.17.060 - Exempt customers. 
All stores must provide at the point of sale, free of charge, either reusable bags or recyclable paper carryout bags or both, at the store's option, to any customer participating either in the California Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 123275) of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 106 of the Health and Safety Code or in the Supplemental Food Program pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 15500) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-282, § 2, 2-9-2011)  
8.17.070 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall become operative on July 1, 2011, for stores defined in Subsections J(1) and J(2) of Section 8.17.010. For stores defined in Subsection J(3) of Section 8.17.010, this chapter shall become operative on January 1, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 2011-282, § 2, 2-9-2011)  
8.17.080 - Enforcement and violation-penalty. 
A.  The city manager has primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter. The city manager, or his/her designee, is authorized to promulgate regulations and to take any and all other actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter, including, but not limited to, investigating violations, issuing fines and entering the premises of any store during business hours. 
B.  If the city manager, or his/her designee, determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, he/she will issue a written warning notice to the operator of a store that a violation has occurred and the potential penalties that will apply for future violations. 
C.  Any store that violates or fails to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter after a written warning notice has been issued for that violation shall be guilty of an infraction. 
D.  If a store has subsequent violations of this chapter that are similar in kind to the violation addressed in a written warning notice, the following penalties will be imposed and shall be payable by the operator of the store: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation after the written warning notice is given; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second violation after the written warning notice is given; or 
(3)  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third and any subsequent violations after the written warning notice is given. 
E.  A fine shall be imposed for each day a violation occurs or is allowed to continue. 
F.  All fines collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used to assist with the implementation and enforcement of the requirements of this chapter. 
G.  Any store operator who receives a written warning notice or fine may request an administrative review of the accuracy of the determination or the propriety of any fine issued, by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of a written warning notice or fine, as applicable. The notice of appeal must include all facts supporting the appeal and any statements and evidence, including copies of all written documentation and a list of any witnesses that the appellant wishes to be considered in connection with the appeal. The appeal will be heard by a hearing officer designated by the city manager. The hearing officer will conduct a hearing concerning the appeal within forty-five (45) days from the date that the notice of appeal is filed, or on a later date if agreed upon by the appellant and the city, and will give the appellant ten (10) days' prior written notice of the date of the hearing. The hearing officer may sustain, rescind, or modify the written warning notice or fine, as applicable, by written decision. The hearing officer will have the power to waive any portion of the fine in a manner consistent with the decision. The decision of the hearing officer is final and effective on the date of service of the written decision, is not subject to further administrative review, and constitutes the final administrative decision. 
(Ord. No. 2011-282, § 2, 2-9-2011)  
8.17.090 - No conflict with federal or state law. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to create any requirement, power or duty that is in conflict with any federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-282, § 2, 2-9-2011)  
Chapter 8.18 - FOOD PACKAGING MATERIALS 
Sections: 
 
8.18.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter are to: 
A.  Decrease the use of products which do not biodegrade and cannot be recycled in order to promote public health, reduce solid waste and litter, and protect wildlife and the environment. 
B.  Eliminate, to the maximum extent practicable, the use of packaging at retail food establishments within the city that is nonbiodegradable, nonrecyclable, and which cannot be reused and thereby to protect the air, land and waters of the city and its environs. 
C.  Reduce litter by encouraging the use of materials that can be reused, recycled or, if littered, can biodegrade into non-harmful component materials. Many packaging materials currently in use are highly durable, buoyant, lightweight and nonbiodegradable and are therefore easily windblown and become litter even when placed in trashcans. Once in the environment, plastic wastes persist and detract from the appearance of the area longer than many other types of litter and due to their essentially indefinite presence in the environment, cause continuing environmental harm as by polluting waterways and the oceans. 
(Ord. 2007-233 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.18.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below, unless otherwise expressly stated herein or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
"Biodegradable" means capable of being broken down by microorganisms commonly found in the environment into non-harmful substances or elements within a reasonably short time after disposal. 
"City facilities" means any building, structure or vehicles owned or operated by the City of Calabasas. 
"Customer" means any person obtaining food or beverages from a restaurant or retail food establishment. 
"Degradable" means material which: (1) substantially reduces to its constituent substances through processes initiated by natural organisms whose end products are substantially, but not necessarily entirely, carbon dioxide and water; and (2) is designed to degrade when exposed to ultraviolet light. Degradable materials do not include synthetic or plastic-coated cellulose-based items comprising more than five percent of the total volume of an item. 
"Disposable food service container" means disposable products used in the restaurant and food service industry to serve or transport prepared, ready-to-consume food or beverages and includes, but is not limited to, plates, cups, bowls, trays and hinged or lidded containers. "Disposable food service container" excludes straws, cup lids, utensils, and packaging for unprepared food. 
"Environmentally acceptable packaging" means packaging every element of which is "returnable," "recyclable," "biodegradable" or "degradable," and does not contain expanded polystyrene (EPS). 
"Expanded polystyrene (EPS)" means and includes blown polystyrene and expanded and extruded foams (sometimes incorrectly called Styrofoam &reg; , a Dow Chemical Company trademarked form of polystyrene foam insulation) which are thermoplastic petrochemical materials utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, foam molding, and extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene). EPS is generally used to make cups, bowls, plates, trays, clamshell containers, meat trays and egg cartons. 
"Food provider" means any establishment which provides prepared food for public consumption on or off its premises and includes without limitation any store, shop, sales outlet, restaurant, grocery store, supermarket, delicatessen, caterer, catering truck or vehicle; and any organization, group or individual which regularly provides food in conjunction with services. 
"Food vendor" means any restaurant or retail food establishment. 
"Nonprofit food provider" means an organization which provides food and which is recognized by the Internal Revenue Services as a nonprofit organization. 
"Packaging" means and includes all food-related wrappings, bags, boxes, coverings and containers, and shall further include cups, glasses and similar containers for drinking out of or for holding liquids, and plates and serving trays but shall specifically exclude plastic knives, forks, spoons, lids, straws and materials used to package unprepared food. 
"Polystyrene" means expanded polystyrene which is a thermoplastic petrochemical material utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, form molding, and extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene). 
"Polystyrene foam" means a thermoplastic petrochemical material utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, foam molding, and extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene). 
"Prepared food" means food or beverages, which are served, packaged, cooked, chopped, sliced, mixed, brewed, frozen, squeezed or otherwise prepared for consumption by a retail consumer on the premises of a retail food establishment. Prepared food does not include raw, butchered meats, fish and/or poultry. 
"Recyclable" means any material including glass, cans, cardboard, paper, mixed paper, or other items which can be recycled, salvaged, composted, processed, or marketed by any means other than land-filling or burning, whether as fuel or otherwise, so that they are returned to use by society. Recyclable materials include any plastic which can be feasibly recycled by a municipal recycling program in the state of California and presently comprise those plastics with the recycling symbols #1 through #5 including polyethylene terephthalate (PET or PETE), high density polyethylene (HDPE), low density polyethylene (LDPE), and polypropylene (PP). For purposes of this chapter, recyclable materials do not include polystyrene, polystyrene foam or expanded polystyrene (which bear recycling symbol #6). 
"Recycling program" means a process whereby used materials are separated from the solid waste stream and utilized as a raw material in the manufacture of a new product or for new economic use. 
"Restaurant" means any establishment that sells "prepared food," including itinerant restaurants, pushcarts and vehicular food vendors. 
"Retail food establishment" means any sales outlet, store, shop, vehicle or other place of business which sells or conveys foods or beverages to ultimate consumers, which foods or beverages are contained, wrapped, or held in or on food packaging. "Retail food establishment" shall include, but not be limited to, any place where food is prepared, mixed, cooked, baked, smoked, preserved, bottled, packaged, handled, stored, manufactured, and sold or offered for sale, including, but not limited to restaurant; drive-in; coffee shop; cafeteria; short-order cafe; delicatessen; luncheonette; grill; sandwich shop; soda fountain; bed and breakfast inn; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge; nightclub; roadside stand; take-out prepared food place; industrial feeding establishment; catering kitchen; mobile food preparation unit; commissary; grocery store; public food market; produce stand; food stand; or any other place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on the premises or elsewhere; and any other establishment or operation where food is processed, prepared, served or provided to or for consumers for charge. 
"Returnable" means food or beverage containers or packages, such as, but not limited to, soft drink bottles and milk containers, that are capable of being returned to the distributor such as, but not limited to, dairies and soft drink bottlers, for reuse as the same food or beverage container at least once, and for which a redemption fee is charged by the retailer. 
"Supplier" means anyone selling, or otherwise supplying food packaging to, a restaurant or retail food establishment. 
"Unprepared food" means any food which is not prepared food. 
(Ord. 2007-233 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.18.030 - Prohibition. 
A.  Commencing March 31, 2008, no person owning, operating or managing a retail food establishment or a nonprofit food provider located in the city shall do or allow another to do any of the following, except as provided in Section 8.18.060: 
1.  Sell or convey at retail, or possess with the intent to sell or convey at retail, any food or beverage that is placed, wrapped or packaged in the city in or on packaging other than environmentally acceptable packaging; nor 
2.  Provide to customers, or possess with the intent to provide to customers, packaging other than environmentally acceptable packaging. 
B.  The presence on the premises of a retail food establishment of packaging other than environmentally acceptable packaging shall constitute a rebuttable presumption of intent to sell, convey at retail, or provide that packaging to customers. 
C.  Commencing July 1, 2007: 
1.  Food packaging other than environmentally acceptable food packaging shall not be used by officers, agents or employees of the city at city facilities for city events or otherwise in the conduct of the city's business. The city shall not acquire environmentally unacceptable food packaging. 
2.  The city shall not sponsor or co-sponsor events within the city at which food packaging other than environmentally acceptable food packaging is used or distributed by event organizers, agents of event organizers, food vendors and any other party (including a nonprofit organization) which enters into an agreement with one or more of the co-sponsors of an event to sell prepared food at the event or otherwise to provide an event-related service. The city's monetary contribution to such events shall be refunded to the city, if the city manager determines that food packaging other than environmentally acceptable food packaging was utilized. 
D.  Commencing July 1, 2007, all rental agreements for any city facility shall require contracting parties to prevent the use or distribution of food packaging other than environmentally acceptable food packaging in the city facility. The agreement shall provide that the contractor's security deposit will be forfeited if the city manager determines that food packaging other than environmentally acceptable food packaging was utilized in violation of the rental agreement. 
(Ord. 2007-233 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.18.040 - Degradable and recyclable food packaging. 
Commencing on March 31, 2007, each retail food establishment in the city shall: 
A.  Report on or before March 31, 2007 and the first business day of each calendar year thereafter, a written certification, signed under penalty of perjury by one authorized to bind the retail food establishment, stating that the owners and operators of the establishment are aware of the requirements of this chapter and comply with it. Such reports may be on a form provided for that purpose by the city manager. 
B.  Maintain written records evidencing its compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 2007-233 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.18.050 - Exemptions. 
A.  During an emergency declared by the city manager or any other public official authorized by law to do so, food establishments, franchisees, contractors and retail food establishments doing business with the city, and those using city facilities, shall be exempt from this chapter. 
B.  If the city manager determines that there is no commercially available environmentally acceptable food packaging that may be substituted for a particular item of non-environmentally acceptable food packaging, then the city manager may, by a written notice published or posted in the manner required by law for ordinances of the city, authorize the use of that item in the city until such time as he or she determines that an alternative has become commercially available, at which time he or she shall issue a written notice terminating the exemption, which notice shall be published or posted in the manner required by law for ordinances of the city. In determining whether alternatives to an item are commercially available, the city manager shall consider: 
1.  The availability of environmentally acceptable packaging for affected products; 
2.  Whether environmentally acceptable packaging alternatives are available at commercially reasonable prices; 
3.  The existence of franchise or other contractual obligations which commit a retail food establishment to use corporate logo or other products which are not available as environmentally acceptable packaging. 
The city manager shall annually review exemptions granted pursuant to this section to determine whether current conditions continue to warrant the exemption. 
C.  Items required to be purchased under contract entered into prior to the adoption of this chapter are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Items packaged outside the city, whether sold at retail within the city or elsewhere, are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2007-233 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.18.060 - Inspection of records. 
All records required by this chapter shall be made available for inspection by the city manager during normal business hours. It is unlawful for anyone having custody of such records to fail or refuse to produce them upon request by the city manager. 
(Ord. 2007-233 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.18.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  The city manager shall enforce this chapter. The city manager may promulgate written regulations upon notice in the manner required by law for the publication or ordinances of the city and may take any and all other actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter, including, but not limited to, inspecting any retail food establishment's premises to verify compliance. 
B.  Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction punishable pursuant to Section 1.16.020(B) of this Code; provided, however, that any person who falsely states that he or she is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter pursuant to Section 8.18.040(B) or fails to timely file the reports required by that section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
C.  Each and every sale or other transfer of food packaging other than environmentally acceptable food packaging shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
D.  The city attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or other equitable relief to enforce this chapter. 
E.  The remedies and penalties provided in this section are cumulative and not exclusive of one another. 
(Ord. 2007-233 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.18.080 - Construction—Preemption. 
This chapter and any provision thereof shall be null and void upon the adoption of any state or federal law or regulation imposing the same or essentially the same limits on the use of prohibited products as set forth in this chapter. This chapter is intended to be a proper exercise of the city's police power, to operate only upon its own officers, agents, employees and facilities and other persons acting within its boundaries, and not to regulate inter-city or interstate commerce. It shall be construed in accordance with that intent. 
(Ord. 2007-233 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 8.19 - PLASTIC STRAWS, STIRRERS, AND CUTLERY BAN 
Sections: 
 
8.19.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter is to: 
A.  Decrease the use of products which do not biodegrade and cannot be recycled in order to promote public health, reduce litter and solid waste, and protect the environment and wildlife. 
B.  Eliminate, to the maximum amount attainable, the use of straws, stirrers, and cutlery at retail food establishments and beverage providers within the City of Calabasas that is non-biodegradable, non-recyclable, and cannot be reused in order to protect the air, waters, and land of the city and its environments. 
C.  Reduce the litter and solid waste by promoting the use of materials that can be reused, recycled, or can biodegrade into harmless component materials if littered. Many of the plastic straws, cutlery, and stirrers are buoyant, lightweight, and non-biodegradable and therefore, eventually become litter even when placed in trash cans. Once in the environment, the plastic waste continually diminish the environment's appearance and continue to inflict environmental harm by polluting the waterways and oceans due to their indefinite presence in the environment. 
(Ord. No. 2018-368 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-24-2018)  
8.19.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below in alphabetical order, unless otherwise expressly stated herein or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
"Beverage providers" mean any business, entity, group, individual, or organization situated in the City of Calabasas that offers frozen, semi-frozen, liquid, slurry or other forms of beverages to the public for consumption. 
"Biodegradable" means capable of decaying through the action of micro-organisms commonly found in the environment into non-harmful substances or elements within a reasonably short time after disposal. 
"Bioplastic" means any substance that is formed from organic biomass sources, such as corn starch or vegetable oils and fats. 
"City facilities" means any structure, vehicle, or building owned or operated by the City of Calabasas. 
"Plastic cutlery" means any utensil, such as a knife, spoon, fork, or spork, composed primarily of plastic derived from either a biologically based polymer, such as corn or other plant sources, or petroleum intended for only one-time use. "Plastic cutlery" includes biodegradable and compostable petroleum or biologically based polymer forms of cutlery, but does not include forms of cutlery that are made from non-plastic materials, such as bamboo, paper, sugar cane, etc. 
"Plastic stirrer" means a device that is used to mix beverages, intended for only one-time use, and composed mainly of plastic derived from either biologically based polymer such as corn or other plant sources, or petroleum. "Plastic stirrer" includes biodegradable or compostable polymer stirrers. It does not include stirrers composed mainly of non-plastic materials, such as bamboo, sugar cane, paper, etc. 
"Plastic straw" means a tube composed mainly of plastic derived from either a biologically based polymer such as corn or other plant sources or petroleum used for conveniently transferring a beverage from its container to the user's mouth. "Plastic straw" includes biodegradable and compostable petroleum or biologically based polymer straws. It does not include straws composed of non-plastic materials, such as bamboo, sugar cane, paper, etc. 
"Polypropylene" means a thermoplastic polymer material derived from the combination of propylene monomers. 
"Polystyrene foam" means a thermoplastic petrochemical material utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, foam molding, and extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene). 
"Recycled" means any material including cans, cardboard, glass, paper, or other items that have been treated, salvaged, composted, processed, or altered to make suitable for reuse. Recycled materials include any plastic which can be feasibly recycled by a civic recycling program in the State of California. Recycled plastics are comprised of plastics with the recycling symbols #1 through #5. For the purposes of this chapter, recyclable materials do not include polystyrene and expanded polystyrene or nylon (which bear recycling symbol #6 and #7 respectively). 
"Retail food establishment" means any store, shop, vehicle, sale outlet, or other places of business which sells foods or beverages to consumers, which acquire the use of plastic straws, stirrers, or cutlery. "Retail food establishment" shall include, but not limited to, any place where food is prepared, mixed, cooked, grilled, baked, handled, stored, and sold or offered for sale, including, but not limited to: cafes; coffee shops; restaurants; supermarkets; delicatessens; catering kitchen; juice bar; hotel; bar; public food market; and any other place where food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on the premises or elsewhere. It also includes, but is not limited to, any operation or establishment where food is prepared, processed, provided, or served to or for consumers for a charge. Retail and wholesale sales of sealed packages of plastic straws, stirrers, and cutlery is not included within the prohibition under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-368 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-24-2018)  
8.19.030 - Prohibition. 
A.  Commencing April 30, 2019, no person managing, owning, or operating a retail food establishment or a non-profit food provider located in the city shall do or allow another to provide, distribute, or sell to consumers, or possess with intent to provide, distribute, or sell plastic straws, stirrers, and cutlery, except as provided in Section 8.18.060. 
B.  The presence on the premises of a retail food establishment of packaging other than environmentally acceptable packaging shall establish a rebuttable presumption of intent to sell, convey at retail, or provide plastic straws, stirrers, and cutlery to consumers. 
C.  Nothing in this section prevents beverage providers, restaurants including fast food restaurants, and vendors from using or choosing non-plastic alternatives such as those made from bamboo, sugar cane, or paper, available to consumers. Non-plastic alternative straws shall only be provided upon request by the consumer. 
D.  Commencing April 30, 2019: 
1.  Plastic straws, stirrers, and cutlery shall not be used by agents, officers, or employees of the city at city facilities for city events or otherwise in the conduct of the city's business. The city shall not acquire any plastic straws, stirrers, and cutlery. 
2.  The city shall not sponsor or co-sponsor events within the city boundaries at which plastic straws, stirrers, and cutlery are used or distributed by event organizers, agents of event organizers, food vendors, and any other party, including a non-profit organization, which enters into an agreement with at least one (1) of the co-sponsors of an event to sell prepared food and drinks at the event or otherwise to provide an event-related service. They city's monetary contribution to such events shall be refunded to the city if the public works director determines that plastic straws, stirrers, and/or cutlery were used. 
3.  All rental agreements for any city facility which includes use of a city authorized caterer shall require contracting parties to prevent the distribution or use of plastic straws, stirrers, and cutlery in the city facility. 
(Ord. No. 2018-368 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-24-2018)  
8.19.040 - Degradable and recyclable straws, stirrers, and cutlery. 
Commencing on April 30, 2019, each retail food establishment in the city shall: 
A.  Report on or before April 30, 2019 and the first business day of each calendar year thereafter, a written certification, signed under penalty of perjury by one authorized to bind the retail food establishment, stating that the owners and operators of the establishment are aware of the requirements of this chapter and comply with it. Such reports may be on a form provided for that purpose by the public works director. The reports and written records evidencing compliance with this chapter shall be maintained for a minimum of two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 2018-368 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-24-2018)  
8.19.050 - Exemptions. 
A.  During an emergency declared by the City of Calabasas or any other public official authorized by law to do so, franchises, contractors, food establishments, and retail food establishments doing business with the city, and those using city facilities, shall be exempt from this chapter. 
B.  If the public works director concludes that there is no commercially available environmentally acceptable alternatives for straws, stirrers, and cutlery that may be substituted for plastic straws, stirrers, and cutlery, then the public works director may authorize the use of that item in the city through a written notice published or posted in the manner required by law for ordinances of the city until such time as he or she decides that an alternative has become commercially available. Then he or she shall issue a written notice dismissing the exemption, which notice shall be posted or published in the manner required by law for ordinances of the city. In determining whether alternatives to an item are commercially available, the public works director take into consideration: 
1.  The availability of environmentally acceptable straws, stirrers, and cutlery; 
2.  Whether environmentally acceptable alternatives are available at commercially reasonable prices; 
3.  The existence of franchise or other contractual obligations which commit a retail food establishment to use corporate logo or other products which are not available as environmentally acceptable products. 
The public works director shall review exemptions granted pursuant to this paragraph annually to determine whether current conditions continue to warrant the exemption. 
C.  Items required to be purchased under contract entered into prior to the implementation of this chapter are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Plastic straws, stirrers, and cutlery distributed outside the city, whether or not sold at retail within the city or elsewhere, are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance. 
E.  Plastic straws, stirrers or cutlery may be provided to individuals with disabilities upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2018-368 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-24-2018)  
8.19.060 - Inspection of records. 
All records required by this chapter shall be made available for inspection by the public works director during normal business hours. It shall be illegal for anyone having custody of such records to fail or refuse to produce them upon request by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 2018-368 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-24-2018)  
8.19.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  The city's code enforcement officers shall enforce this chapter and may publish written regulations upon notice in the manner required by law for the publication or ordinances of the city and may take any and all other actions rational and necessary to enforce this chapter, including, but not limited to, inspecting any retail food establishment's premises to verify compliance. 
B.  Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction punishable pursuant to subsection 1.16.020(B) of this Code provided, however, that any person who falsely states that he or she is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter pursuant to subsection 8.19.040(B) or fails to timely file reports required by that section shall be guilty of misdemeanor punishable pursuant to Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
C.  Each and every sale or other transfer of plastic straws, stirrers, and cutlery shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
D.  The city attorney may seek injunctive, legal, or other equitable relief to enforce this chapter. 
E.  The penalties and remedies provided in this section are cumulative and not exclusive to one another. 
(Ord. No. 2018-368 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-24-2018)  
8.19.080 - Construction; preemption. 
This chapter and any provision thereof shall be null and void upon the adoption of any state or federal law or regulation imposing the same or similar limits on the use of prohibited products as set forth in this chapter. This chapter is intended to be a proper exercise of the City of Calabasas's police power, to operate only upon its own agents, officers, employees and facilities, and others acting within the city's boundaries, and not to regulate inter-city or interstate commerce. It shall be construed in accordance with that intent. 
(Ord. No. 2018-368 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-24-2018)  
Chapter 8.20 - PUBLIC NUISANCE AND ABATEMENT 
Sections: 
 
8.20.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Public Nuisance Abatement Ordinance of Calabasas." 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 2, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 1, 1994)  
8.20.020 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to declare what constitutes a nuisance and to establish procedures to abate nuisances and to recover the cost of doing so from those responsible for the nuisances. The city council declares that adoption of this chapter is in the public interest and promotes the health, safety, and welfare of residents of Calabasas. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 3, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 2, 1994)  
8.20.030 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
"Enforcement officer" means an individual designated by the city manager to act under this chapter or who otherwise has authority to issue notices of violation of this Code. 
"Nuisance" means a nuisance as defined in this chapter, elsewhere in this Code, by another ordinance of the city, or by other law. 
"Responsible person" means and includes each or any of the following: 
1.  A person or corporate entity that, by action or inaction, causes, maintains, permits, or allows a nuisance; 
2.  A person or corporate entity whose agent, employee, or independent contractor, by action or inaction, causes, maintains, permits, or allows a nuisance; 
3.  An owner, in whole or in part, of real property on which a nuisance occurs, exists, or is maintained; 
4.  A lessee or sublessee with a current right of possession of real property on which a nuisance occurs, exists, or is maintained; 
5.  A person or corporate entity that uses real property on which a nuisance occurs, exists, or is maintained; 
6.  An on-site manager who regularly works on real property on which a nuisance occurs, exists, or is maintained, and who is responsible for the business or other activities on that real property; 
7.  The owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers, trustees, general partners or any other person with the authority to act for a legal entity such as a corporation that is a responsible person under any or all of subsections 1 through 6 above; 
8.  If any of the above persons are minors or incompetent, the parents or guardians of such persons shall be deemed responsible persons during such minority or incompetence. 
"Service" means, except as expressly otherwise provided by this chapter, delivery of any notice or other document to a responsible person by personal delivery, or by deposit in the United States mail addressed to a responsible person at his, her or its last address known to the city, or if the responsible person is an owner of the property, at the owner's address as it appears on the last equalized or supplemental assessment roll of Los Angeles County, whichever is more current, or, in the alternative, by placement of a legal advertisement at least once a week for two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Service by mail of a notice or other document in the manner provided for in this section shall be effective on the date of mailing. The failure of any person to actually receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the notice or any proceeding if the requirements of this section are satisfied. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 4, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 3, 1994)  
8.20.040 - Declaration of nuisances. 
A.  Unlawful Nuisances Visible from Off-Site. Except as expressly allowed by any other provision of law, including this Code, it is unlawful for any responsible person to maintain property in the city, or to allow property in the city to be maintained, such that any of the following conditions are visible from a street, other public right-of-way, from neighboring property or from portions of the property held open to the general public: 
1.  Unlawful Outdoor Storage and Conditions. 
a.  An accumulation of abandoned, discarded, or dilapidated objects, including, but not limited to, junk; abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles; vehicle parts and equipment; machine parts, scrap material, appliances, furniture, household equipment and furnishings, shopping carts, containers, packing materials, scrap metal, wood, plant cuttings, rubbish and debris or similar matter which constitutes a threat to public health or safety or renders any premises unsightly and detrimental to the general public welfare; 
b.  Maintaining or failing to maintain property so as to allow conditions that are dangerous and accessible to children or other members of the public, including, but not limited to, abandoned, broken, neglected or unsupervised vehicles, machinery, equipment, lights, light fixtures, refrigerators and freezers, pools, ponds and excavations, as well as all other items and conditions identified in Penal Code Section 402(c) and Health and Safety Code Section 24400; 
c.  Materials or other items stacked above any fence or in a manner by which the materials could be discharged into a storm drain system or otherwise violate the Federal Clean Water Act or other applicable federal, state, or local law. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the orderly outdoor storage of business-related materials and inventory above fence height where permitted by applicable zoning designation, rules or regulations; 
d.  The placement of items of business inventory, refuse containers, equipment, vehicles, or any other obstruction on a street, sidewalk or parking areas developed or intended for use by the public or by invitees onto the property; 
e.  Materials stored or stacked on property in a disorderly or unsightly manner or in a manner by which the materials could be discharged into a storm drain system or otherwise violate the Federal Clean Water Act or other applicable federal, state, or local law; 
f.  Boats, trailers, recreation vehicles, motor vehicles, parts thereof, or other articles of personal property which are left in a state of partial construction, dilapidation or disrepair; or which are parked or stored in violation of applicable zoning designation, rules or regulations; 
g.  Packing boxes, pallets, lumber, junk, trash, salvage materials, or other debris; 
h.  The storage of firewood or other flammable materials other than in compliance with standards relating to the safe storage of combustible materials established in writing by the Los Angeles County fire department or by applicable state or local statute; 
i.  Keeping, maintaining or having any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, partial, or inoperative motor vehicle located on real property. 
i.  A vehicle is inoperative, if: 
(A)  The vehicle is not immediately capable moving under its own power at a legal speed, 
(B)  The vehicle, even if mechanically operative, does not have operable brakes, head lights, tail lights, turning signals, or any other equipment required under the California Vehicle Code or other law for legal operation on public streets, 
(C)  The vehicle, even if mechanically operative, is not licensed and registered in compliance with the California Vehicle Code. 
ii.  This section does not apply if such inoperative vehicle is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner and does not constitute a fire, health or safety hazard. 
2.  Landscaping/Vegetation. 
a.  Maintaining or failing to maintain property, even if not visible as set forth above, so as to allow overgrown vegetation or the accumulation of dirt, litter, trash or debris, dead organic matter, garbage, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or conditions that provide a likely habitat for vermin, insects or rodents of any kind, from which foul smells or odors emanate, or which constitute undue fire, health or safety hazards or other danger to public safety and welfare; 
b.  Overgrown vegetation likely to harbor rats, vermin and other nuisances, growing into the public right-of-way, or obstructing the necessary view of drivers on public streets or private driveways; 
c.  Failure to comply with the requirements set forth in any city zoning approval or permit applicable to the premises. 
3.  Trash, Litter, Trimmings, Oil and Debris. 
a.  The accumulation of litter, debris, trimmings or trash on any property, including sidewalks, gutters, storm drains, driveways, walkways, alleyways, parking lots or a public right-of-way or from which a continuous, offensive odor emanates, even though not visible as set forth above; 
b.  Pooled oil, water, or other liquid accumulation, flowing onto the street, or into a storm drain system, or excessive accumulations of grease or oil on paved surfaces or in storm drain systems. 
4.  Trash Containers. 
a.  Trash, garbage or refuse cans, bins, boxes or other such containers or which emanate a continuous, offensive odor, even though not visible as set forth above. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the outdoor storage of any type of trash receptacle if such receptacle is screened from view from a street, public right-of-way, any public right-of-way or neighboring properties in a manner approved by the community development director and consistent with applicable zoning designations, rules or regulations; 
b.  Any occupied property without regular and adequate trash collection service; 
c.  Trash containers without secure, firmly fitting covers or evidencing an overflow of trash and/or other debris. 
5.  Buildings and Structures. 
a.  Any building or structure determined to be a dangerous building or a substandard building, buildings which are dilapidated, abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed, have broken windows or broken windows secured with wood or other materials or which are left in a state of partial construction, buildings subject to demolition pursuant to applicable provisions of this Code or other authority, for which demolition has not been diligently pursued, and such buildings which are unpainted or where the paint on the building exterior is significantly cracking, peeling, chalking or worn off; 
b.  Unsecured buildings constituting hazardous conditions or which invite or permit trespass or malicious mischief; 
c.  Awnings, covers, canopies, umbrellas, screens, lights, light fixtures or other window coverings or building structures which are damaged, torn, severely faded, rusted, bent, unpainted or otherwise in substantial disrepair. 
6.  Fences and Gates. Fences or other structures on private property which are sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed, extend into a public right-of-way or are otherwise dilapidated or unsafe. 
7.  Graffiti. Graffiti or other words, lettering or drawings not otherwise permitted by the provisions of this Code, which remain on the exterior of any building, fence or wall more than ten (10) days after written notice to remove the same has been given by the community development director. 
8.  Parking Limitations. Vehicles, whether motorized or nonmotorized, parked within any required setback or on any surface which has not previously been approved for parking pursuant to this Code. 
9.  Parking Strips. Allowing an accumulation of junk, rubbish, debris, or dead, decayed or overgrown vegetation in that area between the property line and the street adjacent to a given parcel commonly known as a "parkway." 
10.  Miscellaneous. Any other condition or use of property which the community development director reasonably determines to be a threat to the health and welfare of the public by virtue of its unsafe, dangerous, hazardous, or offensive nature, or which is so out of harmony with the standards of properties in the vicinity as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or value of such properties. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the orderly outdoor storage of business-related materials and inventory where permitted by applicable zoning designation, rules or regulations. 
B.  Additional Unlawful Nuisances. Except as may be authorized by this Code, it is unlawful for any responsible person to maintain, or to allow another to maintain, property in the city so that any of the following conditions exist thereon: 
1.  Property maintained in violation of the Uniform Housing Code, Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 2001 Los Angeles County Building Code, 2001 Los Angeles County Plumbing Code, 2001 Los Angeles County Mechanical Code, 2004 Los Angeles County Electrical Code or the Uniform Fire Code as either has most recently been adopted by the city or the Los Angeles County fire protection district; 
2.  Unpainted buildings and those having dry rot, warping or termite infestation. Any building on which the exterior paint or stucco has deteriorated so as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping or termite infestation as to render the building unsightly or in a state of disrepair; 
3.  Buildings with windows containing broken glass or no glass at all, where the window is of a type which normally contains glass, which constitutes a hazard and/or invites trespassers or malicious mischief. Plywood or other material used to cover broken or missing windows, if permitted under this Code, shall be painted in a color or colors compatible with the remainder of the building; 
4.  Building exteriors, walls, fences, driveways, sidewalks or walkways which are maintained in such condition as to become defective or unsightly or are materially detrimental to nearby properties and improvements; 
5.  Construction equipment or machinery of any type or description parked or stored on property so as to be visible from a street or other public right-of-way, except: 
a.  During excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit on the subject property or an adjoining property, or 
b.  When such machinery is stored in compliance with the provisions of this Code; 
6.  Property which lacks appropriate landscaping, turf or plant material so as to cause excessive dust to escape the site, or the accumulation of dirt, sand, gravel, concrete, litter, debris or other similar material on the property or such accumulation even if not visible if those materials could be discharged into a storm drain system, create a health or safety hazard, or otherwise violate the Federal Clean Water Act or other applicable federal, state, or local law; 
7.  Maintaining or failing to maintain property so as to allow dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds or overgrown vegetation, cultivated or uncultivated, except as otherwise regulated by Section 17.26.070 of this Code regarding oak trees; 
8.  Maintaining property, the topography or configuration of which, whether in its natural state or as a result of grading operations or other earth movement activities, causes or will cause erosion, subsidence or surface water runoff injurious to public health or safety; 
9.  Keeping or maintaining on property any live or dead animal, reptile or insect in such a manner as to pose a threat, disturbance, danger or menace to the health or safety of the community; 
10.  Keeping or maintaining on property accumulations of animal manure or other animal matter of any kind or character from which smells or odors emanate or which provide or are likely to provide a breeding place for vermin, insects or rodents of any kind; 
11.  Keeping, operating or maintaining any machinery on real property which by reason of dust, exhaust or fumes creates a health or safety hazard; 
12.  Maintaining any building, structure or property which has been constructed or is maintained in violation of any specific requirements or prohibition applicable to the building or structure or property contained in the building and construction or zoning regulations of this city or any law of the state or ordinance of the city relating to the condition, location, maintenance or construction of buildings and property; 
13.  Abandoning or vacating any building or structure so that it becomes readily available to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to juveniles, vagrants or persons engaged, in illegal gang or drug activity; 
14.  Any other condition that is contrary to the public peace, health, and safety or otherwise prevents the enjoyment or reasonable use of property. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 5, 2006: Ord. 2006-216 § 1, 2006; Ord. 94-68 § 5, 1994)  
8.20.050 - Authority to inspect. 
Enforcement officers are authorized to enter upon any property or premises within the city to ascertain whether a nuisance as defined in this chapter exists, and to make any examination and surveys as may be necessary in the performance of their enforcement duties, in accordance with Fourth Amendment of United States Constitution and the related protections of the California Constitution. These inspections may include the taking of photographs, samples, or other physical evidence. All inspection, entries, examinations and surveys shall be performed reasonably and in accordance with law. If an owner or occupant of property or his or her agent refuses to consent to entry and inspection, an enforcement officer shall seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to law. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 6, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 5, 1994)  
8.20.060 - Notification of and request to abate nuisance. 
A.  All property found to be maintained in any manner that is described in this chapter shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. 
B.  The procedures for abatement set forth in this section shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. 
C.  When an enforcement officer determines that a nuisance exists, he or she shall serve on the responsible person(s) a written notice of such determination and a request to abate the nuisance. The request shall identify the address at which the nuisance exists; describe the nuisance to be abated; set forth a reasonable time to abate the nuisance; if necessary, request particular corrective actions to accomplish the abatement; warn the responsible person(s) of the consequences of failing to complete abatement within the prescribed time limit; set forth appeal rights; and reference this chapter. Unless an immediate threat to the health, welfare, or safety of the public exists, the time limit for abatement shall be at least ten (10) days. 
D.  Such notice shall also be served upon owner of the property in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.20.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 7, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 6, 1994)  
8.20.070 - Hearing to abate nuisance. 
In the event a responsible person(s) shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with a notice to correct a nuisance within the time set forth for abatement pursuant to Section 8.20.060(C) of this chapter, the community development director shall conduct an administrative review hearing to ascertain whether or not the violation constitutes a nuisance as set forth in this chapter or in any other applicable law. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 8, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 7, 1994)  
8.20.080 - Notice of hearing. 
A.  Notice of the community development director's administrative review hearing shall be served upon the responsible person(s) not less than fourteen (14) days before the time set for the hearing. 
B.  Notice of the hearing shall include the time and date of the hearing, a list of the nuisance violations on the property and a statement requesting the responsible person(s)' attendance at the hearing. 
C.  The notice shall be served as provided in Section 8.20.030(D) of this chapter. 
D.  A responsible person may request one continuance of a hearing provided he or she does so in writing before the date of the hearing and states a reasonable basis for the request. Unless the city issues a written notice of continuance, the hearing shall take place on the date, time, and location specified in the notice of hearing. A responsible person's failure to attend or to be represented at a hearing shall constitute an abandonment of the appeal and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
E.  Each and every responsible person given notice of a nuisance as required by this chapter is jointly and severally liable for the abatement of any nuisance, the costs of abatement, and any related fines, penalties, and interest imposed. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 9, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 8, 1994)  
8.20.090 - Hearing procedure. 
A.  At the time, date and location stated in the hearing or continuance notice served upon the responsible person(s), the community development director shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests and shall receive testimony from responsible person(s), witnesses, city personnel and other interested persons relative to the alleged nuisance and to the proposed rehabilitation, repair or demolition of the property upon which the alleged nuisance exists. 
B.  The request for abatement and any supporting documents prepared by the enforcement officer shall be accepted by the community development director and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the facts stated in such documents. 
C.  The community development director may continue the hearing from time to time and allow the responsible person(s) additional time to abate the nuisance. In addition, the community development director may request additional information or evidence from the responsible person(s) or from the enforcement officer. The enforcement officer and other representatives of the city may, but need not, attend the hearing. 
D.  All hearings shall be recorded on a video or audio device, unless the city elects to use a court reporter. If a court reporter is not used, the city need not provide transcriptions of any hearings, but, within fifteen (15) days after payment of reasonable duplication fee, shall provide a copy of the video or audio recordings to the responsible person(s) or any interested third party. If a court reporter is used, a responsible person or any interested third party may obtain a copy of the transcript upon payment of any fees or costs incurred by the city to provide the transcript. 
E.  The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with the technical rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is of a type upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make such evidence inadmissible in a civil action. The community development director may exclude irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence. 
F.  After considering all testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the community development director shall issue a written decision to affirm, modify, or dismiss the request to abate. The decision shall include the community development director's findings and give notice of the right to seek judicial review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 following a timely appeal to the city manager as provided in Section 8.20.110 of this chapter. If the community development director determines that a nuisance exists, he or she may declare the property to be a public nuisance and order the abatement of the nuisance within thirty (30) days by having such property, building(s) or structure(s) rehabilitated, repaired or demolished. If the nuisance is declared an immediate threat to the health, welfare, or safety of the public the community development director may direct the responsible person(s) to abate the nuisance within a ten-day, or shorter, period of time after service of the decision. 
G.  A copy of the community development director's order shall be served on all owners of the subject property, any other responsible person(s) in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 8.20.030 of this chapter, and to any owner of property within the vicinity of the subject property who requests such notice or who appeared at the hearing. Failure of any interested third party to receive such notice shall not impair the effectiveness of the community development director's decision. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 10, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 9, 1994)  
8.20.100 - Appeal procedures. 
A.  Any responsible person entitled to service under this chapter may appeal a decision of the community development director under Section 8.20.090 of this chapter by filing with the city clerk within ten (10) days of service of such decision, a written, appeal containing the following information: 
1.  The property which is the subject of the nuisance abatement proceeding; 
2.  The names of all persons on whose behalf the appeal is filed; 
3.  The interest of each appellant in the property involved in the proceeding; 
4.  The reasons for the appeal, together with any material facts supporting the contentions of the appellant(s); 
5.  The signatures of all appellants, and their mailing addresses. 
B.  As soon as practical after receiving the written appeal, the city clerk shall set a date for hearing of the appeal by the city manager, which date shall not be less than seven days nor more than thirty-five (35) days from the date the appeal was filed. 
C.  Appellant(s) shall be responsible for paying an appeal fee prior to the date of the hearing in an amount established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
D.  The city clerk shall serve, in the manner provided in Section 8.20.030 of this chapter, written notice of the time and the place of the hearing at least five days before the date of the hearing to each appellant. 
E.  Continuance of the hearing may be granted by the city manager on request of the appellant(s) for good cause shown, or on the city manager's own motion. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 11, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 10, 1994)  
8.20.110 - Appeal decision. 
A.  Upon conclusion of a hearing on an appeal filed under Sections 8.20.100 or 5.18.120 of this chapter, the city manager shall do one (1) of the following: 
1.  Terminate the proceeding and dismiss the matter; 
2.  Confirm the decision of the community development director; or 
3.  Modify such decision based upon evidence adduced at the hearing on the appeal. 
B.  Unless he or she dismisses the matter, the city manager shall declare such property to be a public nuisance and order the abatement of that nuisance within twenty (20) days by having such property, buildings or structures, rehabilitated, repaired or demolished in the manner and means specifically set forth in the city manager's order. 
C.  The decision of the city manager shall be served as required by Section 8.20.120 of this chapter and shall be subject to judicial review in the manner specified in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. The timely filing and diligent prosecution of a request for a hearing before the community development director and of an appeal to the city manager are administrative remedies which must be exhausted before judicial review may be sought. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 12, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 11, 1994) 
( Ord. No. 2013-306, § II, 10-9-2013 )  
8.20.120 - Service of order to abate. 
A.  The city manager's order regarding the abatement of a nuisance shall be served upon the responsible person(s) in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.20.030 of this chapter, and shall describe needed corrections or other means to abate the nuisance. 
B.  A responsible person shall have the right, at his or her expense, to have any such property rehabilitated or to have such buildings or structures demolished or repaired in accordance with the city manager's order, provided the repair, demolition or rehabilitation is commenced prior to the expiration of the twenty-day period immediately after the city manager's order is issued and is thereafter diligently and continuously prosecuted to completion. Upon completion of such abatement by the responsible person(s) to the satisfaction of the city manager, proceedings hereunder shall terminate. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 13, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 12, 1994)  
8.20.130 - City abatement. 
If a nuisance is not abated as directed by the city manager by the time set forth in Section 8.20.120 of this chapter, the city may abate the nuisance. Before the city makes inspection or causes an abatement on private property, the city shall obtain the consent of a responsible person(s) to enter onto the private property to abate the nuisance or obtain an administrative inspection and/or abatement warrant if and as required by law. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 14, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 13, 1994)  
8.20.140 - Summary abatement of nuisance that poses an immediate threat to public health or safety. 
The community development director may immediately abate, without observance of any notice or consent requirements set forth in this chapter, any condition or nuisance that constitutes a serious and imminent danger to the public. Whenever the city causes a summary abatement under this section, it shall provide the party responsible for the nuisance with a post-abatement hearing to contest the validity of the summary abatement under the procedures set forth above for a hearing before as specified in Sections 8.20.080 and 8.20.090 of this chapter, the result of which may be thereafter appealed pursuant to Section 8.20.100 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 15, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 14, 1994)  
8.20.150 - Abatement costs—Report of costs, including attorney's fees. 
A.  A detailed account of abatement costs shall be maintained, including administrative costs such as the cost for preparing, bidding, and awarding a contract for abatement work. Upon completion of abatement by the city, the community development director shall transmit a report of abatement costs to the city clerk. 
B.  In any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a nuisance, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recovery of attorney's fees. The recovery of attorney's fees by a prevailing party shall be limited to those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation of that action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorney's fees. In no action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding shall an award of attorney's fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. The community development director shall report any attorney's fees incurred by the city in a proceeding under this section to the city clerk. Such attorney's fees shall be recoverable as costs of abatement. The report of attorney's fees shall be made part of any related report of abatement costs. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 16, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 15, 1994)  
8.20.160 - Abatement costs—Hearing, notification and collection. 
A.  Upon receipt of a report of abatement costs, the city clerk shall schedule a hearing before the city manager to consider that report. 
B.  The city shall give the responsible person(s) at least five days' notice of the hearing, and shall post a copy of the notice on the subject property for at least five days prior to the hearing. Proof of service and posting shall be made by affidavit filed with the city clerk. The notice shall include a copy of the report of abatement costs, state that the responsible person(s) may object to the abatement costs at the hearing, and state that the abatement costs may be made a special assessment or a nuisance abatement lien against the parcel of property on which the abated nuisance existed or the city may enforce the duty to pay those costs in any other manner provided by law. 
C.  A responsible person may object to the abatement costs at the hearing. The city manager shall consider the report of abatement costs and any objections and determine whether the costs set forth in the report of abatement costs are accurate and reasonable. The city manager shall affirm, correct, or modify the report of abatement costs in light of the evidence before him or her. The decision of the city manager on the report of abatement costs shall be final as to the city, but subject to judicial review in the manner specified in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 and shall be limited to the determination on the amount of the abatement costs. 
D.  Upon report of the city manager, the city council may adopt a resolution making the abatement costs a lien against the property on which the nuisance was maintained and a personal obligation of the property owner and any other responsible person(s) as set forth in Section 8.20.170 of this chapter. 
E.  If abatement costs are not paid within five days after the costs become final, the city may take one or more of the following actions to collect the costs: 
1.  The community development director may bring an action on behalf of the city in small claims court against the responsible person(s) to collect the cost of abatement in an amount within the jurisdiction of the small claims division of the superior court. 
2.  The city attorney may bring an action on behalf of the city in the unlimited jurisdiction of the superior court against the responsible person(s) to collect the cost of abatement. 
3.  The abatement costs may be recorded as a lien against the real property of the responsible person(s) pursuant to a court judgment. 
4.  The city may cause the nuisance abatement lien to be recorded pursuant to Government Code Sections 38773.1 and Section 8.20.160 of this chapter. 
5.  The city may cause the cost of abatement to be made a special assessment against the parcel on which the nuisance was abated pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5. 
6.  The city may recover its abatement costs through any other method permitted under law. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 17, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 16, 1994)  
8.20.170 - Nuisance abatement lien—Recordation and collection. 
A.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.1, prior to the recordation of the lien, notice of the lien shall be served on a responsible person(s) who is the owner of record of the parcel of the land on which the nuisance was abated, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. 
B.  The notice shall specify the amount of the lien, identify the city as the public agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description, and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the record owner of the parcel. 
C.  The notice must be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (commencing with Section 415.10). If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 6062. 
D.  After service of the notice, the city shall submit a certified copy of the nuisance abatement resolution to the Los Angeles Registrar-Recorder for recordation. The city shall attach to the certified copy of the resolution an affidavit or declaration attesting to service as required herein. 
E.  The date of recording of the lien shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. 
F.  If the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, the city shall cause a notice of the discharge to be recorded. 
G.  The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of any foreclosure or collection action to enforce the lien. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 18, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 17, 1994)  
8.20.180 - Special assessment against parcel. 
A.  As an alternative to the procedure authorized by Government Code Section 38773.1, the abatement costs shall become a special assessment against the real property on which the nuisance was abated pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5. The assessment shall continue until it is paid, together with interest at the legal maximum rate computed from the time the determination of the abatement cost became final. 
B.  At the time the special assessment is imposed, notice of the special assessment shall be served on the owner of record of the parcel of the land on which the nuisance was abated, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. 
C.  The notice shall specify the amount of the assessment, identify the city as the public agency on whose behalf the assessment is imposed, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description, and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the assessment is imposed, the name and address of the record owner of the parcel, and state that the amount of the cost of abatement is a special assessment against the real property until it is paid, with an interest rate set forth therein. The notice shall also specify that the property may be sold after three years by the county treasurer-tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. 
D.  If the property owner's identity can be determined from the county assessor or the registrar-recorder, the city must serve the notice by certified mail. 
E.  The county treasurer-tax collector's power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of a property owner to receive notice. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrances for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
F.  If the city imposes a special assessment pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5, the city may conduct a sale of vacant residential developed property for which the payment of that assessment is delinquent, subject to the requirements applicable to the sale of property pursuant to Section 3691 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
G.  Notices or instruments relating to the abatement proceeding or special assessment may be recorded. 
H.  If the assessment levied for city abatement costs, together with any interest or penalties thereon, is paid in full after the date the assessment is added to the county tax rolls, the city shall promptly cause such assessment to be removed from the tax rolls. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 19, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 18, 1994)  
8.20.190 - Civil, criminal or other action to abate nuisance. 
The procedures for notification and abatement of nuisances in this chapter shall be in addition to any other proceedings authorized by law. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to preclude the city attorney from commencing a civil or criminal action to abate a nuisance in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 20, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 19, 1994)  
8.20.200 - Treble cost of abatement in civil or criminal judgment. 
Except for conditions related to substandard buildings abated pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17980, upon entry within a two-year period of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment finding a property owner responsible for a condition that may be abated pursuant to this chapter, the court may order the owner to pay the city treble the costs of the abatement. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 21, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 20, 1994)  
8.20.210 - Miscellaneous. 
Any person who removes or defaces a request to abate nuisance or other notice posted pursuant to this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2006-228 § 22, 2006: Ord. 94-68 § 21, 1994)  
Chapter 8.24 - PARK REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
8.24.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is known as "Park Regulations of the City of Calabasas." 
(Ord. 95-91 § 1, 1995)  
8.24.020 - Purpose. 
To provide guidelines for responsible behavior in all public parks within the city. 
(Ord. 95-91 § 2, 1995)  
8.24.030 - Definitions. 
The following definitions are applicable to provisions of this chapter. 
"Clean up after your dog" refers to the picking up and disposal of canine fecal matter by the person controlling the animal while at the park. 
"Graffiti" is the defacing of surfaces using marking pens, spray paint and other materials. 
"Motorized vehicles" are any powered, two-or-more-wheeled vehicles. 
"Park hours" are the hours of the day when the park is available and open to the public. 
"Radio-controlled devices" are air or ground-based devices powered by batteries, fuel, wind or water. 
"Rollerskating and rollerblading" is a means of mobilization using two or four-wheeled skates for transportation or recreation. 
"Water feature" refers to a series of cast concrete retention dishes cascading water to a holding pond with a circulation pump system. 
(Ord. 95-91 § 3, 1995)  
8.24.040 - Park regulations. 
A.  Park hours of operation shall be determined by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Dogs are allowed in the parks if kept on a leash. Please be considerate of other park patrons and clean up after your dog. 
C.  Motorized vehicles or radio-controlled devices are not allowed in the park. (An exception is motorized wheelchairs and sit-down type carts for disabled individuals.) 
D.  Freedom Park. The water feature is a special part of the park experience. Individuals must keep off the structure and pond, and refrain from placing debris, coins, etc. in the waterfall or pond. 
E.  All trash and debris must be placed in the appropriate containers. 
F.  Rollerblading and rollerskating is not allowed on the tennis courts. 
(Ord. 95-91 § 4, 1995)  
Chapter 8.28 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , adopted June 24, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 8.28, §§ 8.28.010—8.28.140, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 8.28 pertained to storm water and urban runoff pollution prevention controls. See Code Comparative Table and Disposition List for a detailed history of derivation. 
 
8.28.008 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Chapter 8.28: Storm Water Management and Discharge Control." 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015)  
8.28.009 - Findings. 
A.  The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.) provides for the regulation and reduction of pollutants discharged into the waters of the United States by extending National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter "NPDES") requirements to storm water and urban runoff discharge into municipal storm drain systems. 
B.  The City of Calabasas is authorized by Article XI, §5 and §7 of the state Constitution to exercise the police power of the state by adopting regulations to promote public health, public safety and general prosperity. 
C.  The City of Calabasas has authority under the California Water Code to adopt and enforce ordinances imposing conditions, restrictions and limitations with respect to any activity which might degrade the quality of waters of the state. 
D.  Storm water and urban runoff flows from individual properties into streets, storm drains, or natural watercourses, which then lead into the Santa Monica Bay. 
E.  The City of Calabasas is a permittee under the "Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Discharges Within the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles County, Except those Discharges Originating from the City of Long Beach MS4", issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board—Los Angeles Region (Order No. R4-2012-0175), which also serves as a NPDES permit under the Federal Clean Water Act (NPDES No. CAS004001), as well as Waste Discharge Requirements under California law (the "Municipal NPDES permit"). In order to participate in a watershed management program and/or enhanced watershed management program and/or enhanced watershed management program, the municipal NPDES permit requires permittees to develop and implement a low impact development (LID) ordinance. 
F.  The City of Calabasas is committed to a stormwater management program that protects water quality and water supply by employing watershed-based approaches that balance environmental, social, and economic considerations. 
G.  Urbanization has led to increased impervious surface areas resulting in increased water runoff and less percolation to groundwater aquifers causing the transport of pollutants to downstream receiving waters. 
H.  The City of Calabasas needs to take a new approach to managing rainwater and urban runoff while mitigating the negative impacts of development and urbanization. 
I.  LID is widely recognized as a sensible approach to managing the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff by setting standards and practices to maintain or restore the natural hydrologic character of a development site, reduce off-site runoff, improve water quality, and provide groundwater recharge. 
J.  In order to control, in a cost-effective manner, the quantity and quality of storm water and urban runoff to the maximum extent practicable, the adoption of reasonable regulations, as set forth herein, is essential. 
K.  This chapter also sets forth requirements for the construction and operation of certain commercial development, new development and redevelopment and other projects (as further defined herein). This chapter authorizes the authorized enforcement officer to define and adopt applicable best management practices and other storm water pollution control measures, to grant waivers from LID requirements, as provided herein, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided herein, the authorized enforcement officer shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this section. 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015)  
8.28.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the future health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city and the water quality of the Malibu Creek and Los Angeles River watersheds and surrounding coastal areas by: 
1.  Reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable; 
2.  Regulating illicit connections and illicit discharges and thereby reducing the level of contamination of storm water and urban runoff into the MS4 and receiving waters; and 
3.  Regulating non-storm water discharges to the MS4, natural drainage courses, and receiving waters. 
B.  The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the quality of watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands within the city in a manner consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act, the California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and the Municipal NPDES Permit. 
C.  This Chapter also sets forth requirements for the construction and operation of certain commercial development, new development and redevelopment and other projects (as further defined herein) which are intended to ensure compliance with the storm water mitigation measures prescribed in the current version of the Municipal NPDES Permit approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region. 
D.  This chapter authorizes the authorized enforcement officer to define and adopt applicable best management practices (BMPs) and other storm water pollution control measures and to cite infractions and to impose fines pursuant to this chapter. Except as otherwise provided herein, the authorized enforcement officer shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this section. 
E.  This chapter is also intended to provide the city with the legal authority necessary to control discharges to and from those portions of the municipal storm water system over which it has jurisdiction as required by the municipal NPDES permit. 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015)  
8.28.020 - Definitions. 
Except as specifically provided herein, any term used in this chapter shall be defined as that term is defined in the current municipal NPDES permit, or if it is not specifically defined in either the municipal NPDES permit, then as such term is defined in the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and/or the regulations promulgated thereunder. If the definition of any term contained in this chapter conflicts with the definition of the same term in the current municipal NPDES permit, then the definition contained in the municipal NPDES permit shall govern. The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter. 
"Area susceptible to runoff" means any surface directly exposed to precipitation or in the path of runoff caused by precipitation which path leads off the parcel on which the surface is located. 
"Area of special biological significance (ASBS)" means areas designated by the state water board as ocean areas requiring protection of species or biological communities to the extent that alteration of natural water quality is undesirable. All areas of special biological significance are also classified as a subset of state water quality protection areas. 
"Authorized enforcement officer" means the director of the department of public works on his or her designee. 
"Automotive service facility" means a facility that is categorized in any one (1) of the following standard industrial classification (SIC) and North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes. For inspection purposes, permittees need not inspect facilities with SIC codes 5013, 5014, 5541, 5511 provided that these facilities have no outside activities or materials that may be exposed to storm water. 
"Basin plan" means the Water Quality Control Plan, Los Angeles Region, Basin Plan for the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, adopted by the Regional Water Board on June 13, 1994 and subsequent amendments. 
"Best management practices (BMPs)" means practices or physical devices or systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from storm water or non-storm water discharges to receiving waters, or designed to reduce the volume of storm water or non-storm water discharged to the receiving water. Examples of BMPs may include, but are not limited to public education and outreach, proper planning of development projects, proper cleaning of catch basin inlets, and proper sludge- or waste-handling and disposal, among others. 
"Biofiltration" means a LID BMP that reduces storm water pollutant discharges by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy or groundcover, and through incidental infiltration and/or evapotranspiration, and filtration. Incidental infiltration is an important factor in achieving the required pollutant load reduction. Therefore, the term "biofiltration" as used in this chapter is defined to include only systems designed to facilitate incidental infiltration or achieve the equivalent pollutant reduction as biofiltration BMPs with an underdrain (subject to approval by the regional board's executive officer). Biofiltration BMPs include bioretention systems with an underdrain and bioswales. 
"Bioretention" means a LID BMP that reduces storm water runoff by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through evapotranspiration and infiltration. The bioretention system typically includes a minimum two-foot top layer of a specified soil and compost mixture underlain by a gravel-filled temporary storage pit dug into the in-situ soil. As defined in this chapter, a bioretention BMP may be designed with an overflow drain, but may not include an underdrain. When a bioretention BMP is designed or constructed with an underdrain it is regulated by the NPDES permit as biofiltration. 
"Bioswale" means a LID BMP consisting of a shallow channel lined with grass or other dense, low-growing vegetation. Bioswales are designed to collect storm water runoff and to achieve a uniform sheet flow through the dense vegetation for a period of several minutes. 
"City" means the City of Calabasas. 
"Clean Water Act (CWA)" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act enacted in 1972, by Public Law 92-500, and amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987. The Clean Water Act prohibits the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States unless the discharge is in accordance with a NPDES permit. 
"Commercial development" means any development on private land that is not heavy industrial or residential. The category includes, but is not limited to: hospitals, laboratories and other medical facilities, educational institutions, recreational facilities, plant nurseries, car wash facilities, mini-malls and other business complexes, shopping malls, hotels, office buildings, public warehouses and other light industrial complexes. 
"Commercial malls" means any development on private land comprised of one (1) or more buildings forming a complex of stores which sell various merchandise, with interconnecting walkways enabling visitors to easily walk from store to store, along with parking area(s). A commercial mall includes, but is not limited to: mini-malls, strip malls, other retail complexes, and enclosed shopping malls or shopping centers. 
"Construction activity" means any construction or demolition activity, clearing, grading, grubbing, or excavation or any other activity that result in land disturbance. Construction does not include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety or routine maintenance activities required to maintain the integrity of structures by performing minor repair and restoration work, maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purposes of the facility. See "routine maintenance" definition for further explanation. Where clearing, grading or excavating of underlying soil takes place during a repaving operation, state general construction permit coverage by the State of California general permit for storm water discharges associated with industrial activities or for storm water discharges associated with construction activities is required if more than one (1) acre is disturbed or the activities are part of a larger plan. 
"Control" means to minimize, reduce or eliminate by technological, legal, contractual, or other means, the discharge of pollutants from an activity or activities. 
"Development" means construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-family, multiunit or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail, and other nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or mass grading for future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety. 
"Directly adjacent" means situated within two hundred (200) feet of the contiguous zone required for the continued maintenance, function, and structural stability of the environmentally sensitive area. 
"Director" means the city's director of public works or the director's designee. 
"Discharge" when used without further qualification of the term means any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, dumping, or disposal of any liquid, semisolid, or solid substance. 
"Discharging directly" means outflow from a drainage conveyance system that is composed entirely or predominantly of flows from the subject, property, development, subdivision, or industrial facility, and not commingled with the flows from adjacent lands. 
"Discharge of a pollutant" means any addition of any "pollutant" or combination of pollutants to "waters of the United States" from any "point source" or, any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the "contiguous zone" or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft which is being used as a means of transportation. The term discharge includes additions of pollutants into waters of the United States from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a state, municipality, or other person which do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately owned treatment works. 
"Discretionary project" is defined in the same manner as Section 15357 of the Guidelines For Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act contained in Title 14 of the California Code Of Regulations, as amended, and means a project which requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation when the city decides to approve or disapprove a particular activity, as distinguished from situations where the city merely has to determine whether there has been conformity with applicable statutes, ordinances, or regulations. 
"Disturbed area" means an area that is altered as a result of clearing, grading, and/or excavation. 
"Environmentally sensitive area (ESA)" means an area in which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their special nature or role in an ecosystem and which would be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and developments (California Public Resources Code Section 30107.5). Areas subject to storm water mitigation requirements are areas designated as significant ecological areas by the County of Los Angeles (Los Angeles County Significant Areas Study, Los Angeles County Department of Regional Planning (1976) and amendments); an area designated as a significant natural area by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife's Significant Natural Areas Program provided that area has been field verified by the department of fish and game; an area listed in the basin plan as supporting the rare, threatened, or endangered species (RARE) beneficial use; and an area identified by the city as environmentally sensitive as reflected on the map which is on file in the city's department of public works. 
"Flow-through BMPs" means modular, vault type "high flow biotreatment" devices contained within an impervious vault with an underdrain or designed with an impervious liner and an underdrain. 
"General construction activities storm water permit" means the general NPDES permit adopted by the state board which authorizes the discharge of storm water from construction activities under certain conditions. 
"General industrial activities storm water permit" means the general NPDES permit adopted by the state board which authorizes the discharge of storm water from certain industrial activities under certain conditions. 
"Green roof" means a LID BMP using planter boxes and vegetation to intercept rainfall on the roof surface. Rainfall is intercepted by vegetation leaves and through evapotranspiration. Green roofs may be designed as either a bioretention BMP or as a biofiltration BMP. To receive credit as a bioretention BMP, the green roof system planting medium shall be of sufficient depth to provide capacity within the pore space volume to contain the design storm depth and may not be designed or constructed with an underdrain. 
"Good housekeeping practices" means common practices related to the storage, use, or cleanup of materials, performed in a manner that minimizes the discharge of pollutants. Examples include, but are not limited to, purchasing only the quantity of materials to be used at a given time, use of alternative and less environmentally harmful products, cleaning up spills and leaks, and storing materials in a manner that will contain any leaks or spills. 
"Hazardous material(s)" means any material(s) defined as hazardous by Division 20, Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Hillside" means a property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions, where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope that is twenty-five (25) percent or greater and where grading contemplates cut or fill slopes. 
"Illicit connection" means any man-made conveyance that is connected to the storm drain system without a permit, excluding gutters, roof-drains and other similar connections. Examples include channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the storm drain system. 
"Illicit discharge" means any discharge that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations and is: 
1.  Into the MS4; 
2.  From the MS4 into a receiving water; 
3.  Through a natural drainage channel into the MS4 or into a receiving water; or directly into a receiving water. 
The term illicit discharge includes any non-storm water discharge, except authorized non-storm water discharges; conditionally except non-storm water discharges; and non-storm water discharges resulting from natural flows specifically identified in the NPDES permit. 
"Impervious surface" means any man-made or modified surface that prevents or significantly reduces the entry of water into the underlying soil, resulting in runoff from the surface in greater quantities and/or at an increased rate, when compared to natural conditions prior to development. Examples of places that commonly exhibit impervious surfaces include parking lots, driveways, roadways, storage areas, and rooftops. The imperviousness of these areas commonly results from paving, compacted gravel, compacted earth, and oiled earth. 
"Industrial park" means land development that is set aside for industrial development. Industrial parks are usually located close to transport facilities, especially where more than one (1) transport modalities coincide: highways, railroads, airports, and navigable rivers. It includes office parks, which have offices and light industry. 
"Infiltration" means the downward entry of water into the surface of the soil. 
"Infiltration BMP" means a LID BMP that reduces stormwater runoff by capturing and infiltrating the runoff into in-situ soils or amended onsite soils. Examples of infiltration BMPs include infiltration basins, dry wells, and pervious pavement. 
"Inspection" means entry and the conduct of an on-site review of a facility and its operations, at reasonable times, to determine compliance with specific municipal or other legal requirements. The steps involved in performing an inspection, include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Pre-inspection documentation research; 
2.  Request for entry; 
3.  Interview of facility personnel; 
4.  Facility walk-through; 
5.  Visual observation of the condition of facility premises; 
6.  Examination and copying of records as required; 
7.  Sample collection (if necessary or required); 
8.  Exit conference (to discuss preliminary evaluation); and report preparation, and if appropriate, recommendations for coming into compliance. 
"Low impact development (LID)" consists of building and landscape features designed to retain or filter storm water runoff. 
"Material" means any substance including, but not limited to: garbage and debris; lawn clippings, leaves, and other vegetation; biological and fecal waste; sediment and sludge; oil and grease; gasoline; paints, solvents, cleaners, and any fluid or solid containing chemicals. 
"Maximum extent practicable (MEP)" means the standard for implementation of storm water management programs to reduce pollutants in storm water, including management practices, control techniques and system, design and engineering methods. See also municipal NPDES permit. 
"Multi-phased project" means any planning priority project implemented over more than one (1) phase. The site of a multi-phased project shall include any land and water area designed and used to store, treat or manage stormwater runoff in connection with the development or redevelopment, including any tracts, lots, or parcels of real property, whether developed or not, associated with, functionally connected to, or under common ownership or control with such development or redevelopment. 
"Municipal NPDES permit" or "MS4 permit" means the "Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Discharges within the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles County, except those Discharges Originating from the City of Long Beach MS4" (Order No. R4-2012-0175, NPDES Permit No. CAS004001), issued on November 08, 2012, issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region and any successor permit to that permit. 
"Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)" or "municipal storm water system" means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains): 
1.  Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, storm water, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States; 
2.  Designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water; 
3.  Which is not a combined sewer; 
4.  Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 C.F.R. Section 122.2. (40 C.F.R. Section 122.26(b)(8)). 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)" means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under CWA Section 307, 402, 318, and 405. The term includes an "approved program." 
"Natural drainage system" means a drainage system that has not been improved (e.g., channelized or armored). The clearing or dredging of a natural drainage system does not cause the system to be classified as an improved drainage system. 
"New development" means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision. 
"NPDES permit" means any waste discharge requirements issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region or the state water resources control board as an NPDES permit pursuant to Water Code Section 13370. 
"Parking lot" means land area or facility for the parking or storage of motor vehicles used for businesses, commerce, industry, or personal use, with a lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area, or with twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces. 
"Pollutant" means those pollutants defined in Section 502(6) of the federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1362(6)), or incorporated into California Water Code Section 13373. Examples of pollutants include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Commercial and industrial waste (such as fuels, solvents, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers, pesticides, slag, ash, and sludge); 
2.  Metals such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium; and non-metals such as phosphorus and arsenic; 
3.  Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease); 
4.  Excessive eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials in amounts which may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the state; 
5.  Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show facilities); 
6.  Substances having characteristics such as pH less than six (6) or greater than nine (9), or unusual coloration or turbidity, or excessive levels of fecal coliform, or fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus. 
The term "pollutant" shall not include uncontaminated storm water, potable water or reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility. The term "pollutant" also shall not include any substance identified in this definition, if through compliance with the best management practices available, the discharge of such substance has been reduced or eliminated to the maximum extent practicable. In an enforcement action, the burden shall be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish the reduction or elimination of the discharge to the maximum extent practicable through compliance with the best management practices available. 
"Planning priority project" mean a project that is required to incorporate appropriate storm water mitigation measures into the design plan for its respective project. 
"Project" means all development, redevelopment, and land disturbing activities. The term is not limited to "project" as defined under CEQA (Pub. Resources Code Section 21 065). 
"Rainfall harvest and use" means a LID BMP system designed to capture runoff, typically from a roof but can also include runoff capture from elsewhere within the site, and to provide for temporary storage until the harvested water can be used for irrigation or non-potable uses. The harvested water may also be used for potable water uses if the system includes disinfection treatment and is approved for such use by the local building department in conjunction with requirements of the county public health department. 
"Receiving water" means "water of the United States" into which waste and/or pollutants are or may be discharged. 
"Redevelopment" means land disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition or replacement of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of impervious surface area on an already developed site for all project categories except single family residential projects. For existing single family dwelling and accessory structures, redevelopment is the creation, addition, or replacement of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area. "Redevelopment" includes, but is not limited to, the following activities that meet the minimum standards set forth in this definition: 
1.  Expansion of a building footprint; 
2.  Addition or replacement of a structure; 
3.  Replacement of an impervious surface that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and 
4.  Land disturbing activities related to structural or impervious surfaces. "Redevelopment" does not include routine maintenance activities that are conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of facility or an emergency redevelopment activity that is required to protect public health and safety. 
"Regional board" means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region. 
"Restaurant" means a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption (SIC Code 5812). 
"Retail gasoline outlet" means any facility engaged in selling gasoline and lubricating oils. 
"Routine maintenance" includes, but is not limited to projects conducted: 
1.  Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility. 
2.  Perform as needed restoration work to preserve the original design grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities. 
3.  Carry out road shoulder work, regrade dirt or gravel roadways and shoulders and perform ditch cleanouts. 
4.  Update existing lines 1 [] and facilities to comply with applicable codes, standards, and regulations regardless if such projects result in increased capacity. 
5.  Repair leaks routine maintenance does not include construction of new 2 [] lines or facilities resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards and regulations. 
"Runoff" means any runoff including storm water and dry weather flows from a drainage area that reaches a receiving water body or subsurface. During dry weather it is typically comprised of base flow either contaminated with pollutants or uncontaminated and nuisance flows. 
"Significant ecological areas (SEAs)" means an area that is determined to possess an example of biotic resources that cumulatively represent biological diversity, for the purposes of protecting biotic diversity, as part of the Los Angeles County General Plan. Areas are designated as SEAs, if they possess one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
1.  The habitat of rare, endangered, and threatened plant and animal species. 
2.  Biotic communities, vegetative associations, and habitat of plant and animal species that are either one (1) of a kind, or are restricted in distribution on a regional basis. 
3.  Biotic communities, vegetative associations, and habitat of plant and animal species that are either one (1) of a kind or are restricted in distribution in Los Angeles County. 
4.  Habitat that at some point in the life cycle of a species or group of species, serves as a concentrated breeding, feeding, resting, migrating grounds and is limited in availability either regionally or within Los Angeles County. 
5.  Biotic resources that are of scientific interest because they are either an extreme in physical/geographical limitations, or represent an unusual variation in a population or community. 
6.  Areas important as game species habitat or as fisheries. 
7.  Areas that would provide for the preservation of relatively undisturbed examples of natural biotic communities in Los Angeles County. 
8.  Special areas. 
"Site" means land or water area where any "facility or activity" is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. 
"Source control BMP" means any schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, managerial practices or operational practices that aim to prevent storm water pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution. 
"Standard urban storm water mitigation plan" or "SUSMP" means the current version of the standard urban storm water mitigation plan approved by the regional board, and on file in the office of the city clerk of this city, and the NPDES permit models that have been approved by the executive officer of the regional board for implementation to control storm water pollution from new development and redevelopment or any project that were authorized under a prior version (pre-2012) of the municipal NPDES permit. 
"Storm drain system" means any facility or any parts of the facility, including streets, gutters, conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels and watercourse that are used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting or disposing of storm water and are located within the city. 
"Storm event" means a rainfall event that produces more than one-tenth inch of precipitation in twenty-four (24) hours unless specifically stated otherwise. 
"Stormwater" or "storm water" means runoff and drainage related to precipitation events (pursuant to 40 C.F.R. Section 122.26(b)(13); 55 Fed. Reg. 47990, 47995(Nov. 16, 1990). 
"Storm water runoff" or "urban runoff" means surface water flow produced by storm and non-storm events. Non-storm events include flow from residential, commercial or industrial activities involving the use of potable and non-potable water. When all other factors are constant, runoff increases as the perviousness of a surface decreases. 
"Storm water management plan" means a plan which shall be required in connection with any new development or redevelopment for the purposes of construction erosion control, runoff detention to control runoff rate to predevelopment levels, and runoff retention or other treatment measures to prevent dry-weather pollution from entering the storm drain system. 
"Storm water runoff" means that part of precipitation (rainfall or snowmelt) which travels via flow across a surface to the MS4 or receiving waters from impervious, semi-pervious or pervious surfaces. When all other factors are equal, runoff increases as the perviousness of a surface decreases. 
"Structural BMP" means any structural facility designed and constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts of storm water and urban runoff pollution (e.g. canopy, structural enclosure). Structural BMPs may include both treatment control BMPs and source control BMPs. 
"SUSMP" means the Los Angeles Countywide Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan. 
"Treatment" means the application of engineered systems that use physical, chemical, or biological processes to remove pollutants. Such processes include, but are not limited to, filtration, gravity settling, media adsorption, biodegradation, biological uptake, chemical oxidation and UV radiation. 
"Treatment control BMP" means any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media adsorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process. 
"Urban runoff" means surface water flow produced by non-storm water resulting from residential, commercial, and industrial activities involving the use of potable and non-potable water. 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Update existing lines includes replacing existing lines with new materials or pipes. 

--- () --- 
New lines are those that are not associated with existing facilities and are not part of a project to update or replace existing lines. 
 
8.28.030 - Responsibility for administration. 
This chapter shall be administered by the public works director. 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015)  
8.28.040 - Prohibited activities. 
A.  Illicit discharges and connections. No person shall commence, establish, use, maintain, or continue any illicit connections to the MS4 or any illicit discharges to the MS4. This prohibition against illicit connections applies to the use, maintenance, or continuation of any illicit connection, whether that connection was established prior to, or after the effective date of this chapter. 
B.  Littering. No person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left, or maintained or kept, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or any other discarded or abandoned objects, articles or accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or drainage structure, business place, or upon any private plot of land in the city, so that the same might be or become a pollutant. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water within the city. This subsection shall not apply to refuse, rubbish or garbage deposited in containers or other appropriate receptacles which are placed in designated locations for regular solid waste pick up and disposal. 
C.  Disposal of Landscape Debris. No person shall intentionally dispose of leaves, dirt or other landscape debris into a storm drain. 
D.  Industrial Activities. No person shall conduct any industrial activity in the city without obtaining all permits required by state or federal law, including a NPDES general industrial activity storm water permit when required. Persons conducting industrial activities within the city should refer to the most recent edition of the "Industrial/Commercial Best Management Practices Handbook", produced and published by the Storm Water Quality Task Force, for specific guidance on selecting best management practices for reducing pollutants in storm water discharges from industrial activities. 
E.  Non-storm water discharges. All non-storm water discharges into the MS4 are prohibited unless those flows are: 
1.  In compliance with a separate NPDES permit; 
2.  Pursuant to a discharge exemption by the regional board, the regional board's executive officer, or the state water resources control board; 
3.  Associated with emergency firefighting activities (i.e., flows necessary for the protection of life or property); 
4.  Natural flows as defined in the municipal NPDES permit; 
5.  Conditionally exempt non-storm water discharges as defined in accordance with the municipal NPDES permit; or 
6.  Authorized as a temporary non-storm water discharge by USEPA pursuant to Sections 104(a) or 104(b) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act. 
F.  Prohibited discharges include, but are not limited to: 
1.  The discharge of wash waters to the MS4 from commercial auto washing or when gas stations, auto repair garages, or other type of automotive service facilities are cleaned; 
2.  The discharge of water to the MS4 from mobile auto washing, steam cleaning, mobile carpet cleaning, and other such mobile commercial and industrial operations; 
3.  Discharges to the MS4 from areas where repair of machinery and equipment, including motor vehicles, which are visibly leaking oil, fluid, or antifreeze, is undertaken; 
4.  Discharges of runoff to the MS4 from storage areas of materials containing grease, oil, or other hazardous substances, and uncovered receptacles containing hazardous materials; 
5.  Discharges of commercial/residential swimming pool filter backwash to the MS4; 
6.  Discharges of runoff from the washing of toxic materials from paved or unpaved areas to the MS4; 
7.  Discharges to the MS4 from washing impervious surfaces in industrial/commercial areas, unless specifically required by the state's, or the city's, or Los Angeles County's health and safety codes, or permitted under a separate NPDES permit; 
8.  Discharges to the MS4 from the washing out of concrete or cement laden wash water from concrete trucks, pumps, tools, and equipment; 
9.  Discharges to the MS4 of any pesticide, fungicide, or herbicide banned by the US EPA or the California Department of Pesticide Regulation or a product registered under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act to any waste stream that may ultimately be released to waters of the United States—unless specifically authorized under an NPDES permit. This requirement is not applicable to products used for lawn and agricultural purposes. 
10.  The disposal of hazardous wastes into trash containers used for municipal trash disposal where such disposal causes or threatens to cause a direct or indirect discharge to the MS4. 
G.  Discharges in Violation of the Municipal NPDES Permit. Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of the municipal NPDES permit, either separately or in combination with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and such person(s) shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city from all losses, liabilities, claims, or causes of actions in any administrative or judicial action relating to such discharge. 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015)  
8.28.060 - Exempted discharges. 
Discharges from those activities specifically identified in, or pursuant to, Part III.A.1-3 of the municipal NPDES permit as being exempted discharges, conditionally exempted discharges, or designated discharges shall not be considered a violation of this chapter, provided that any such discharges are consistent with Part III.A of the municipal NPDES permit and: 
A.  Applicable BMPs developed pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit are implemented to minimize any adverse impacts from such identified sources; 
B.  The discharger meets all notification, reporting and recordkeeping requirements; and 
C.  The discharger has conducted all applicable monitoring requirements. 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015)  
8.28.080 - Conditional exemptions from non-storm water discharge prohibition. 
The following categories of non-storm water discharges are conditionally exempt from the non-storm water discharge prohibition in the municipal NPDES permit and shall not be considered a violation of this chapter; provided that they meet all required conditions and BMPs as specified, or as otherwise approved by the regional board. 
A.  Discharges from essential non-emergency fire fighting activities provided appropriate BMPs are implemented pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit; 
B.  Discharges from drinking water supplier distribution systems, where not otherwise regulated by an individual or general NPDES permit, provided appropriate BMPs are implemented pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit; 
C.  Discharges from foundation and footing drains; 
D.  Water from crawl space or basement pumps; 
E.  Hillside dewatering; 
F.  Naturally occurring ground water seepage via a MS4; and 
G.  Non-anthropogenic flows from a naturally occurring stream via a culvert MS4, as long as there are no contributions of anthropogenic runoff. 
Conditionally exempt non-storm water discharges shall not cause or contribute to an exceedance of applicable receiving water limitations and/or water quality effluent limitations pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit or special protections, or alter natural ocean water quality. 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015)  
8.28.100 - Good housekeeping provisions. 
Owners and occupants of property within the city shall implement best management practices to prevent or reduce non-stormwater discharges and the discharge of pollutants to the municipal storm water system, natural drainage courses, the ASBS and receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. Treatment and structural BMPs shall be properly operated and maintained to prevent the breeding of vectors. Implementation includes, but is not limited to: 
A.  Chemical and Human Waste. No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise expose any chemical, human, or septic waste to precipitation in an area where a discharge to city streets, the MS4, natural drainage courses, or receiving water may or does occur. 
B.  Use of Water. Dry cleaning methods shall be used for outdoor areas before using cleaning methods that require water, as runoff is not permitted to leave the property. Sweeping and collection of debris is encouraged for trash disposal and cleaning outdoor areas. 
C.  Storage of Materials, Machinery, and Equipment. Machinery or equipment that is to be repaired or maintained in areas susceptible to or exposed to runoff, shall be placed in a manner so that leaks, spills and other maintenance-related pollutants are not discharged to the MS4, natural drainage courses, or receiving waters. 
D.  Removal and Disposal of Debris from Industrial/Commercial Motor Vehicle Parking Lots. Industrial/commercial motor vehicle parking lots with more than twenty-five (25) parking spaces that are located in areas potentially exposed to storm water shall be swept regularly or other equally effective measures shall be utilized to remove debris from such parking lots. 
E.  Food Wastes. Food wastes generated by nonresidential food service and food distribution sources shall be properly disposed of and in a manner so such wastes are not discharged to the MS4, natural drainage courses, or receiving waters. 
F.  Best Management Practices. Best management practices shall be used in areas susceptible to runoff for the removal and lawful disposal of pollutants. 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015)  
8.28.120 - Requirements for existing properties. 
Owners and occupants of property within the city shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Septic Waste. No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise expose any chemical or septic waste to precipitation in an area where discharge to city streets or storm drains system may or does occur. 
B.  Use of Water. Runoff of water used for irrigation purposes shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable. Runoff of water from the permitted washing down of impervious areas shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable and diverted so that flow is directed to landscaped areas for infiltration where possible. 
C.  Storage of Materials, Machinery, and Equipment. Machinery or equipment that is to be repaired or maintained in areas susceptible to or exposed to storm water, shall be placed in a manner so that pollutants are not discharged to the municipal storm water system. 
D.  Removal and Disposal of Debris and Residue and Other Materials. 
1.  Non-residential motor vehicle parking lots with more than twenty-five (25) parking spaces that generate runoff shall be swept regularly or other equally effective measures will be utilized to remove oil, chemicals, debris or other polluting materials from such parking lots. Sweeping and collection of debris is encouraged for trash disposal. 
2.  Food and liquid wastes generated by non-residential food service and food distribution sources shall be disposed of in a manner so such wastes are not discharged to the municipal storm water system. 
3.  Best management practices shall be used in areas exposed to storm water for the removal and lawful disposal of all fuels, chemicals, fuel and chemical wastes, animal wastes, garbage, batteries, or other materials which have potential adverse impacts on water quality. 
E.  Maintenance of Structural BMPs. Structural BMPs required by the city, County of Los Angeles, or any state or federal agency shall be properly operated and maintained, as specified by an approved SUSMP or storm water mitigation plan, or otherwise determined by the authorized enforcement officer. Records and documentation of such maintenance shall be provided to the director upon request. 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015)  
8.28.140 - Requirements for industrial/commercial and construction activities. 
A.  Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger described in any general NPDES permit addressing such discharges, as may be issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the state water resources control board, or the regional board, shall comply with all requirements of such permit and the provisions of this chapter. Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit. Proof of compliance with any such NPDES permit may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized enforcement officer, or designated representative, prior to the issuance of any grading, building or occupancy permits, or any other type of permit or license issued by the city. 
B.  Storm water runoff containing sediment, construction materials or other pollutants from the construction site and any adjacent staging, storage or parking areas shall be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. The following shall apply to all construction projects within the city and shall be required from the time of land clearing, demolition or commencement of construction until receipt of a certificate of occupancy: 
1.  Sediment, construction wastes, trash and other pollutants from construction activities shall be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. 
2.  Structural controls such as sediment barriers, plastic sheeting, detention ponds, filters, berms, and similar controls shall be utilized to the maximum extent practicable in order to minimize the escape of sediment and other pollutants from the site. 
3.  Between October 1 and April 15, all excavated soil shall be located on the site in a manner that minimizes the amount of sediment running onto the street, drainage facilities or adjacent properties. Soil piles shall be bermed or covered with plastic or similar materials until the soil is either used or removed from the site. 
4.  No washing of construction or other vehicles is permitted adjacent to a construction site. No water from the washing of construction vehicle of equipment on the construction site is permitted to run off the construction site and enter the MS4. 
5.  Trash receptacles shall be situated at convenient locations on construction sites and shall be maintained in such a manner that trash and litter does not accumulate on the site nor migrate off site. 
6.  Erosion from slopes and channels must be controlled through the effective combination of best management practices. 
C.  The owner or authorized representative of the owner shall certify in a form acceptable to the director or duly authorized representative that best management practices to control runoff from construction activity at all construction sites will be implemented prior to the issuance of any building or grading permit. 
D.  A local storm water pollution prevention plan and wet weather erosion control plan for construction activities shall be required by the director consistent with the municipal NPDES permit. Such plans must be submitted to the city for review and approval prior to the issuance of building or grading permits. 
E.  A storm water pollution prevention plan shall be required by the director consistent with the municipal NPDES permit and the general construction permit for those projects that have land disturbances of one (1) acre or greater. 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015)  
8.28.160 - Low impact development requirements for new development and redevelopment. 
A.  Objective. The provisions of this section establish requirements for construction activities and facility operations of development and redevelopment projects to comply with the current MS4 permit (Order No. R4-2012-0175), to lessen the water quality impacts of development by using smart growth practices, and integrate LID practices and standards for storm water pollution mitigation through means of infiltration, evapotranspiration, biofiltration, and rainfall harvest and use. LID shall be inclusive of new development and/or redevelopment requirements. 
B.  Scope. This section contains requirements for storm water pollution control measures in development and redevelopment projects and authorizes the city to further define and adopt storm water pollution control measures, and to develop LID principles and requirements, including but not limited to the objectives and specifications for integration of LID strategies. Except as otherwise provided herein, the city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this section. 
C.  Applicability. This section applies to the following new development and redevelopment projects which are subject to city conditioning and approval for the design and implementation of post-construction controls and other BMPs to mitigate storm water pollution, prior to completion of the project(s), as follows: 
1.  New Development Projects. 
a.  All development projects equal to one (1) acre or greater of disturbed area that adds more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of impervious surface area. 
b.  Industrial parks with ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of surface area. 
c.  Commercial malls with ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of surface area. 
d.  Retail gasoline outlets with five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area. 
e.  Restaurants (standard industrial classification (SIC) of 5812) with five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area. 
f.  Parking lots with five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area, or with twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces. 
g.  Street and road construction of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area shall follow the city's green streets policy to the maximum extent practicable. Street and road construction applies to standalone streets, roads, highways, and freeway projects, and also applies to streets within larger projects. 
h.  Automotive service facilities (standard industrial classification (SIC) of 5013, 5014, 5511, 5541, 7532-7534 and 7536-7539) with 5,000 square feet or more of surface area. 
i.  Projects located in or directly adjacent to, or discharging directly to an significant ecological area (SEA), where the development will: 
1.  Discharge storm water runoff that is likely to impact a sensitive biological species or habitat; and 
2.  Create two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more of impervious surface area 
a.  New single-family hillside homes. 
2.  Redevelopment Projects. 
a.  Land disturbing activity that results in the creation or addition or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site for categories identified in C.1. 
b.  Where redevelopment results in an alteration to more than fifty (50) percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-construction storm water quality control requirements, the entire project must be mitigated. 
c.  Where redevelopment results in an alteration of less than fifty (50) percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-construction storm water quality control requirements, only the alteration must be mitigated, and not the entire development. 
d.  Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities that are conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of facility or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect public health and safety. Impervious surface replacement, such as the reconstruction of parking lots and roadways which does not disturb additional area and maintains the original grade and alignment, is considered a routine maintenance activity. Redevelopment does not include the repaving of existing roads to maintain original line and grade. 
e.  Existing single-family dwelling and accessory structures are exempt from the redevelopment requirements unless such projects create, add, or replace ten thousand (10,000) square feet of impervious surface area. 
D.  LID Standards Manual. The director shall prepare, maintain, and update, as deemed necessary and appropriate, a manual ("LID standards manual"), which shall include urban and stormwater runoff quantity and quality control development principles and technologies for achieving compliance with the provisions of this section. The LID standards manual shall also include technical feasibility and implementation parameters, as well as other rules, requirements, and procedures as the director deems necessary, for implementing the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  Specific Requirements. 
1.  New Single-Family Hillside Homes. To the extent that the city may lawfully impose conditions, mitigation measures or other requirements on the construction of new single-family hillside homes, new single-family hillside homes are exempt from the new development/redevelopment project performance criteria of Part VI.D.7.c of the MS4 permit but shall, include mitigation measures to: 
a.  Conserve natural areas; 
b.  Protect slopes and channels; 
c.  Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage; 
d.  Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability; and 
e.  Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge, unless the diversion would result in slope instability. 
2.  Street and road construction of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface are exempt from the new development/redevelopment project performance criteria of Part VI.D.7.c of the MS4 permit but shall follow the city's green streets policy to the maximum extent practicable. 
3.  New Development and Redevelopment Projects. Unless otherwise exempted in this chapter or in the MS4 permit, the site for every new development and redevelopment project shall comply with Part VI. D. 7.c of the MS4 permit and be designed to control pollutants, pollutant loads, and runoff volume to the maximum extent feasible by minimizing impervious surface area and controlling runoff from impervious surfaces through infiltration, evapotranspiration, bioretention and/or rainfall harvest and use in accordance with the requirements set forth in the MS4 permit and the LID standards manual. The project applicant shall prepare and submit a storm water mitigation plan, which shall implement set LID standards and practices for storm water pollution mitigation consistent with this chapter and the LID standards manual, to the director for review and approval. The storm water mitigation plan shall provide documentation to demonstrate compliance with the MS4 permit on the plans and permit application submitted to the city, and shall comply with the following: 
a.  Retain storm water runoff onsite for the storm water quality design volume (SWQDv) defined as the runoff from: 
1.  The eighty-fifth percentile twenty-four-hour runoff event as determined from the Los Angeles County eighty-fifth percentile precipitation isohyetal map; or 
2.  The volume of runoff produced from a three-quarter inch, twenty-four-hour rain event, whichever is greater. 
b.  Minimize hydromodification impacts to natural drainage systems as defined in the NPDES permit. 
F.  Technical Infeasibility. 
1.  Some relief, as outlined later in this section, from the MS4 permit (Part VI.D.7.c) requirements may be granted for technical infeasibility. To demonstrate technical infeasibility, the project applicant must demonstrate that the project cannot reliably retain one hundred (100) percent of the SWQDv on-site, even with the maximum application of green roofs and rainwater harvest and use, and that compliance with the applicable post-construction requirements would be technically infeasible by submitting a site specific hydrologic and/or design analysis conducted and endorsed by a registered professional engineer, geologist, architect, and/or landscape architect. Technical infeasibility may result from conditions including the following: 
(a)  The infiltration rate of saturated in-situ soils is less than one-third inch per hour and it is not technically feasible to amend the in-situ soils to attain an infiltration rate necessary to achieve reliable performance of infiltration or bioretention BMPs in retaining the SWQDv onsite. 
(b)  Locations where seasonal high groundwater is within five (5) to ten (10) feet of surface grade; 
(c)  Locations within one hundred (100) feet of a groundwater well used for drinking water; 
(d)  Brownfield development sites or other locations where pollutant mobilization is a documented concern; 
(e)  Locations with potential geotechnical hazards; 
(f)  Smart growth and infill or redevelopment locations where the density and/ or nature of the project would create significant difficulty for compliance with the onsite volume retention requirement. 
2.  If partial or complete onsite retention is technically infeasible, the project site may biofiltrate one and one-half (1½) times the portion of the remaining SWQDv that is not reliably retained onsite. Biofiltration BMPs must adhere to the design specifications provided in the MS4 permit (Order No. R4-2012-0175). Additional alternative compliance options such as offsite infiltration and groundwater replenishment projects may be available to the project site. The applicant for the project should contact the authorized enforcement officer to determine eligibility. 
3.  The remaining SWQDv that cannot be retained or biofiltered onsite must be treated onsite to reduce pollutant loading. BMPs must be selected and designed to meet pollutant-specific benchmarks as required by the MS4 permit. Flow through BMPs may be used to treat the remaining SWQDv and must be sized based on a rainfall intensity of: 
(a)  0.2 inches per hour, or 
(b)  The one-year, one-hour rainfall intensity as determined from the most recent Los Angeles County isohyetal map, whichever is greater. 
G.  Exemptions from LID Requirements. The provisions of this section do not apply to any of the following: 
1.  A development involving only emergency construction activity required to immediately protect public health and safety; 
2.  Infrastructure projects within the public right-of-way, excluding street and road construction of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface; 
3.  A development or redevelopment involving only activity related to gas, water, cable, or electricity services on private property; 
4.  A development or redevelopment involving only resurfacing and/or re-striping of permitted parking lots, where the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of the facility is maintained; 
5.  A project not requiring a city building, grading, demolition or other permit for construction activity. 
H.  City Review and Approval. Prior to the issuance of a permit for a new development or redevelopment project, the city shall evaluate the proposed project using the MS4 permit, and erosion and grading requirements of the city building official or authorized enforcement officer to determine (i) its potential to generate the flow of pollutants into the MS4 after construction; and (ii) how well the storm water mitigation plan for the proposed project meets the goals of this chapter. Each plan will be evaluated on its own merits according to the particular characteristics of the project and the site to be developed. Based upon the review, the city may impose conditions upon the issuance of the building permit, in addition to any required by the state construction general permit for the project, in order to minimize the flow of pollutants into the MS4. 
I.  Issuance of Discretionary Permits. No discretionary permit may be issued for any new development or redevelopment project identified in this section until the authorized enforcement officer confirms that the project plans, including the storm water mitigation plan, comply with the applicable LID requirements of this chapter. Where redevelopment results in an alteration to more than fifty (50) percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-development storm water quality control requirements, the entire project must be mitigated. Where redevelopment results in an alteration to less than fifty (50) percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-development storm water quality control requirements, only the alteration must be mitigated, and not the entire development. 
J.  Issuance of Certificates of Occupancy. As a condition for issuing a certificate of occupancy for a project subject to this chapter, the director shall require facility operators or owners to build all BMPs that are shown on the approved project plans and to submit an owner signed certification statement stating that the site and all LID BMPs will be maintained in compliance with the storm water mitigation plan and other applicable regulatory requirements. 
K.  Transfer of Properties Subject to Requirement for Maintenance of BMPs. 
1.  The transfer or lease of a property subject to a requirement for maintenance of BMPs shall include conditions requiring the transferee and its successors and assigns to either: (a) assume responsibility for maintenance of any existing BMP, or (b) to replace an existing BMP with new control measures or BMPs meeting the then current standards of the city and the municipal NPDES permit. Such requirement shall be included in any sale or lease agreement or deed for such property. The condition of transfer shall include a provision that the successor property owner or lessee conduct maintenance inspections of all BMPs at least once a year and retain proof of inspection. 
2.  For residential properties where the LID BMPs are located within a common area which will be maintained by a homeowner's association, language regarding the responsibility for maintenance shall be included in the project's conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs). Printed educational materials will be required to accompany the first deed transfer to highlight the existence of the requirement and to provide information on what storm water management facilities are present, signs that maintenance is needed, and how the necessary maintenance can be performed. The transfer of this information shall also be required with any subsequent sale of the property. 
3.  If LID BMPs are located within an area proposed for dedication to a public agency, they will be the responsibility of the developer until the dedication is accepted. 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015)  
8.28.180 - Fees. 
Fees for plan reviews, inspections, violations, corrections, and tasks associated with this chapter may be established by resolution of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015)  
8.28.200 - Enforcement. 
A.  Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance. 
1.  A violation of any provision of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, and the city attorney is authorized to abate such violation by means of a civil action in addition to whatever other remedies are available to the city under this Code and other applicable laws, rules or regulations. Additionally, the following conditions shall be considered a public nuisance: 
a.  Any failure to comply with any applicable requirement of this chapter or the municipal NPDES permit; or 
b.  Any false certification or verification, or any failure to comply with a certification or verification provided by a project applicant or the applicant's successor in interest; or 
c.  Any failure to properly operate and maintain any structural or treatment control BMP on a property in accordance with an approved storm water mitigation plan or an approved SUSMP or approved SWPPP (storm water pollution prevent plan or similar type of approved water quality improvement plan, this chapter, or the municipal NPDES permit. 
2.  The above listed conditions are hereby determined to be a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, are declared and deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated or restored by any authorized enforcement officer, and a civil or criminal action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be brought by the city attorney. 
3.  The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property and the cost thereof shall be invoiced to the owner of the property, as provided by law or ordinance for the recovery of nuisance abatement costs. If any violation of this chapter constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the authorized enforcement officer shall so declare. The failure of any person to take appropriate annual precautions to prevent storm water pollution after written notice of a determination under this section shall constitute a public nuisance and a violation of this chapter. 
B.  Inspections. 
1.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this section, or whenever an authorized enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists on any construction site any condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this section, the authorized enforcement officer may, upon consent or upon obtaining an inspection warrant, enter such construction site at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the officer by this section. 
2.  Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection process as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including, but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of storm water contamination, discharges of nonstorm water to the MS4, discharges which are not pursuant to an NPDES permit, or similar factors. 
3.  Right to Inspect. Prior to commencing any inspection as herein below authorized, the authorized enforcement officer shall obtain either the consent of the owner, his/her authorized representative or the occupant of the property or shall obtain an administrative inspection warrant or criminal search warrant. 
4.  Entry to Inspect. The authorized enforcement officer may enter property to investigate the source of any discharge to any public street, inlet, gutter, storm drain or any other part of the MS4 located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
5.  Compliance Assessments. The authorized enforcement officer may inspect property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter, including but not limited to (a) identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals used and materials stored on or contained within the property; (b) identifying point(s) of discharge of all wastewater, process water systems and pollutants; (c) investigating the natural slope at the location, including drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems; (d) establishing the location of all points of discharge from the property, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system; (e) locating any illicit connection or the source of prohibited discharge; (f) evaluating compliance with any permit issued relating to a discharge to the storm water drainage system. 
6.  Portable Equipment. For purposes of verifying compliance with this chapter, the authorized enforcement officer may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other mobile equipment. 
7.  Records Review. The authorized enforcement officer may inspect all records of the owner or occupant of property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously occurring on-site, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, storm water pollution prevention plans, monitoring program plans and any other record(s) relating to illicit connections, prohibited discharges, or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to the storm water drainage system. 
8.  Sample and Test. The authorized enforcement officer may inspect, sample and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the storm water drainage system. The authorized enforcement officer may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any legal nonconforming connection or other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests, including but not limited to smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The authorized enforcement officer may take photographs or video tape, make measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property. 
9.  Monitoring. The authorized enforcement officer may erect and maintain monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring or sampling any discharge or potential source of discharge to the storm water drainage system. 
10.  Test Results. The owner or occupant of property subject to inspection shall, on submission of a written request, receive copies of all monitoring and test results conducted by the authorized enforcement officer. 
C.  Concealment. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of such provision. 
D.  Civil Actions. In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, any violation of this section may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. In any such action, the city may seek, and the court shall grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies: 
1.  A temporary and/or permanent injunction. 
2.  Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection. 
3.  Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from violation. 
4.  Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. 
E.  Administrative Enforcement Powers. In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this chapter, any authorized enforcement officer has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies: 
1.  Cease and Desist Orders. When an authorized enforcement officer finds that a discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of this chapter, the officer may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, or practice, or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct that those persons not complying shall: (a) comply with the requirement, (b) comply with a time schedule for compliance, and (c) take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the violation from recurring. 
2.  Notice to Clean. Whenever an authorized enforcement officer finds any oil, earth, debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds, which may result in pollutants entering the municipal storm drain system or a non-storm water discharge to the storm drain system, he or she may give notice to the owner or occupant of the adjacent property to remove such oil, earth, debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or other material, in any manner that he or she may reasonably provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice. 
F.  Penalties. Violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16 of Article 1 of this Code. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
G.  Permit Revocation. To the extent the city makes a provision of this chapter or any identified BMP a condition of approval to the issuance of a permit or license, any person in violation of such condition is subject to the permit revocation procedures set forth in this Code. 
H.  Remedies. Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive." 
I.  Authority to Conduct Samplings and Establishing Sampling Devices. With the consent of the owner or occupant or pursuant to an inspection warrant, any authorized enforcement officer may establish on any property such devices as necessary to conduct sampling and monitoring activities necessary to determining the concentrations of pollutants in stormwater and/or non-stormwater runoff. The inspections provided for herein may include but are not limited to: 
1.  Inspecting efficiency or adequacy of construction or post construction BMPs; 
2.  Inspection, sampling and testing any area runoff, soils in areas subject to runoff, and or treatment system discharges; 
3.  Inspection of the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, including the use of smoke and dye tests and video survey of such pipes and conveyance systems; 
4.  Inspection of all records of the owner, contractor, developer or occupant of public or private property relating to BMP inspections conducted by the owner, contractor, developer or occupant and obtaining copies of such records as necessary; 
5.  Identifying points of stormwater discharge from the premises whether surface or subsurface and locating any illicit connection or discharge. 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015)  
8.28.220 - No taking. 
The provisions of this article will not be construed or operated to deprive any property owner of substantially all of the market value of such owner's property or otherwise constitute an unconstitutional taking without compensation. 
( Ord. No. 2015-326, § 2 , 6-24-2015)  
Chapter 8.30 - MOBILE COMMERCIAL WASHING OPERATIONS 
Sections: 
 
8.30.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
A.  To regulate mobile commercial washing activities to prevent detergents and other pollutants from being discharged into the city's storm drain system. 
B.  To establish procedures to carry out the permitting, inspection, and monitoring necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 2008-251 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.30.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below unless otherwise the context clearly requires otherwise: 
"Director" means the director of public works of the city. 
"Mobile commercial washing" means any activity conducted for compensation that involves the washing of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, or any other vehicle, and which is moved from one location to another, such as to serve customers at their residences or places of work and includes any temporary car wash event conducted by any person for the purpose of fund raising. 
(Ord. 2008-251 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.30.030 - Permit required. 
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on mobile commercial washing in the city without first obtaining and maintain a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2008-251 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.30.040 - Application procedure. 
A.  Application. Applications for mobile commercial washing permits shall be filed with the director and shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Applications shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
2.  Applications shall be completed on a form designated by the director, and shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury. 
B.  Contents of Application Form and Renewal Application Form. Applications for mobile commercial washing permits and for the renewal for such permits shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name, address, telephone and other contact information for the applicant; 
2.  A complete description of the mobile commercial washing to be conducted in the city; 
3.  Any other information that the director reasonable requires to administer this chapter or Chapter 8.28 of this Code with respect to the applicant's activities in the city. 
(Ord. 2008-251 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.30.050 - Issuance of permit and registration certificates. 
A.  Once a completed application is filed, and the applicant pays the prescribed fee, the director shall review the application and either approve (with or without conditions of approval) or deny, the application. If the application is denied, the director shall give notice of that decision to the applicant and shall include a statement of the reasons for the denial. The grounds for denial shall be: 
1.  The permit application contains a false or misleading statement of a material fact. 
2.  The permit application fails to demonstrate how the applicant will comply with this chapter and Chapter 8.28 of this Code. 
3.  The application seeks approval for mobile commercial washing in violation of applicable law. 
B.  Notice of the director's decision shall be mailed by certified or registered mail or personally delivered to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
C.  Issuance of Permit. A mobile commercial washing permit shall be effective on the date it is approved by the director or by the city manager on appeal. 
D.  Valid for One Year; Renewal; Suspension and Revocation. A mobile commercial washing permit shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance, unless suspended or revoked. A mobile commercial washing permit must be renewed annually. The director shall review a mobile commercial washing permit renewal application in the manner prescribed in this section prior to receipt of an application for renewal if he or she receives a request for such review from a departments or officer of the city. If the director denies an application for renewal or revokes or suspends a permit, the permittee may appeal the director's decision to the city manager pursuant to Section 8.30.060 of this chapter. 
E.  Information Required to Be Updated. A permittee shall notify the director of any change in facts or information presented in the application within ten (10) calendar days after such change provided, however, that nothing in this section shall entitle a permittee to conduct mobile commercial washing other than in compliance with the permit as issued and in accordance with this chapter, Chapter 8.28 of this Code and other applicable law. 
F.  Nontransferable. No permit issued under this chapter may be transferred and any attempt to do so shall invalidate the permit and constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2008-251 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.30.060 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  Within ten (10) calendar days of the director's decision, the applicant may appeal an adverse decision to the city manager. The appeal shall be in writing, shall set forth the ground(s) for the appeal, and shall be accompanied by an appeal fee in an amount established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
B.  A hearing shall be held and action taken not less than fourteen (14) days nor more than thirty (30) calendar days after the timely filing of a complete appeal, unless the applicant requests an extension. One extension shall be granted as a matter of right, but the city manager shall have discretion to grant or deny further extensions. 
C.  The city shall give the applicant ten (10) calendar days' notice of the hearing at the address shown on the application in the manner specified by Section 8.30.050(B) of this Code. 
D.  At the time set for the hearing, the city manager shall hear the applicant, who may present any facts to show why the permit should be granted. The city manager shall give consideration to all relevant documents filed and all relevant testimony given at the hearing. 
E.  The city manager shall adopt and issue a written decision approving or denying an application within thirty (30) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. Any decision to deny a permit application shall be based on the grounds set forth in Section 8.30.050(A) of this Code. Notice of the city manager's decision shall be final as to the city and shall be given as provided in Section 8.30.050(B) of this Code. 
(Ord. 2008-251 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.30.070 - Permit conditions. 
A mobile commercial washing permittee shall: 
A.  When utilizing wash water recycling units: 
1.  Notify the director in writing of all changes in disposal sites during the permit period, 
2.  Discharge wash water only as specified in the permit application; 
B.  Comply with Chapter 8.28 of this Code; 
C.  Display his or her or its mobile commercial washing permit as required by the director. 
(Ord. 2008-251 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.30.080 - Bonds. 
Prior to the issuance or renewal of the permit, an applicant shall secure and deliver to the satisfaction of the director a performance or cash bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Said performance or cash bond shall serve as security for the faithful performance of all conditions and provisions of this chapter and any permit issued under it and shall be acceptable in form to the city attorney. The bond shall remain in force during the life of the permit and all renewals thereof. The bond shall be in favor of the city and shall not extend to the right of recovery against the sureties by third persons. After any recovery against the bond by the city, the bond amount shall be restored to the required sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(Ord. 2008-251 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.30.090 - Indemnification. 
Prior to the issuance or renewal of a permit, applicants shall execute an indemnification agreement with the city as follows: 
"Permittee shall indemnify, defend with counsel approved by city and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees and agents from and against any and all loss, liability, penalty, fine, forfeiture, claim, demand, action, proceeding or suit, of any and every kind and description, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, legislative or administrative in nature including, but not limited to, injury to and death of any person and damage to property or for contribution or indemnity claimed by third parties arising out of or occasioned in any way by, directly or indirectly by the negligence or willful misconduct of permittee, its officers, agents and employees in performing services in the City of Calabasas; and/or by the failure of permittee, its officers, agents and employees to comply with the provisions of applicable laws, including the Calabasas Municipal Code, and/or applicable permits and licenses." 
(Ord. 2008-251 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.30.100 - Inspection and reporting. 
The director is authorized to enforce all provisions of this chapter. The city's inspection authority pursuant to this section shall include the authority to enter, sample, inspect, review and copy records the director may inspect mobile commercial washing activities which take place in any public area and, upon an appropriate warrant, if required, may inspect such activities on private property. 
(Ord. 2008-251 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.30.110 - Prohibition on hiring unpermitted mobile commercial washing services. 
No person shall hire, engage, or use any mobile commercial washing service which does not have a valid mobile commercial washing permit from the city. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as an infraction pursuant to Section 1.16.020 of this Code and/or pursuant to Chapter 1.17 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2008-251 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 8.32 - USE OF SKATEBOARDS 
Sections: 
 
8.32.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of skateboards within the city pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 21967. The city council, after due consideration of the probability and gravity of potential injuries to persons and property, as well as consideration of the practicability and cost of protecting against the risk of such injury, has determined that the provisions of this chapter represent reasonable measures to protect persons and property. 
(Ord. 2001-161 § 1, (part), 2001)  
8.32.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
"Public parking lots" means all parking facilities, of whatever nature, owned, operated, or maintained by the city, open to the use of the public for purposes of parking motorized vehicles, and shall including ingress and egress of such areas. 
"Road" or "roadway" means defined within California Vehicle Code Sections 527 and 530. 
"Sidewalk" means a portion of a street, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation located between the roadway and adjacent property lines for pedestrian travel. 
"Skateboard" means a single platform, which is mounted upon wheels, of any material upon which any person may ride, and such device may be used for moving or self propulsion (including self-propelled scooters). This definition shall not include the following: 
1.  Wheelchairs or other wheeled devices or conveyances operated by the disabled and tricycles ridden by children under the age of five; 
2.  Devices or conveyances whose primary purpose is used for carrying infants, small children or goods; 
3.  Devices or conveyances operated by any employee of the city and acting within the course and scope of his or her employment. 
Streets. As defined within California Vehicle Code Sections 590 and 591, "streets" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Street includes highway. 
(Ord. 2001-161 § 1, (part), 2001)  
8.32.030 - Use of skateboards prohibited in certain places. 
A.  No person shall ride a skateboard, or cause or permit same to roll or coast in the following areas: 
1.  Any roadway within the city; 
2.  Any public parking lot located within the city; 
3.  Any publicly owned tennis court; 
4.  Any construction site located on public property; 
5.  During "darkness" as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 280, unless a rider is wearing a reflective device or clothing in a manner that is visible during the hours of darkness; 
6.  Any privately owned property, including a parking lot, if (1) the owner of the property has first placed signs in plain view at each vehicular entrance and/or exit to the lot, and (2) the signs are not less than seventeen (17) by twenty-two (22) inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, and (3) the signs state: "Unlawful to ride or propel skateboards or similar devices, on this property. Calabasas Municipal Code Chapter 8.32." 
B.  Further, a person riding or propelling a skateboard on sidewalks: 
1.  Shall not impede or interfere with the flow of vehicular traffic; 
2.  Shall yield to all pedestrians, including at or in marked and unmarked crosswalks; 
3.  Shall not suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and travel into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
4.  Shall obey all stop signs, traffic signals, yield signs and other such traffic control devices; 
5.  Shall not travel at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent having due regard for the pedestrian or vehicle traffic, width of the sidewalk, and in no event at a speed which endangers the safety of persons or property; 
6.  Shall not operate any skateboard in any place in the city in such an unsafe or dangerous manner, as to put himself/herself or others in danger of serious bodily injury or death; 
7.  Shall not operate any skateboard to damage any property. 
(Ord. 2001-161 § 1, (part), 2001)  
8.32.040 - Protective equipment. 
Because skateboarding is considered a hazardous recreational activity, all persons eighteen (18) years of age or younger operating a skateboard in any area where skateboards are permitted to be operated shall be required to wear a helmet, knee pads and elbow pads. 
(Ord. 2001-161 § 1, (part), 2001)  
8.32.050 - Penalties and enforcement. 
This chapter shall be enforced by the Los Angeles County sheriff's department. Warnings of violations can be given at the discretion of the sheriff's deputy. Violation of this chapter is deemed to be an infraction and is punishable according to the provisions of Section 1.16.020 (B) of the this Code. Violators may be required to appear before the Calabasas Teen Court. 
(Ord. 2001-161 § 1, (part), 2001)  
8.32.060 - Exceptions. 
The prohibitions set forth in Section 8.32.030 shall not be applicable to: 
A.  Skateboards operated in designated areas approved by the city council such as a "skate park"; 
B.  Skateboards operated on sidewalks within city parks; 
C.  Skateboards operated while crossing a street at a marked crosswalk or at intersections designated for crossing; 
D.  Skateboards operated in private property if permission is granted by owner, manager or agent of property. 
(Ord. 2001-161 § 1, (part), 2001)  
Chapter 8.34 - GRAFFITI ABATEMENT 
Sections: 
 
8.34.010 - Title. 
This chapter may be referred to as the city's "Graffiti Abatement Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2009-256, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
8.34.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Graffiti on public or private property is a condition of blight that not only detracts from the value of property on which it is located, but also detracts from the value of surrounding properties so as to negatively affect the entire community. 
B.  California Government Code section 38771 authorizes the city to declare what constitutes a nuisance. Section 53069.3 of that code further authorizes the city to provide for the removal of graffiti and other inscribed materials from private as well as public property, under certain circumstances. The city council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance and, unless the city causes it to be removed from public and private property, it tends to remain. Other properties may then become the target of graffiti with the result that entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to live and work. 
C.  It is the purpose and intent of this chapter, to provide city staff additional enforcement tools to protect the public from vandalism and defacement, including the application of graffiti to public and private property, walls, and other structures, as well as on vehicles and other personal property. It is the further intent of this chapter, to provide notice to all of those who disregard the property rights of others, that law enforcement, all city departments, the city attorney and city prosecutor, and the district attorney's office, are directed or requested to strictly enforce the law and vigorously prosecute persons who deface public or private properties. 
(Ord. No. 2009-256, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
8.34.030 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
"Adhesive label" means any so-called "bumper sticker," sheet of paper, fabric, plastic, or other material with an adhesive backing. 
"Aerosol paint container" means any aerosol paint container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spray painting, undercoating, spray insulation, or applying another substance capable of defacing property. 
"City" means the City of Calabasas. 
"Costs" means and include, but is not limited to, court costs, attorneys' fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending persons who create, cause, or commit the graffiti in violation of this chapter. 
"Director" means the community development director. 
"Enforcement officer" means any city official, agent or contractor authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, those from the community development department and the public works department. 
"Graffiti" means any inscription, word, figure, mark, or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn, glued or painted on or otherwise posted or affixed to or on any surface without the prior consent of the owner of the property on which the surface is located, regardless of the nature of the material. 
"Graffiti-attracting surface" means the existence of any surface of any structure, tree, shrub, vehicle, personal or real property in the city that has been defaced with graffiti after removal more than three times in any twelve-month-period. 
"Notice" means a notice to abate graffiti with city employees and contract agents provided for in Section 8.34.050 of this chapter. 
"Property owner" means any person who owns, possesses, occupies, or otherwise has responsibility for the repair or maintenance of real property. 
"Responsible person" has the meaning set forth in Chapter 1.17 of this Code. 
"Retrofit" means and includes, without limitation, to restore, modify or alter real property to remove graffiti, to prevent or inhibit the recurrence of graffiti, or to return the real property to an acceptable, usable, unblemished, unblighted, or original state or condition. 
"Structures" means any structure as defined in Title 15 or Title 17 of this Code, and shall include, but not be limited to, buildings, walls, fences, poles, signs, posts, railings, benches, tables, waste containers, sidewalks, streets, cubs, and cargo/shipping containers. 
"Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails. A vehicle shall include, but not be limited to, a trailer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-256, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
8.34.040 - Maintenance of graffiti prohibited. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, it shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to cause or permit any graffiti to be visible from any real property or the public right-of-way provided, as to a person other than one who inscribed or otherwise created the graffiti, that the person is a responsible person with respect to the real property or personal property on which the graffiti is located. 
B.  Neither the city prosecutor nor the city attorney shall criminally prosecute a person other than one who inscribed or otherwise created the graffiti for a violation of this section, unless one or more responsible persons has been issued three notices of violation in accordance with Section 1.17.040 of this Code for graffiti at any location on his, her or its property in a twelve-month period. This condition precedent shall not apply to instances in which the city prosecutor or city attorney alleges violations of other provisions of this Code are present in connection with that property. In such cases, the criminal remedy may be exercised at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2009-256, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
8.34.050 - Removal of graffiti. 
A.  Declaration of Nuisance. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38771, the city council hereby declares the following conditions to constitute public nuisances: 
1.  Graffiti on any structure, tree, shrub, sidewalk, vehicle, personal or real property in the city that is visible from any other real property whether privately or publicly owned or from a public right-of-way. 
2.  Graffiti-attracting surfaces. 
B.  Abatement of Nuisance. The city council hereby declares that the maintenance of the nuisance conditions listed in subsection (A) of this section is subject to abatement as set forth herein. 
C.  Notice to Abate. Notwithstanding any other nuisance abatement notice procedures in this Code or authorized by applicable law, whenever any enforcement officer determines the existence of a nuisance as set forth in subsection (A) of this section, the enforcement officer may issue a notice to abate graffiti to the owner of the affected property, or to any other responsible person known to the enforcement officer, requiring the abatement of the nuisance within seventy-two hours of service of the notice. The enforcement officer may provide additional time to abate a violation of this chapter; provided that, he or she determines the violation is a graffiti attracting surface requiring abatement in the manner set forth in subsections (D)(1) through (D)(4) of this section. 
1.  Contents of Notice. A notice shall contain the following provisions: 
a.  The address of the real property on which the nuisance exists; 
b.  A brief description of the nuisance; 
c.  A reference to this chapter or other law prohibiting the graffiti or other nuisance; 
d.  A brief description of the actions required to abate the nuisance; 
e.  A deadline by which to abate the nuisance; 
f.  The time by and manner in which a responsible person may contest the notice pursuant to this chapter; and, 
g.  A statement that, if the notice is not timely appealed and the violations are not abated within the time specified, the right to contest the notice is waived and the city may abate the nuisance with city employees or agents at the expense of the responsible person(s). The notice shall further state that abatement costs may be assessed against the property owner and all other responsible persons, as a lien or special assessment in accordance with the provisions of chapter 8.20 or in any other manner provided by law. 
2.  Service of Notice to Abate Graffiti. Any notice shall be served upon the responsible persons by either personal delivery or by first class mail and shall be deemed served when mailed or personally served. If served by mail, the date of service shall be the date the city places the notice in a U.S. Postal Service mail receptacle. Failure of any responsible person to receive a notice shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter provided the notice is mailed to the address of record of the property owner and any other responsible person to be charged by the notice. 
D.  Method of Abatement. When graffiti is abated by repainting, the property owner shall use paint that matches the color of the remaining portions of the structure unless otherwise approved by the director. A notice may require, without limitation, one or more of the following modifications: 
1.  Retrofitting of a surface or structure; 
2.  Application of anti-graffiti materials (such as anti-etching films or anti-graffiti paints) approved by the director; 
3.  Installation of landscaping approved by the director; and, 
4.  Installation of additional lighting approved by the director. 
E.  The city council authorizes the appropriation and use of public funds (i) to remove graffiti from any real or personal property in the city; (ii) to repair, restore, replace, or retrofit real or personal property in the city that has been defaced with graffiti that cannot be cost effectively removed; or (iii) to otherwise abate graffiti-attracting surfaces. 
F.  Property Owner Consent. If a property owner consents to the abatement of graffiti or graffiti-attracting surfaces by city employees or agents, the city shall have the right, but not the obligation, to abate the nuisance. The director may authorize graffiti abatement under this subsection. 
G.  Appeal of Notice to Abate Graffiti. 
1.  Right of Appeal from a Notice to Abate Graffiti. 
a.  A responsible person may contest a notice by filing a written appeal with the city clerk and paying an appeal fee as may established from time to time by resolution of the city council within three days of the date of service of the notice. An appeal shall contain the following information: 
i.  Name, address, and telephone number of each responsible person appealing the notice, as well as a description of each appellant's interest in or other relationship to the identified property in the notice; 
ii.  Address and description of property identified in the notice; 
iii.  Date of the notice; 
iv.  Grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the hearing officer to understand the nature of the controversy; and, 
v.  The signature of at least one appellant. 
b.  Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely request for an appeal and payment of the appeal fee constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a notice. Unless an appeal is filed and fee paid, a notice becomes final and unappealable seventy-two (72) hours after service. 
c.  This chapter shall only apply to instances where the city has elected to establish the right, but not the obligation, to abate graffiti with city employees or contract agents. This chapter does not limit the right of city officials to issue alternative written or oral notices of code violations for maintaining graffiti on real or personal property to responsible persons, or to cause the abatement of graffiti nuisances in a different manner, including, without limitation, by court orders arising from the city's exercise of its criminal or civil remedies 
2.  Appeal Hearing before City Manager. 
a.  Within thirty (30) days of the filing date of an appeal, the city manager shall conduct a hearing on the appeal. The city manager shall, by first class mail, give each appellant at least five days' notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing at the address(es) specified on the appeal. The failure of any appellant to receive a properly addressed notice of hearing shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
b.  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a nuisance by a preponderance of the evidence. The notice, reports, and photographs submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the facts contained in those documents and such enforcement officer is not required to participate in the hearing. Subject to the reasonable discretion of the city manager to ensure an efficient and effective hearing, the appellant and the city may present testimony, witnesses, and evidence pertaining to the alleged nuisance or the ground(s) of appeal, as well as to cross-examine any witnesses testifying at the hearing. 
c.  The failure of any appellant to appear at the hearing without such cause as the city manager may deem sufficient to justify a continuance shall constitute a default and the notice shall thereupon be final and unappealable. 
d.  The city manager may continue the hearing on his/her own motion. 
3.  Notice of Decision; Order to Abate. 
a.  Within ten (10) days after conclusion of the hearing, the city manager shall make any one or more of the following determinations in writing: 
i.  A finding and description of each nuisance at the subject property or that no nuisance exists. If the city manager determines no nuisance exists, he or she shall cancel the notice. 
ii.  The name of each person responsible for a nuisance at the subject property, as well as the name of any appellant who lacks responsibility therefor. 
iii.  The required corrective actions for each unabated graffiti nuisance and the date by which each must be abated; and, 
iv.  Any other finding, determination, or requirement relevant to the appeal. 
b.  The decision of the city manager is final and binding. A decision determining the existence of a nuisance shall substantively state the following: "This is a final administrative decision of the City; judicial review of this decision is subject to the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.6 et seq." 
c.  A copy of the decision shall be served on all responsible parties by first class mail at the address(es) stated on the appeal or, for responsible persons not party to the appeal, to their addresses of record or addresses otherwise known to the city. Failure of a responsible person to receive a properly addressed and mailed decision shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
H.  Scope of Abatement. Whenever the city authorizes the use of public funds for the abatement of graffiti or graffiti-attracting surfaces, the city shall not authorize or undertake to repaint or repair of any area more extensive than that covered by graffiti, unless the director, determines in writing that a more extensive area should be repainted or repaired to avoid blight, or a responsible person agrees in writing to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing a more extensive area. 
I.  Costs of Abatement. The costs of abatement by city employees or contract agents shall constitute a joint and several obligations of all responsible persons and may be assessed in any, or all, of the following manners: 
1.  Special assessment or nuisance abatement lien in accordance with the provisions of chapter 8.20 of this Code; 
2.  Graffiti abatement lien against any property owned by a minor or other person (or the parent or guardian of any minor) creating, causing, or committing a graffiti nuisance, as authorized by section 38772 of the California Government Code; 
3.  Pursuant to an order of restitution by a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with California Penal Code Section 1202.4, California Government Code section 38772, or any other applicable state or federal law; and, 
4.  Any other manner provided or authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-256, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
8.34.060 - Prevention of graffiti through land use entitlements. 
A.  In approving subdivision maps, conditional use permits, variances, or other land use entitlements, the city shall consider imposing conditions reasonably related to the control of graffiti and/or the mitigation of the impacts of graffiti. Such conditions may include, without limitation: 
1.  Installation and maintenance of anti-graffiti materials approved by the director on likely graffiti-attracting surfaces; 
2.  Installation and maintenance of landscaping to protect likely graffiti-attracting surfaces; 
3.  Installation and maintenance of lighting to protect likely graffiti-attracting surfaces; 
4.  Immediate removal of graffiti; 
5.  Authorizing right of access by city employees or contract agents to remove graffiti; and, 
6.  Supplying the city at its request with paint and/or other materials acceptable to the director to abate graffiti. 
B.  The review authority, as defined in Title 17, shall require applicants for any subdivision maps, conditional use permits, variances, or other land use entitlements to record against the property any conditions of approval relating to graffiti control or prevention. The applicant shall record those conditions of approval, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, with the Los Angeles County Recorder, and such conditions of approval shall run with the land and bind all future owners of the property and any and all successors in interest of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2009-256, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
8.34.070 - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies specified in this chapter shall be cumulative and the city may resort to any other remedy available at law or in equity and resort to any one remedy shall not cause an election precluding the use of any other remedy with respect to a violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-256, § 2, 6-10-2009)  
Chapter 8.36 - SHARED ON-DEMAND MOTORIZED SCOOTERS 
 
8.36.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to declare that unless specifically permitted by this Code, shared on-demand motorized scooters are prohibited from being placed in the public right-of-way or on public property, operated in the public right-of-way or on public property, or offered for use anywhere in the city, so as to allow for adequate pedestrian traffic flow and to promote public safety. This chapter is intended to be a proper exercise of the City of Calabasas's police power, to operate only upon persons and entities acting within the city's boundaries, and not to regulate inter-city or interstate commerce. It shall be construed in accordance with this purpose and intent. 
(Ord. No. 2019-377 , § 3, 6-12-2019)  
8.36.020 - Definitions. 
"Abandon" means leaving an item unattended for any length of time. 
"Public area" means any outdoor area that is open to the public for public use, whether owned or operated by the city or a private party. 
"Public right-of-way" means any public alley, parkway, public transportation path, roadway, sidewalk, or street that is owned, granted by easement, operated, or controlled by the city, state, or any other governmental agency. 
"Scooter" means any wheeled device that has handlebars and a floorboard designed to be stood upon when riding. 
"Shared on-demand motorized scooter" means any wheeled scooter that is designed to either be powered by an electric motor or other power source, or to be powered by human propulsion, that is accessed via an on-demand electronic or other portal, whether through a smart-phone, access code, I.D. card, or similar method, and is operated by a private entity that owns, manages, maintains and insures the devices for shared use by its customers or members, which are available to its customer or members in unstaffed, self-service locations. 
(Ord. No. 2019-377 , § 3, 6-12-2019)  
8.36.030 - Prohibited conduct. 
It is unlawful to: 
A.  Display, place, offer, or make available for rent any shared on-demand motorized scooter within the City of Calabasas. 
B.  Park, leave standing, leave lying, abandon, or otherwise place a shared on-demand motorized scooter in a public area, public right-of-way, or on public property anywhere within the city in a manner that: 
1.  Obstructs travel upon or blocks access to a public right-of-way; 
2.  Poses an immediate public safety hazard; or 
3.  Is otherwise not expressly permitted by applicable laws or administrative regulations. 
C.  Operate a shared on-demand motorized scooter in a sidewalk, public right-of-way, or on public property anywhere within the city. 
D.  Operate a shared on-demand motorized scooter on any bicycle path, trail, or bikeway anywhere within the city. 
E.  Provide or offer for use a shared on-demand motorized scooter anywhere within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2019-377 , § 3, 6-12-2019)  
8.36.040 - Impoundment of devices. 
A.  A shared on-demand motorized scooter that is placed, displayed, offered, or made available for rent, or abandoned, in the public right-of-way or a public area in violation of this chapter shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the city. 
B.  Peace officers, traffic control officers, parking enforcement officers, code enforcement officers, those other city officials designated by the city manager, and any party contracted by the city to impound shared on-demand motorized scooters are authorized to impound any shared on-demand motorized scooter placed, displayed, offered, or made available for rent, or abandoned, in the public right-of-way or a public area in violation of this chapter. 
C.  The city council may adopt impound fees by resolution, which shall reflect the city's enforcement, investigation, storage and impound costs. 
D.  No person shall retrieve any impounded shared on-demand motorized scooter except upon demonstration of proper proof of ownership of the device and payment of applicable impound fees. 
(Ord. No. 2019-377 , § 3, 6-12-2019)  
8.36.050 - Enforcement. 
A.  The city's code enforcement officers and other persons designated by the city manager shall enforce this chapter and may publish written regulations in the manner required by law for the publication of ordinances and may take any and all other actions rational and necessary to enforce this chapter. 
B.  Any person or entity violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to subsection 1.16.020(B) of this Code. Each separate shared on-demand motorized scooter maintained or abandoned in violation of this chapter constitutes a separate violation. 
C.  In addition to any other remedies available by law and under this Code, a violation of this chapter is subject to the administrative enforcement provisions of Chapter 1.17 of this Code. Each separate shared on-demand motorized scooter maintained or abandoned in violation of this chapter and each separate day or portion thereof wherein the violation continues constitutes a separate and distinct violation. 
D.  The remedies specified in this chapter shall be cumulative and the city may resort to any other remedy available at law or in equity and resort to any one (1) remedy shall not cause an election precluding the use of any other remedy with respect to a violation. 
E.  The city attorney or city prosecutor may seek injunctive, legal, or other equitable relief to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2019-377 , § 3, 6-12-2019)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE  
Chapter 9.02 - EMERGENCY KEY SYSTEM 
 
9.02.010 - Purpose; Intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare by ensuring quick law enforcement access to properties in the event of an emergency. 
( Ord. No. 2017-352 , § 1, 4-26-2017)  
9.02.020 - Definitions. 
"Key access system" shall mean a U.L. listed key lock box, access key switch or security padlock, size and style approved by the jurisdictional sheriff station commander, that meets the requirements and uses the security code key adopted by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department. 
"Responsible party" means person(s) charged with the responsibility for the facility, or homeowner's association board of directors. 
"Security padlock" means a padlock approved by the jurisdictional sheriff station commander that utilizes the approved security key code adopted by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department. 
"Emergency" means a sudden, unexpected occurrence, involving a clear and imminent danger, demanding immediate action to prevent or mitigate loss of, or damage to, life, health, property, or essential public services; or response to a call for service. 
( Ord. No. 2017-352 , § 1, 4-26-2017)  
9.02.030 - Emergency key (E-Key) system. 
The following residential structures and residential communities shall be equipped with a key lock box or access key switch at or near the vehicular/pedestrian access gate or other such location required by the sheriff's station commander that permits access to the location by law enforcement personnel: 
Gated communities with single-family residences, multi-family residences, or both single-family and multi-family residences with restricted access through unstaffed vehicular/pedestrian gates; 
Multi-family residential structures that have restricted access to the entranceway through locked doors or gates which lead to a common area. 
Gated communities that have restricted access through vehicular/pedestrian gates which use a padlock device for securing the gate(s) may opt to use the approved security padlock or install a key access system. 
( Ord. No. 2017-352 , § 1, 4-26-2017)  
9.02.040 - New and existing residential communities. 
A.  All newly constructed residential communities subject to this chapter shall have the key access system installed and operational prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. All residential communities in existence on the effective date of this ordinance and subject to this section shall have one (1) year from the effective date of this ordinance to have a key access system installed and operational. 
B.  The jurisdictional sheriff station commander shall designate the type of key lock system to be implemented within the city and shall have the authority to require al single-family and multi-family communities to use the designated system. 
C.  The emergency key system designated in this chapter shall be a separate system from the fire department system, and will require the installation of separate lock boxes or key access panels at locations designated by the jurisdiction sheriff station commander. 
D.  The responsible party required to have an emergency key system shall, at all times, keep a key in the lock box (in lieu of an approved key switch) that will allow access to the unstaffed vehicular/pedestrian gates. 
E.  All costs for the purchase, installation and maintenance of the emergency key system shall be borne by and the sole responsibility of, the responsible party. 
F.  The jurisdictional sheriff station commander shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations for the use of the emergency key system. 
( Ord. No. 2017-352 , § 1, 4-26-2017)  
9.02.050 - Violations; penalties. 
A.  A violation of this chapter by any responsible party who owns, manages or operates a residential community subject to this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to Section 1.16.029 A. of this Code or, at the discretion of the office issuing the citation or prosecutor, as an infraction pursuant to Section 1.16.020 B. of this Code. 
B.  Each such violation is a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which such violation is committed or allowed to continue. 
( Ord. No. 2017-352 , § 1, 4-26-2017)  
Chapter 9.04 - LAW ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE SERVICE FEES 
 
9.04.010 - Parties and unruly gatherings. 
The city council finds that parties or gatherings at private residences within the city may on occasion disturb the public peace, safety and welfare thereby requiring law enforcement services over and above those normally provided. It is in the best interests of the public safety, welfare and convenience of the city as well as in fairness to its citizens that the city require those persons utilizing or requiring law enforcement services beyond those provided the public at large to defray the city's expense for providing the same. 
(Ord. 93-52 § 1, 1993)  
9.04.020 - Procedure. 
When a party, gathering or other assemblage of persons occurs on private property and is determined by a sheriff's deputy at the scene to constitute a violation of the California Penal Code or is otherwise a threat to the public peace, health, safety or welfare due to the magnitude of the crowd, noise or disturbance or unruly behavior generated by the gathering, excessive traffic, or destruction of property, then the deputy shall take such actions and give such direction as is necessary to abate the violation or condition and shall advise the responsible party orally and in writing that if additional law enforcement personnel are required to abate the condition, that the responsible party and/or property owner shall be held responsible for the cost of providing such services pursuant to this chapter. Direction shall be given to the person responsible for the event or on whose property it is located. If the condition is not voluntarily abated or if it nevertheless becomes necessary to call in additional sheriff's personnel in order to terminate the gathering, quell any disturbance, direct traffic, cite illegally parked vehicles or otherwise respond to the situation, then the cost of such additional law enforcement services beyond the initial response shall be reimbursed to the city as provided in Section 9.04.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-52 § 2, 1993)  
9.04.030 - Written notice. 
The sheriff is authorized and directed to prepare appropriate advisory procedures to be followed by deputies responding to a large gathering, including preparation of written materials advising the responsible person or persons of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-52 § 4, 1993)  
9.04.040 - Cost reimbursement. 
A.  The person or persons responsible for a gathering described in Section 9.04.020 of this chapter or on whose property the gathering is held, or if such person is a minor then the parents or legal guardians of the minor, shall be jointly and severally liable for the following costs attributable to the event: 
1.  The actual cost to the city of law enforcement services beyond the initial response by a sheriff's deputy necessary to abate the conditions described in Section 9.04.020 of this chapter; 
2.  Damage to public property resulting from such law enforcement response; and 
3.  Injuries to law enforcement personnel incurred in such law enforcement response. 
B.  The sheriff's department shall accurately compute the cost of providing such services in accordance with the schedule of rates and charges for personnel and equipment contained in the law enforcement services agreement with the city and advise the city manager of such costs, as well as any other costs of damage to public property or injuries to personnel resulting from the law enforcement response. The person responsible for the event as above described shall be billed for these costs by the city manager upon notice of the charges from the sheriff and payment shall be due and payable within fifteen (15) days of the billing date. Should the amount due not be paid, the city may collect the debt, as well as any costs incurred in collecting the debt due to nonpayment, pursuant to any available provision of law. 
(Ord. 93-52 § 3, 1993)  
Chapter 9.07 - SIDEWALK VENDING 
 
9.07.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following meanings shall apply: 
"Roaming sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction. 
"Sidewalk vending receptacle" means a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance. 
"Sidewalk vendor" means a person who sells food or merchandise from a sidewalk vending receptacle, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path. 
"Stationary sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location. 
(Ord. No. 2019-371 , § 3, 1-9-2019)  
9.07.020 - Sidewalk vending permits. 
A.  Only sidewalk vendors with valid sidewalk vending permits issued by the public works director may vend upon the city's public right-of-way. 
B.  A sidewalk vending permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked as set forth in this article. 
C.  To apply for a sidewalk vending permit, the applicant must provide: 
1.  A completed application form containing: 
a.  Their name and mailing address; 
b.  Description of the merchandise offered for sale or exchange; 
c.  If the sidewalk vendor is an agent of an individual, company, partnership, or corporation, the name and business address of the principal and any owners of the company, partnership, or corporation; and 
d.  Certification that the information is true to his or her knowledge and belief. 
2.  A copy of a California's driver's license or identification number, an individual taxpayer identification number, or a Social Security number. Such information is not a public record and will remain confidential as required by Government Code section 51038(c)(4). 
3.  A copy of a valid California Department of Tax and Fee Administration seller's permit, as required. 
4.  A copy of a valid mobile food permit issued by the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health, as required. 
5.  A statement indicating whether the sidewalk vendor intends to operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor and, if roaming, the intended method and path of travel. 
D.  To ensure the safety of residents and the merchantability of products sold by vendors without a fixed place of business, the city requires all sidewalk vending applicants to undergo a fingerprinting background check and to submit the results to the city as an attachment to their application. 
E.  The sidewalk vending permit application shall require the applicant to agree, in writing, to comply with all the provisions of this chapter and all applicable provisions of the Calabasas Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2019-371 , § 3, 1-9-2019)  
9.07.030 - General regulations. 
A.  To maintain accessibility standards for the city's disabled residents, every sidewalk vendor operating on any sidewalk or public right-of-way must ensure that no obstruction is placed in the sidewalk or public right-of-way that would reduce the width of the sidewalk to less than forty-eight (48) inches, exclusive of the top of the curb. No obstruction shall be located in a sidewalk or public right-of-way less than six (6) feet in width when the sidewalk is adjacent to the curb. 
B.  To prevent food-borne illness and protect the health and safety of the city's residents, every sidewalk vendor selling any food or beverage is required to wear a hairnet and food service gloves. 
C.  To prevent dangerous distractions and promote the general welfare of the city's residents, sidewalk vendors emitting any loud, unnecessary and unusual noises must comply with Section 9.25.010 of this Code. 
D.  A sidewalk vending permit does not provide an exclusive right to operate within any specific portion of the public right-of-way. 
E.  No equipment or objects used for sidewalk vending purposes may be left or maintained in public spaces or in any portion of the public right-of-way from ten p.m. to eight a.m. Any equipment or objects left overnight in public spaces or in any portion of the public right-of-way will be considered discarded and may be seized or disposed of by the city. 
F.  To facilitate the enforcement of this chapter, every sidewalk vendor must display their city-issued sidewalk vending permit on the street-side portion of their pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance when operating in the public right-of-way. 
G.  To prevent unintended rolling or slipping, a sidewalk vendor is prohibited from operating a pushcart, pedal-driven cart, wagon, or other non-motorized conveyance on a public-right-of-way with a slope greater than five (5) percent. 
H.  To preserve accessibility to private and public facilities, a sidewalk vendor operating on any sidewalk or public right-of-way must ensure that no obstruction is placed impeding entry to and exit from a business or residence or access to a public facility. 
I.  A sidewalk vendor shall not engage in the selling of alcohol, marijuana, tobacco products, products that contain nicotine or any product used to smoke/vape nicotine or marijuana, or adult-oriented material depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities. 
J.  A sidewalk vendor must carry a waste disposal bag or container to permit the disposal of trash, food, or liquids. 
K.  No sidewalk vending receptacle shall contain or use propane, natural gas, batteries, or other explosive or hazardous materials. A sidewalk vendor may not use an open flame on or within any sidewalk vending receptacle. 
L.  Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not touch, lean against, or be affixed at any time to any building or structure including, but not limited to lampposts, parking meters, mailboxes, traffic signals, fire hydrants, benches, bus shelters, newsstands, trashcans or traffic barriers. 
(Ord. No. 2019-371 , § 3, 1-9-2019)  
9.07.040 - Location-specific regulations. 
A.  Sidewalk vending hours' limitations in areas zoned for nonresidential use will be as restrictive as any limitations on hours of operation imposed on other businesses or uses on the same street, excluding those permitted to operate twenty-four (24) hours. 
B.  Sidewalk vending is limited to the hours of nine a.m. through five p.m. for areas that are exclusively residential. 
C.  Stationary sidewalk vendors are prohibited from operating in areas that are exclusively residential. 
D.  A stationary sidewalk vendor is prohibited from operating in a city park if the city has entered into exclusive agreements for the sale of food or merchandise by one (1) or more concessionaires for that city park. 
E.  A sidewalk vendor is prohibited from operating within five hundred (500) feet of a permitted certified farmers' market, a permitted swap meet, or any area subject to a temporary use permit for the duration of the permit. 
F.  To limit traffic congestion and protect the safety of children traveling to and from and in and around schools from potential adverse safety impacts due, in part, to sidewalk congestion, no sidewalk vendor is permitted to operate within five hundred (500) feet of a public or private school during the period extending of one (1) hour before the start of classes and one (1) hour after the end of classes. 
G.  To protect the health and safety of school children, no state-registered sex offender may operate as a sidewalk vendor within five hundred (500) feet of a public or private school at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2019-371 , § 3, 1-9-2019)  
9.07.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Every person vending without a sidewalk vending permit is guilty of an administrative violation punishable by an administrative fine not to exceed: 
1.  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first violation; or 
2.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second violation within one (1) year of the first violation; or 
3.  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional violation within one (1) year of the first violation. 
4.  Upon proof of a valid permit issued by the public works department, the administrative fine in Section 9.07.050(A) will be reduced to the corresponding administrative fine in Section 9.07.050(B). 
B.  Every person violating any other provision of this chapter is guilty of an administrative violation punishable by an administrative fine not to exceed: 
1.  One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; or 
2.  Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one (1) year of the first violation; or 
3.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one (1) year of the first violation. 
4.  The public works director may rescind a sidewalk vendor permit for the remaining term of the permit upon a fourth or subsequent violation of this chapter. 
C.  Failure to pay an administrative fine is not punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor. Additional fines, fees, assessments, or any other financial conditions beyond those authorized will not be assessed. However, the city may levy a lien on the violator's real or personal property, including the vehicle used for vending purposes. 
D.  An administrative violation constitutes a separate and distinct violation for each day that it exists and each such violation may be subject to the maximum fine permitted under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2019-371 , § 3, 1-9-2019)  
9.07.060 - Ability-to-pay determination. 
A.  Any fine issued under Section 9.08.050 will be accompanied with a notice of and instruction regarding the right to request an ability-to-pay determination. 
B.  If the requestor is receiving public benefits under Government Code section 68632, subdivision (a), or has a monthly income which is one hundred twenty-five (125) percent or less than the current poverty guidelines updated periodically in the Federal Register by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, the public works director will limit the total amount of the requestor's administrative fine to twenty (20) percent of the total and may: 
1.  Allow the person to complete community service in lieu of paying the total administrative fine; or 
2.  Waive the administrative fine; or 
3.  Offer an alternative disposition. 
(Ord. No. 2019-371 , § 3, 1-9-2019)  
Chapter 9.08 - SOLICITATION 
 
9.08.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following meanings shall apply: 
"Business" means and includes any type of product, goods, service, performance or activity which is provided or performed, or offered to be provided or performed, in exchange for money, labor, goods or any other form of consideration. 
"Employment" means and includes services, industry or labor performed by a person for wages or other compensation or under any contract of hire, written, oral, express or implied. 
"Solicit" means and includes any request, offer, enticement or action which announces the availability for or of employment, the sale of goods, or a request for money or other property, or any request, offer, enticement or action which seeks to purchase or secure goods or employment, or to make a contribution of money or other property. As defined herein, a solicitation shall be deemed complete when made, whether or not an actual employment relationship is created, a transaction is completed, or an exchange of money or other property takes place. 
(Ord. 95-97 § 2 (part), 1995)  
9.08.020. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-301, § 1, adopted Aug. 22, 2012, repealed § 9.08.020, in its entirety. Former § 9.08.020, pertained to "Solicitation of persons traveling in vehicles on public right-of-way prohibited." See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for derivation.  
9.08.030 - Solicitation by persons in moving vehicles on public right-of-way prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, while the occupant of a moving vehicle, to solicit, or attempt to solicit, employment, business, or contributions of money or other property, from a person who is within the public right-of-way, including but not limited to a public street, highway, sidewalk or driveway. 
(Ord. 95-97 § 2 (part), 1995)  
9.08.040 - Solicitation prohibited in commercial parking areas—Exception—Written policy and notice. 
A.  No person shall solicit, or attempt to solicit, employment from a location within a commercial parking area other than an area within or served by such parking area which is authorized by the property owner or the property owner's authorized representative for such solicitations. This section shall not apply to a solicitation to perform employment or business for the owner or lawful tenants of the subject premises. 
B.  For purposes of this section, "commercial parking area" means privately owned property which is designated or used primarily for the parking of vehicles and which adjoins one or more commercial establishments. This section shall only apply to commercial parking areas where the following occurs: 
1.  The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial parking area establishes a written policy which provides an area or areas for the lawful solicitation of employment in locations which are accessible to the public and do not interfere with normal business operations of the commercial premises; and 
2.  A copy of said policy is submitted to the city manager to be maintained in city files; and 
3.  The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial parking area has caused a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such commercial parking area not less than eighteen (18) by twenty-four (24) inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height and not to exceed in total area, six square feet. The notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
It is a misdemeanor to engage in the solicitation of employment in areas of this commercial parking lot which are not approved for such activity by the property owner, other than to perform employment or business for the owner or lawful tenants of the premises. 
(Ord. 95-97 § 2 (part), 1995)  
9.08.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Every person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 95-97 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 9.09 - DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION 
 
9.09.010 - Purpose; intent. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate solicitation in the city to allow residents to protect their peace and tranquility, to allow the free and safe flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and to deter fraud and other criminal behavior. It is the intent of this chapter to respect the rights of free expression guaranteed by the California and United States Constitutions; to constitute reasonable, content-neutral, time, place and manner restrictions; and to impose the smallest burden on expressive activity necessary to accomplish the objectives of this chapter. This chapter shall be construed in light of this intent. 
B.  The exclusion of religious and political motivations from the purposes for solicitation regulated by this chapter is intended to provide greater protection for such expressive activity as required by judicial decisions and not to require city officials to determine what does and does not constitute bona fide religious and political motives except as necessary to do so. Accordingly, in the enforcement of this chapter, city officials shall accept claims that activity is politically or religiously motivated unless evidence is obtained demonstrating those claims to be untruthful. 
( Ord. No. 2013-305, § 1, 9-11-2013 )  
9.09.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Person" shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, social club, league, fraternal organization, joint stock company, estate trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, association, or any other group acting as a unit. 
B.  "Solicitation" includes the act of any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, vehicle or any other type of conveyance who goes from house to house, business to business, or from place to place within the city either: (1) requesting, either directly or indirectly, money, credit, funds, contributions, personal property or anything of value; (2) taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or services of any kind or description for future delivery or for services to be performed in the future, either in person or by distributing flyers and leaflets; and (3) selling and making immediate delivery any goods, wares, merchandise or services of any kind or description, commonly referred to as "peddling." 
C.  "Solicitor" means any person engaged in solicitation. 
A solicitation, as defined in this subsection, shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this subsection. 
( Ord. No. 2013-305, § 1, 9-11-2013 )  
9.09.030 - Solicitation—Prohibitions. 
No person while soliciting shall do any of the following: 
1.  Solicit at any dwelling, including but not limited to a house, apartment, or condominium where there is a sign posted in a conspicuous location indicating "No Solicitations," "Do Not Disturb", or words of similar clear import. 
2.  Touch, come into physical contact with, or affix any object to the person of any member of the public, without the express permission of that member of the public. 
3.  Persistently and importunately solicit any member of the public after such member of the public expresses his or her desire not to be solicited. 
4.  Intentionally and deliberately obstruct the free movement of any member of the public on any street, sidewalk or other place or in any place open to the public. 
5.  Threaten any harm to any member of the public who declines to be solicited. 
( Ord. No. 2013-305, § 1, 9-11-2013 )  
9.09.040 - Violations; penalties. 
A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to Section 1.16.020.A. of this Code or, in the discretion of the prosecutor, as an infraction pursuant to Section 1.16.020.B. of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2013-305, § 1, 9-11-2013 )  
Chapter 9.10 - DRONES AND UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS 
 
9.10.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of unmanned aircraft, commonly known as drones, which can at times pose a hazard to full-scale aircraft in flight and to persons on the ground. Imposing community-based safety requirements on the operation of model UAS and imposing restrictions on the operation of both model UAS's and civil UAS's consistent with Federal Aviation Administration rules is necessary to mitigate such risks and to protect the public from the hazards associated with the operation of unmanned aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 2017-354 , § 1, 12-13-2017)  
9.10.020 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Civil UAS" shall mean an unmanned aircraft or unmanned aircraft system operated by any person for any purposes other than strictly hobby or recreational purposes, including, but not limited to, commercial purposes or in the furtherance of, or incidental to, any business or media service or agency. 
"Drone" refers to any UAS. 
"FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
"Model UAS" shall mean an unmanned aircraft or unmanned aircraft system operated by any person strictly for hobby or recreational purposes. 
"Person" shall mean natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
"Public UAS" shall mean an unmanned aircraft or unmanned aircraft system operated by any public agency for government related purposes. 
"Unmanned aircraft" shall mean an aircraft without a human pilot onboard, that is controlled by an operator on the ground, and is operated without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft. 
"Unmanned aircraft system (UAS)" shall mean an unmanned aircraft and associated elements, including, but not limited to, any communication links and components that control the unmanned aircraft. 
"Visual line of sight" means that a person operating an unmanned aircraft has an unobstructed view of the unmanned aircraft. The operator must use his or her own natural vision (which includes vision corrected by standard eyeglasses or contact lenses) to observe the unmanned aircraft. People other than the operator may not be used in lieu of the operator for maintaining visual line of sight to the unmanned aircraft, except as otherwise permitted by federal law. The use of vision-enhancing devices, such as binoculars, night vision goggles, powered vision magnifying devices, and goggles or other devices designed to provide a "first-person view" from the unmanned aircraft do not constitute visual line of sight of the person operating the unmanned aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 2017-354 , § 1, 12-13-2017)  
9.10.030 - Regulations 
The following shall apply to the operation of any model UAS or civil UAS within the City of Calabasas: 
1.  No pSerson shall operate any model UAS or civil UAS within the City of Calabasas in a manner that is prohibited by any federal statute or regulation. 
2.  No person shall operate any model UAS or civil UAS within the City of Calabasas in a manner that interferes with manned aircraft, and any person operating a model UAS shall always give way to any manned aircraft. 
3.  No person shall takeoff, land or operate any model UAS or civil UAS within the City of Calabasas beyond the "visual line of sight" of the person operating the model UAS or civil UAS. 
4.  No person shall operate any model UAS or civil UAS within the City of Calabasas other than during daylight hours defined as between official sunrise and official sunset for local time, except that a person may operate a model UAS or civil UAS during periods of civil twilight if the UAS has lighted anti-collision lighting visible for at least three (3) statute miles. As used herein, "civil twilight" means a period of time that begins thirty (30) minutes before official sunrise and ends at official sunrise, and a period of time that begins at official sunset and ends thirty (30) minutes after official sunset. 
5.  No person shall operate any model UAS or civil UAS within the City of Calabasas more than four hundred (400) feet above the earth's surface, unless the UAS is both flown within a 400-foot radius of a structure and does not fly higher than four hundred (400) feet above the structure's immediate uppermost limit. 
6.  Excluding takeoff and landing, no person shall operate any model UAS or civil UAS within the City of Calabasas closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any individual, except the operator or the operator's helper(s). 
7.  No person shall takeoff or operate a model UAS or civil UAS on private property without the consent of the property owner. 
8.  No person shall takeoff, land or operate a model UAS or civil UAS over publicly permitted events without prior notification and authorization of the city. 
9.  No person shall takeoff, land or operate a model UAS or civil UAS within one thousand five hundred (1,500) horizontal feet of any manned or unmanned aircraft. 
10.  No person shall takeoff, land or operate a model UAS or civil UAS within five hundred (500) feet of any emergency vehicle that is operating with lights and/or sirens. 
11.  No person shall takeoff, land or operate a model UAS or civil UAS within five hundred (500) feet of any active law enforcement or emergency response incident. 
12.  No person shall takeoff, land or operate a model UAS or civil UAS within two hundred (200) feet of a school facility without prior notification and authorization of school officials. 
13.  No person shall takeoff, land or operate a model UAS or civil UAS within one hundred (100) feet of any public building or facility without prior notification, and authorization of the city. 
14.  No person shall operate a model UAS or civil UAS that has any type of weapon attached to it. 
15.  No person shall operate any model UAS or civil UAS within the City of Calabasas in violation of any temporary flight restriction (TFR) or notice to airmen (NOTAM) issued by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
16.  No person shall operate any model UAS or civil UAS within the City of Calabasas in a careless or reckless manner so as to endanger the life or property of another. The standard for what constitutes careless and reckless operation under this section shall be the same as the standard set forth in any federal statutes or regulations governing aeronautics including but not limited to Federal Aviation Rule 91.13. 
(Ord. No. 2017-354 , § 1, 12-13-2017)  
9.10.040 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any Public UAS, or UAS weighing less than 0.55 lbs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-354 , § 1, 12-13-2017)  
9.10.050 - Violations; penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1.16.020A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-354 , § 1, 12-13-2017)  
Chapter 9.12 - ALARM SYSTEMS AND FALSE ALARMS 
 
9.12.010 - Purpose and scope. 
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations governing alarm systems, both commercial and residential, within the city, and provide for enforcement of violations of provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 96-106 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.12.020 - Definitions. 
"Alarm system" means an assembly of equipment and devices designed to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention. "Alarm system" includes, but is not limited to, audible alarms, automatic dialing systems, commercial alarms, robbery alarm systems, intrusion alarm systems, manual holdup alarm systems which monitor temperature, humidity, smoke or other products of combustion. 
"Audible alarm" means any alarm system which generates a sound which is designed to be heard outside the building where the system is installed. 
"Automatic dialing system" means an alarm system which automatically sends over telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a message or signal indicating the existence of an emergency situation. 
"Commercial alarm" means an alarm installed on premises which are not primarily used for residential purposes. 
"False alarm" means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, electrical failure, electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation or maintenance, or the negligence of the owner, lessee, or of his employees or agents. Such terminology does not include, for example, alarms caused by extremely high winds, tornadoes, earthquakes, or other violent, uncontrollable acts of nature. 
"Intrusion alarm system" means an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
"Manual holdup alarm system" means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked or by an observer of the attack. 
"Public agency" includes the state, county and any city or district therein, and any department or officers thereof. 
"Robbery alarm system" means an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
"Station commander" means the station commander of the Lost Hills sheriff station or his designated representative. 
"Subscriber" means any person or business entity which owns, leases, rents, or is entitled to possession of any premises on which an alarm system is installed. Public agencies are not included within this definition. 
(Ord. 96-106 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.12.030 - Audible alarm requirements. 
A.  No audible alarm shall be installed, maintained, or used which emits a sound similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren. 
B.  The subscriber to an audible alarm system affixed to real property shall post a notice containing the name and telephone number of the person to be notified to render repairs, services, or turn off the alarm when the alarm is activated. Such notice shall be posted near the alarm in such a position as to be legible from the ground adjacent to the building. 
C.  All audible alarms shall be designed and/or equipped to automatically turn off no more than ten (10) minutes after being activated. 
D.  No subscriber, seller or lessor of alarm systems shall install, equip or utilize an audible alarm that automatically sets itself. 
E.  No person shall use any alarm system which is equipped with direct-dial device, and which when activated, automatically dials any telephone number in any office of the sheriff. 
F.  This chapter is not applicable to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles or to a public telephone utility whose only duty is to furnish telephone service pursuant to tariffs on file with the California Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. 96-106 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.12.040 - Back-up power. 
All new alarms shall be supplied with an uninterruptable power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal utility electric service will not activate the alarm system. The power supply shall be capable of operating for at least four hours. 
(Ord. 96-106 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.12.050 - Alarm company registration. 
Persons who install, service, or maintain alarm systems in the city shall register with the city prior to doing so and shall furnish a listing of those residences and businesses at which that person has installed alarm systems and shall update that listing not less than quarterly. The information shall be provided in an electronic format acceptable to the city and shall remain confidential. 
(Ord. 96-106 § 2 (part), 1996) 
(Ord. No. 2010-269, § 1, 2-10-2010)  
9.12.060 - False alarms, service charge and confirmation required status. 
The station commander is authorized to implement such procedures and policies as may be reasonably necessary to reduce false alarms as defined in this chapter. These include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  The Lost Hills sheriff station will monitor all false burglary and robbery alarms within the city. 
B.  False alarms activated within a calendar year shall be subject to a service charge as set forth by resolution. 
(Ord. 96-106 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.12.070 - Punishment/Public nuisance. 
A.  Any violation of any provision of this chapter other than Section 9.12.060 B is an infraction. 
B.  A third false alarm within a one-year period arising from the same alarm system or from the same real property shall constitute a public nuisance and an infraction. In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, the city may summarily abate and/or bring suit to enjoin or abate the nuisance. 
1.  For an alarm system transferring signals directly to a police station, the city may summarily abate a nuisance under this section by severing the connection between the alarm system and the police station. 
2.  If summary abatement of a nuisance under this section requires entry onto private property, the city may do so only pursuant to a warrant or court order or in those exigent circumstances in which no warrant or court order is required by law. 
(Ord. 96-106 § 2 (part), 1996) 
(Ord. No. 2010-269, § 2, 2-10-2010)  
Chapter 9.16 - RESTRICTIONS FOR MINORS REGARDING SCHOOL TRUANCY 
 
9.16.010 - Prohibited act. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education, to be "absent from school and found in a public place," as defined in subsection (B) of this section, unless the minor has one of the valid excuses specified in Section 9.16.020. 
B.  For purposes of this chapter, a minor is "absent from school and found in a public place" if said minor is found idling, wandering, strolling, playing, or aimlessly driving or riding about, in or upon any public street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground, or other public ground, public place or public building, place of amusement or eating place, vacant lot or unsupervised place, or any place open to the public during the hours of eight-thirty a.m. and one-thirty p.m. of the same day on days when said minor's school is in session. 
(Ord. 96-109 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.16.020 - Valid excuses. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply when a minor has one of the following valid excuses: 
A.  The minor has in his or her possession a written excuse from the minor's parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of said minor, which excuse provides a reasonable explanation, as determined by the court, for the minor's absence from school; 
B.  The minor is accompanied by his or her parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor; 
C.  The minor is upon an emergency errand directed by said minor's parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor; 
D.  The minor is going to or returning directly from a medical appointment; 
E.  The minor has permission to leave campus and said minor has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit; 
F.  The minor is going to or returning directly from a public meeting, or place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school activity, provided such meeting, event or activity is a school-approved activity for the minor or is otherwise supervised by school personnel of said minor's school; 
G.  The presence of the minor in said place or places is connected with or required by a school-approved or school-related business, trade, profession or occupation in which said minor is lawfully engaged. 
(Ord. 96-109 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.16.030 - Infraction—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine not as required by Section 1.16.020 of the Calabasas Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 96-109 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.16.040 - Hearing requirement—Parental obligation to attend. 
A minor cited for an infraction under this chapter must attend a court hearing on the infraction and must be accompanied at the hearing by his or her parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of said minor. If any such parental or custodial person(s) fails to attend the hearing with the minor, and unless the interests of justice would otherwise be served, the court shall continue the hearing and shall issue a citation to said parental or custodial person(s) directing said person(s) to appear at the continued hearing with the minor. 
(Ord. 96-109 § 2 (part), 1996)  
9.16.050 - Penalty may be set aside for first infraction. 
Notwithstanding Section 9.16.030, the court may set aside the fine imposed by this chapter, or any portion thereof, if the fine is based on the minor's first infraction under this chapter and provided the minor produces proof satisfactory to the court that the following has occurred during the period between the initial hearing on the infraction and any subsequent hearing set by the court: 
A.  The minor has had no unexcused absences from school; and 
B.  The minor has performed ten (10) hours of court-approved community service during times other than said minor's hours of school attendance; or 
C.  The minor's parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of said minor has or have attended a parenting class or a series of parenting classes approved by the court. 
(Ord. 96-109 § 2 (part), 1996)  
Chapter 9.17 - SOLICITING ON CITY PROPERTY 
 
9.17.010 - Soliciting on city property prohibited—Authorized business permitted when. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to solicit, in any manner or for any purpose, in any building or in or on any property or premises owned, leased, managed or controlled by the City of Calabasas excluding public sidewalks, provided, that the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed nor construed as prohibiting any person having business with the City of Calabasas, or any officer or employee of the City of Calabasas having authority to make any purchase for City of Calabasas, from calling upon such officer or employee in the ordinary course of business. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.17.020 - Exceptions—Employee insurance. 
This chapter does not prohibit the solicitation in any such building or in or on any such property or premises as described in Section 9.17.010 for group insurance under a policy which is approved by the city council/manager, at times, places and under conditions specified by the city council/manager. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.17.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine as set forth in CMC Section 1.16.020B. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.18 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
9.18.010 - Drinking in public deemed misdemeanor—Exceptions. 
Every person who consumes any beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage on any public street, sidewalk, alley, highway or parking lot open to the public is guilty of a misdemeanor. This section shall not be deemed to proscribe any act which is positively permitted or prohibited by any law of the state of California. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.18.020 - Alcoholic beverages defined. 
As used in this chapter, "alcoholic beverages" includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half (½) of one (1) percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.18.100 - Possessing opened alcoholic beverage receptacle prohibited at or near off-sale liquor establishments. 
A.  No person who has in his or her possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, shall enter, be, or remain on the posted premises of, including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the Business and Profession Code, or on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed and posted premises. 
B.  As used in subsection A of this section, "posted premises" means those premises which are subject to licensure under any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage license, the parking lot immediately adjacent to the licensed premises on which clearly visible notices indicate to the patrons of the licensee and parking lot and to persons on the public sidewalk, that the provisions of subsection A of this section are applicable. 
C.  Pursuant to subsection B of this section, off-sale liquor store establishments are required to post a sign on the premises advising patrons of subsection A of this section. The sign shall be in a conspicuous place and readily observable. It should be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in size and read as follows: "It is an infraction for any person who possesses any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, to enter, be, or remain on the premises of, including the parking lot of such liquor store establishment or the public sidewalk immediately adjacent to it." 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.18.110 - Exception. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to a private, residential parking lot which is immediately adjacent to the posted premises. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.18.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of subsection A of Section 9.18.100 is guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine as set forth in CMC Section 1.16.020B. 
For a violation of subsection A of Section 9.18.100 to occur, the posting of a sign in accordance with the provisions of subsection B of Section 9.18.100 is required. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.19 - GAMBLING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES 
 
9.19.010 - Person defined. 
As used in this chapter, "person" includes a person, firm and corporation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.19.020 - Acts regulated by state. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter does not prohibit any act either positively permitted or prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.19.030 - Gambling activities prohibited. 
A person shall not deal, play, carry on, or conduct: 
A.  Any game where players bet or wager money, checks, credits or other things of value against each other; or 
B.  Any game of chance for money, checks, credits or other things of value. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.19.040 - Betting and wagering prohibited. 
A person shall not bet or wager at or on any game. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.19.050 - Permitting gambling activities prohibited when. 
A person shall not knowingly permit any game prohibited by this chapter to be played, conducted or dealt in any house or other premises owned by, rented by, or in the lawful possession of such person. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.19.060 - Attending places where gambling occurs prohibited. 
A person shall not resort to, attend, visit or be in any house, room or other place in the City of Calabasas where there is any gambling being conducted, played or carried on. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.19.070 - Gambling paraphernalia—Destruction authorized when. 
The sheriff shall destroy anything which is used, kept, placed or maintained in violation of any statute or of the ordinance codified in this chapter or any other ordinance after any person owning, possessing or having control of such cards, game or thing has pleaded guilty to or has been convicted of such violation, and such plea of guilty or conviction has become final. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.19.080 - Money received during enforcement procedure—Deposit requirements. 
The sheriff shall deposit in the city treasury to the credit of the general fund all money received or obtained in the enforcement of this chapter, after any person owning, possessing or having control of such money has pleaded guilty to or has been convicted of violating this chapter, and such plea of guilty or conviction has become final. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.19.090 - Release of cards, games or money from court custody authorized when. 
The sheriff shall apply to the judge of any court which has custody of anything subject to destruction or money subject to deposit in the general fund under the terms of Sections 13.20.070 through 13.20.090 of this chapter, the disposition of which is not otherwise provided for by state law, for an order releasing such cards, game, things, or money to him for the purpose of complying with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.19.100 - Premises deemed nuisance when—Abatement. 
Any premises occupied for the purpose of, or used for the purpose of conducting the business of illegal gambling as prohibited by this chapter is a public nuisance and may be abated as such by action brought by the city attorney or city prosecutor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.19.110 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.19.120 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter, and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.20 - NUDE PERFORMERS AND WAITERS  
Part 1 - INDECENT EXPOSURE 
 
9.20.010 - Statutory authority for Part 1 provisions—Definitions. 
The ordinance codified in this Part 1 is adopted pursuant to Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. All words used in this Part 1 which also are used in said Sections 318.5 and 318.6 are used in the same sense and mean the same as the same respective words used in the said Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.20.020 - Acts constituting misdemeanors designated. 
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who: 
A.  Exposes his or her private parts or buttocks or employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate the private parts or pubic hair while participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer; or 
B.  Permits, procures or assists any person to so expose himself or herself, or to employ any such device. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.20.030 - Exceptions to Part 1 applicability. 
This Part 1 does not apply to: 
A.  A theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances; 
B.  Any act authorized or prohibited by any state statute. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.20.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
A violation of this Part 1 is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding $1000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.20.050 - Severability. 
If any provision or clause of this Part 1 or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Part 1 which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Part 1 are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Part 2 - FEMALE PERFORMERS AND WAITRESSES 
 
9.20.060 - Statutory authority for Part 2 provisions—Definitions. 
The ordinance codified in this Part 2 is adopted pursuant to Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. All words used in this Part 2, which also are used in the said Sections 318.5 and 318.6, are used in the same sense and mean the same as the same respective words used in the said Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.20.070 - Acts constituting misdemeanors designated. 
Every female is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer: 
A.  Exposes any portion of either breast below a straight line so drawn that both nipples, and all portions of both breasts which have a different pigmentation than that of the main portion of the breasts, are below such straight line; or 
B.  Employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate such portions of the breast; or 
C.  Wears any type of clothing so that any portion of such part of the breast may be observed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.20.080 - Counseling or assisting prohibited acts deemed misdemeanor. 
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who permits, counsels or assists any person to violate any provision of this Part 2. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.20.090 - Exceptions to Part 2 applicability. 
This Part 2 does not apply to: 
A.  A theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances; 
B.  Any act authorized or prohibited by any state statute. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.20.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
A violation of this Part 2 is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.20.110 - Severability. 
If any provision or clause of this Part 2 or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Part 2 which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Part 2 are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.21 - PUBLIC RESTROOMS 
 
9.21.010 - Public restroom defined. 
A "public restroom" is defined as any structure or facility situated on public or private property equipped with toilets, urinals or washbowls, or other similar facilities, erected and maintained for use by members of the general public for personal hygiene and comfort. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.21.020 - Entering restroom marked for use by opposite sex prohibited. 
A.  No male shall knowingly enter a public restroom marked for the use of females. 
B.  No female shall knowingly enter a public restroom marked for the use of males. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.21.030 - Sign requirements. 
All public restrooms maintained for the exclusive use of either males or females shall be marked in a manner so as to give appropriate notice to members of the public that the facility is for the exclusive use of males or females. The markings or signs may be written in the English language or may be of other customary design giving reasonable notice of the exclusive use of that facility. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.21.040 - Exceptions to chapter applicability. 
A.  This chapter shall not apply to those restrooms within the city that are designed, erected and maintained so as to accommodate only one (1) person at a time and are equipped with an appropriate locking device so as to preclude multiple use. 
B.  Section 9.21.020 of this chapter shall not apply to minors under the age of seven (7) years when accompanied by a responsible adult charged with the care of such minor, any person employed to perform janitorial or maintenance duties in public restrooms, or any public officer while in the performance of his official duties. 
C.  Section 9.21.020 of this chapter shall not apply to persons with a physical or mental disability or to those assisting such persons. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.21.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or a term in the county jail not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.21.060 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.22 - USE OF WHITE CANES FOR BLIND PERSONS 
 
9.22.010 - Use of white canes for blind persons—Restrictions. 
For the purpose of guarding against accidents in traffic on the public thoroughfares, it is unlawful for any person, except persons wholly blind or with functionally low vision, to carry or use on the roads, highways and public places in the City of Calabasas, any canes or walking sticks which are white in color, or white with red end or bottom. Such canes or walking sticks must be used on the roads, highways and other public places of the City of Calabasas by persons wholly blind or with functionally low vision, as a means of protecting them and for the purpose of identifying them by drivers of vehicles, operators or motor-driven vehicles and other pedestrians with whom they come in contact on such roads, highways and public places. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.22.020 - Vehicles to stop for persons with white canes. 
Any driver of a vehicle, operator of a motor-driven vehicle, or pedestrian who is not wholly blind or with functionally low vision who approaches or comes in contact with a person wholly blind or with functionally low vision, carrying a cane or walking stick white in color, or white with red end, shall immediately come to a full stop and take such precautions before proceeding as may be necessary to avoid accident or injury to the person so carrying a white cane or walking stick. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.22.030 - Unauthorized use of white cane or failure to stop prohibited—Penalty. 
Any person, other than a person wholly blind or with functionally low vision, who shall carry such a cane or walking stick such as is described in Section 9.22.010 of this chapter, contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or who fails to heed the approach of a person so carrying such a white cane or walking stick, or one (1) white with red end, or who fails to come to a stop upon approaching or coming in contact with a person so carrying such a cane or walking stick, or who fails to take precautions against accident or injury to such a person after coming to a stop as provided for herein, shall be guilty of an infraction, which is punishable by a fine as set forth in Section 1.16.020B. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.23 - LOOKOUTS FOR CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES 
 
9.23.010 - Lookouts for illegal activities prohibited. 
Every person who acts as a guard or lookout for any building, premises or establishment used for gambling, prostitution or any other form of vice or illegal act, or where alcoholic beverages are illegally kept, sold or purchased, or for any person soliciting, offering or engaging in prostitution, gambling or any other form of vice or illegal act, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.23.030 - Exception—Acts covered by other law. 
The prohibitions of this chapter do not apply to any action either positively permitted or prohibited by constitutional provision or by general law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.23.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.23.050 - Severability. 
If any provision of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.24 - LITTERING, LOITERING AND OTHER OBSTRUCTIONS 
 
9.24.170 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-371 , § 4, adopted Jan. 9, 2019, repealed § 9.24.170, which pertained to peddling on highways—location restrictions and derived from Ord. No. 2016-338 , 9-28-2016.  
9.24.180 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-371 , § 5, adopted Jan. 9, 2019, repealed § 9.24.180, which pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. No. 2016-338 , 9-28-2016.  
9.24.190 - Gates opening outward over highways—Construction and maintenance prohibited. 
It is unlawful to construct or maintain any gate in any fence in such manner that such gate may be opened outward over any portion of any public highway open for either pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.24.200 - Gates opening outward over highways—Permitting prohibited. 
It is unlawful to cause or permit any gate in any fence to be or remain opened outward over any portion of any public highway open for either pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.24.210 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of Section 9.24.190 or Section 9.24.200 is an infraction, punishable as set forth in CMC Section 1.16.020B. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.25 - NOISY STREET HAWKING AND ADVERTISING 
 
9.25.010 - Noisy hawking and advertising prohibited where. 
A person shall not, upon any highway or sidewalk, or in any doorway or entrance to any building opening into any such highway or sidewalk not set back at least ten (10) feet from the front property line, make any loud or raucous noise by using any loudspeaker, blowing any bugle, horn or trumpet, or by beating any drum, or ringing any bell, or in any other manner, for the purpose of advertising, announcing or calling attention to any goods, wares or merchandise, or for the purpose of advertising, announcing or calling attention to any show, exhibition, entertainment or event. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.25.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, which is punishable as set forth in CMC Section 1.16.020B. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.25.030 - Severability. 
If any portion of the ordinance codified in this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.26 - RECOVERY OF COSTS RELATED TO UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES AND DISTURBANCES OF THE PEACE 
 
9.26.010 - Recovery of costs related to unlawful assemblies and disturbances of the peace. 
A.  If it is established that (a) there was reasonable cause for a law enforcement officer to have issued a notice and warning as set forth below to any person or persons for actions in violation of Penal Code Section 415 and/or Section 407, (b) that such person or persons received such a notice and warning, (c) that within six months of the time set forth in the notice and warning, such person or persons were found in violation of such sections and arrested or given a citation therefor for further such acts at or near the location set forth in the notice and warning, and (d) that the person or persons were found guilty of one or more of the violations of Penal Code Section 415 and/or Section 407 for which they were arrested or given a citation, or found guilty of one or more violations of Penal Code Section 272 wherein an act or omission caused, encouraged, persuaded or induced a minor to commit an offense as defined in Penal Code Section 415 and/or Section 407; then 
1.  The court imposing sentence on such person may, as a condition of probation, order such person to pay the reasonable costs necessarily incurred by the city for law enforcement officers' return to the location of the incident which led to the conviction. In doing so the court shall follow the procedures set forth in Penal Code Section 1203.1 or Penal Code Section 1203.1e, treating such costs as if they are the costs of an emergency response; or 
2.  The reasonable costs necessarily incurred by the city for law enforcement officers' return to the location of the incident which led to a conviction shall be a charge against the person or persons convicted. The charge constitutes a debt of such person or persons and is collectible by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract. Prior to initiating an action to collect any such debt the city shall provide such person or persons a bill itemizing the charges and afford them at least sixty (60) days to pay the bill. 
B.  At the time of the initial contact at the location, the law enforcement officer shall take any such actions and give such direction as necessary to abate the violation or condition and shall advise the responsible person in writing that, if additional law enforcement personnel are required to return to abate a continued or subsequent condition, the responsible person and owner or occupant of the property shall be held liable for the cost of providing such services. If personnel do return to the location following the warning and a conviction does result, then the cost of the services, shall be reimbursed to the city as provided in this section. 
The form of the written notice and warning shall be in English and in Spanish and shall be substantially as follows: 
NOTICE AND WARNING 
On _______ (date) at _______ (time) a.m./p.m. at _______ (address) you were warned by _______ (name of enforcement officer) that your actions were in violation of Penal Code Section 415 and/or Section 407 and that if, within six (6) months of the time set forth above, you were found in violation of such sections and arrested or given a citation for further such acts at or near the location set forth above you may be required to pay the reasonable costs necessarily incurred by the City of Calabasas for law enforcement officers' return to the location which led to your arrest or citation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.27 - PICKETING PRIVATE RESIDENCES 
 
9.27.010 - Picketing of private residences prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before or about the residence or dwelling of any individual. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.28 - LOUD, UNNECESSARY AND UNUSUAL NOISE 
 
9.28.010 - Loud, unnecessary and unusual noise. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code that regulate noise, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, and unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. The standard which may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  The level of noise; 
B.  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
C.  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
D.  The level and intensity of any background noise; 
E.  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
F.  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
G.  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
H.  The time of the day or night the noise occurs; 
I.  The duration of the noise; 
J.  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and 
K.  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-358 , § 3, 1-24-2018)  
9.28.020 - Penalty and other remedies. 
A.  Any person violating this chapter is guilty of an infraction punishable as set forth by CMC 1.16.020B. 
B.  In addition to the remedies provided in subsection A of this section, the city shall have the power to enforce violations of any provision of this chapter by any lawful means permitted by this Code or by applicable law, including, but not limited to, by imposing administrative remedies under Chapter 17 of Title 1 of this Code and/or by seeking a civil injunction from a court of competent jurisdiction against any persons who maintain an advertisement in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
C.  In addition to any other remedies and penalties available under this Code and applicable law, a city code enforcement officer may issue a citation for a violation of Section 9.28.010, pursuant to the requirements and procedures set forth in Chapter 1.17 of this Code. As a further alternative and notwithstanding Section 1.17.080 of this Code, a city code enforcement officer may issue a citation for a violation of Section 9.28.010, without first issuing a notice of violation. Any person issued a citation for a violation of Section 9.28.010 shall be subject to fines and penalties as set by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-365 , § 3, 3-14-2018)  
Chapter 9.29 - SPECTATORS AT ILLEGAL MOTOR VEHICLE SPEED CONTESTS AND EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED 
 
9.29.010 - Prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
A.  Be knowingly present as a spectator at any illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed conducted on a public street or highway; or 
B.  Be knowingly present as a spectator where preparations are being made for any such event. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.29.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions govern the construction of this chapter: 
A.  "Illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed" shall mean any speed contest or exhibition of speed referred to in California Vehicle Code Sections 23109(a) and 23109(c); 
B.  "Spectator" shall mean any person who is present at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching, or witnessing the event as it progresses. A "spectator" includes any person at the location of the event without regard to whether the person arrived at the event by driving a vehicle, riding as a passenger in a vehicle, walking, or arriving by some other means; 
C.  A person is "present" at the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed if that person is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the location of the event, or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the street or highway where preparations are being made for the event; 
D.  "Preparations" for the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed include, but are not limited to, situations where: (1) a group of motor vehicles or persons has arrived at a predetermined location for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (2) a group of individuals has lined one (1) or both sides of a public street or highway for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (3) one (1) or more persons has impeded the free public use of a public street or highway by actions, words or physical barrier for the purpose of conducting the event; (4) two (2) or more vehicles have lined up with motors running for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed; (5) one (1) or more drivers is racing his engine or spinning his tires in preparation for the event; or, (6) an individual is stationed near one (1) or more motor vehicles as a race starter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.29.030 - Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.30 - CURFEW FOR MINORS 
 
9.30.010 - Prohibited act. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to be present in a "public place," as defined in Section 13.56.010.B. below, between the hours of ten p.m. on any given day and sunrise of the immediately following day, unless the minor satisfies one (1) of the exemptions specified in Section 13.56.020. 
B.  For purposes of this chapter, a "public place" means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including, but not limited to, any public street, sidewalk, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground, or other public ground or public building, any common area of any school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, or shop, or any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including any place of amusement, entertainment, or eating place. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.30.020 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply when a minor satisfies any one of the following: 
A.  The minor is accompanied by his or her parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by said parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of the minor; 
B.  The minor is on an errand at the direction of the minor's parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by said parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of the minor; 
C.  The minor is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
D.  The minor is present at, or traveling to or directly home from, a place or places that is connected with or required by a business, trade, profession or occupation in which said minor is lawfully engaged; 
E.  The minor is involved in an "emergency situation," which means for this purpose, any unforeseen set of circumstances that calls for immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life, including, but not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, or automobile accident; 
F.  The minor is within fifty (50) feet of the front door of his or her residence; 
G.  The minor is present at, or traveling to or directly home from, a school, religious, or recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a school, religious or civic organization, or other similar entity or organization that assumes responsibility for the minor; 
H.  The minor is present at, or traveling to or directly home from, a political fundraiser, rally or other political activity, or is otherwise exercising his or her First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, provided that any such political event or other First Amendment-type activity is supervised by adults and/or sponsored by a political organization or other similar entity or organization that assumes responsibility for the minor; 
I.  The minor is present at, or traveling to or directly home from, a public meeting, or place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school activity, provided such meeting, event or activity is a school-approved activity for the minor or is otherwise supervised by school personnel of said minor's school; or 
J.  The minor has entered into a valid marriage, is on active duty with the armed forces of the United States, or has otherwise been declared emancipated pursuant to Section 7002, et seq., of the California Family Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.30.030 - Enforcement. 
Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being present in a "public place," as defined in this chapter, during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this chapter unless the officer reasonably believes that a violation of Section 13.56.010 has occurred and that, based on the apparent offender's responses, no exemption under Section 13.56.020 is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.30.040 - Powers of law enforcement officers not limited. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in any way as to limit the power or right of a law enforcement officer(s) to make any investigation, detention or arrest as such law enforcement officer(s) would be permitted to make in the absence of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.30.050 - Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.30.060 - Parental liability. 
Any parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by said parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of a minor, who knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, a minor to violate the curfew restrictions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.30.070 - Severability. 
If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provision or application of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.31 - SALE OF KNIVES TO MINORS 
 
9.31.010 - Sale of knives to minors prohibited—Exceptions. 
Every person who sells to any minor any dirk or dagger, or any knife with a blade three (3) inches or more in length, or any snap-blade or spring-blade knife, regardless of the length of the blade, unless such minor is accompanied by an adult person and unless the person selling such dagger or knife keeps a full and complete record of the name and address of the purchaser, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.31.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-345 , § 2, 1-25-2017)  
Chapter 9.32 - CARRYING KNIVES IN PLAIN VIEW 
 
9.32.010 - Knives and daggers defined. 
As used in this chapter, the terms "knives and daggers" shall include any knife having a blade of three (3) inches or more in length; any spring-blade, switch-blade or snap-blade knife; any knife any blade of which is automatically released by a spring mechanism or other mechanical device; any ice pick or similar sharp stabbing tool; any straight-edge razor or any razor blade fitted to a handle. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.32.020 - Carrying knives and daggers in plain view prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to carry on his person, in plain view, any knife or dagger. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.32.030 - Exemptions to chapter applicability. 
The foregoing restrictions shall not be deemed to prohibit the carrying of ordinary tools or equipment for use in a lawful occupation or for the purpose of lawful recreation, or where the carrying of a knife or dagger is a recognized religious practice. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.32.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.33 - WEAPON-LIKE EQUIPMENT AT PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES 
 
9.33.010 - Carrying certain objects prohibited at picket lines and other public assemblies. 
A.  No person shall carry or possess, while participating in any demonstration, rally, picket line or other such public assembly, any length of lumber, wood, wood lath or other wood product, unless the other dimensions of such object do not exceed a thickness of one-fourth (¼) of one (1) inch and a width of two (2) inches; or, if not generally rectangular in shape, such object shall not exceed three-quarters (¾) of one (1) inch in its thickest dimension; and such object is blunt and unsharpened at its end and edge. 
B.  No person shall carry or possess, while participating in any demonstration, rally, picket line or other such public assembly, any bar, shaft, rod, cable, wire or other such length of hard metal, hard plastic or other hard, synthetic material. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any person from carrying any knife not prohibited by state law other than the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.33.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.34 - THEFT OF WATER 
 
9.34.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms are defined as: 
A.  "Authorized public officer" is a peace officer with authority to arrest under California Penal Code Sections 830 through 830.14, inclusive or as each of those statutes may be amended or reenacted. 
B.  "Driver" is any person who drives a vehicle. 
C.  "Theft of water" includes, but is not limited to, theft, as that term is defined and limited in Section 484 of the California Penal Code, of water, and theft of utility services, as defined and limited in California Penal Code Section 498 where the utility service taken is water service. 
D.  "Vehicle" is any transportation device that requires the driver to have in his or her immediate possession a valid driver's license for the appropriate class of vehicle being driven and which transportation device is equipped with a motor. 
E.  "Public agency" is any federal, state or local government agency present in the City of Calabasas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.34.030 - Abatement of nuisance vehicle by seizure and forfeiture. 
A.  Any vehicle used for the purpose of theft of water is a nuisance and the vehicle shall be enjoined and abated as provided in this section. 
B.  Any vehicle used to transport stolen water is a nuisance and the vehicle shall be enjoined and abated as provided in this section. 
C.  Any person or his or her servant, agent, or employee who owns, leases, conducts or maintains any vehicle used for any of the purposes or acts set forth in this section is responsible for creating a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.34.040 - Vesting of title. 
All rights, title and interest in any vehicle described in Section 9.34.030 shall vest in the City of Calabasas upon commission of the act giving rise to the nuisance under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.34.050 - Seizure of vehicle. 
A.  An authorized public officer may seize a vehicle subject to forfeiture under this section upon the issuance of an order by a court having jurisdiction of the vehicle. Seizure without court order may be made in any of the following circumstances: 
1.  The seizure is incident to an arrest or search under a search warrant; 
2.  There is probable cause to believe the vehicle was used in violation of this chapter. 
B.  An authorized public officer seizing a vehicle under this section shall complete a receipt in accordance with Penal Code Section 1412 and deliver it to the person from whose possession the vehicle was seized. 
C.  An immediate investigation shall be made by the seizing public agency as to any potential claimant to a seized vehicle whose right, title, interest, or lien is of record in this or any other state or appropriate federal agency. Within two (2) business days of the vehicle's seizure, the public agency shall send a notice of seizure to all potential claimants whose right, title, interest or lien did not arise subsequent to the date and time of seizure of the vehicle, if that person or entity was not previously given a notice of seizure, and to the city attorney/city prosecutor for the City of Calabasas. 
D.  The notice of seizure shall include the following: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the agency providing the notice; 
2.  Identifying information for the vehicle seized and the authority and reason for the seizure; 
3.  A statement that in order to receive their post-seizure hearing, the potential claimant shall request the hearing in person, in writing, or by telephone within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the notice; and 
4.  The time in which a claim of interest in the vehicle seized or subject to forfeiture is required to be filed. 
E.  The seizing public agency shall provide any potential claimants discovered as a result of the investigation set out in subsection C of this section with the opportunity for a post-seizure hearing to determine the validity of the seizure. The post-seizure hearing shall be conducted within two (2) business days of the request for the hearing. The public agency may authorize its own officer or employee to conduct the hearing if the hearing officer is not the same person who directed or participated in the seizure of the vehicle. Failure of the potential claimant to request or attend a scheduled hearing within the appropriate time frame shall satisfy the post-seizure requirement. 
F.  A vehicle seized pursuant to this section may be held as evidence in any proceeding brought by the city attorney/city prosecutor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.34.060 - Forfeiture and notice of intended forfeiture of vehicle. 
A.  Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the notice of seizure required in Section 9.34.050, the city attorney/city prosecutor may pursue the forfeiture of vehicles seized under this chapter, as provided in this section. If the city attorney/city prosecutor does not commence forfeiture procedures under this section within that fourteen-day period, title shall revert to the owner and the seized vehicle shall be returned to the owner. 
B.  If the city attorney/city prosecutor determines that forfeiture of the seized vehicle is warranted, the city attorney/city prosecutor shall serve a notice of intended forfeiture upon any person who has an interest in the seized vehicle. The notice shall be served as soon as practicable, but in any event within thirty (30) calendar days of the seizure of the vehicle subject to forfeiture. 
C.  The notice of intended forfeiture shall be served as follows: 
1.  By personal delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested, upon any person who has an interest in the seized vehicle as determined pursuant to Section 9.34.050(C). 
2.  In the event that the person entitled to service refuses to accept certified return receipt mail or cannot be personally served, service may be made by substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished by any one (1) of the following methods: 
a.  By leaving a copy during usual business hours at the recipient's business with the person who is apparently in charge, and by thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the recipient where the copy was left; or 
b.  By leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual place of abode, in the presence of a competent member of the household and thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left. 
3.  If the person entitled to service lives out of state and will not accept certified return receipt mail, then service may be made by first class mail. 
4.  If the person entitled to notice cannot be located, or service cannot be effected as set forth in this subsection, service may be made by publication in a Los Angeles newspaper of general circulation. Service shall be deemed sufficient when it is accomplished pursuant to Government Code Section 6063. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.34.070 - Claim opposing forfeiture and court proceedings. 
A.  A person claiming an interest in the seized vehicle must within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the notice of intended forfeiture or within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of first publication of the notice of intended forfeiture, file with the Superior Court of the county in which the vehicle was seized, a claim opposing forfeiture, verified in accordance with Section 446 of the Code of Civil Procedure, stating his, her or its interest in the vehicle. An endorsed copy of the claim shall be served upon the city attorney/city prosecutor within ten (10) calendar days of the filing of the claim. 
B.  If a verified claim is filed in accordance with this section, the forfeiture proceeding shall be set for hearing within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the claim is filed with the court. The city attorney/city prosecutor shall file a petition for forfeiture with the court within ten (10) calendar days of service of the claim upon the city attorney/city prosecutor. A copy of the petition shall be served upon the claimant. 
C.  The hearing shall be before the Superior Court of Los Angeles County. The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply to proceedings under this section unless otherwise inconsistent with the provisions or procedures set forth in this section. However, in proceedings under this section, there shall be no joinder of actions, coordination of actions, except for forfeiture proceedings, or cross-complaints, and the issues shall be limited strictly to the questions related to this section. Trial shall be by court or jury. 
D.  With respect to vehicles described in subsection B of this section for which forfeiture is sought and as to which forfeiture is contested, the city attorney/city prosecutor shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used as set forth in Section 9.34.030. 
E.  Upon proof that the vehicle was used for any of the purposes set forth in Section 9.34.030, the court shall declare the vehicle a nuisance and order that the vehicle be forfeited, sold, and the proceeds distributed as set forth in Section 9.34.080. The court may make a different distribution of the proceeds if the court finds that the claimant did not know that the vehicle was used for a purpose that constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
F.  If no claims are timely filed, the city attorney/city prosecutor shall prepare a written declaration of forfeiture of the vehicle to the city. A written declaration of forfeiture signed by the city attorney/city prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to provide good and sufficient title to the forfeited vehicle. The proceeds from the disposal of the vehicle declared forfeited by the city attorney/city prosecutor shall be distributed in accordance with Section 9.34.080. The city attorney/city prosecutor ordering forfeiture pursuant to this section shall provide a copy of the declaration of forfeiture to any person who received notice of the forfeiture proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.34.080 - Disposal of vehicle and distribution of proceeds. 
In all cases where vehicles seized pursuant to this section are forfeited to the city, the vehicles shall be sold, or if cash is paid as settlement in lieu of forfeiture of the vehicle, the proceeds of sale or settlement shall be distributed and used in decreasing order of priority as follows: 
A.  To pay costs associated with the towing, storage and release of any vehicle seized under this section; 
B.  To pay costs associated with the sale of the vehicle; 
C.  For the vehicle forfeited to pay a lien holder of record, if any, up to the amount of his, her, or its unsatisfied lien on the vehicle; 
D.  The remaining funds shall be distributed as follows: 
1.  First, to the city attorney/city prosecutor in an amount equal to all expenditures, other than personnel costs or costs provided for in subsections A, B and C of this section, made or incurred in connection with the enforcement of this section, including but not limited to, costs for equipment, investigation, supplies, litigation, insurance and liability resulting from enforcement of this section and costs of publication of the notices set forth in Section 9.34.060 
2.  Second, to the public agency which has seized a vehicle under this chapter in an amount equal to all expenditures, other than personnel costs or costs provided for in subsections A, B and C of this section, made or incurred in connection with enforcement of this section, including but not limited to, costs for equipment, investigation and supplies related to enforcement of this section. 
3.  Of any remaining funds, sixty percent (60%) to the seizing public agency, forty percent (40%) to the City of Calabasas general fund, provided that such funds shall be used for the purpose of abating or deterring theft of water and may not be used for personnel costs. 
E.  For budgeting purposes, funds attributable to this ordinance shall not be considered anticipated general fund revenue. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.34.090 - Stolen vehicles. 
A vehicle that has been reported stolen, prior to a seizure under this chapter shall not be subject to forfeiture unless the identity of the registered owner cannot be reasonably ascertained or the registered owner fails to redeem the vehicle within sixty (60) days of the seizure. The registered owner of the vehicle may claim the vehicle upon payment of tow storage and release charges, provided the vehicle is not subject to any holds for traffic or parking violations and the vehicle registration is current. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.34.100 - Recovery of monetary loss. 
Nothing in this section shall preclude an owner of a vehicle who suffers a monetary loss from the forfeiture of a vehicle under this section from recovering the amount of the actual monetary loss from the person who committed the act giving rise to forfeiture under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.34.110 - Discretion of the city attorney/city prosecutor. 
From the time the city attorney/city prosecutor receives the notice of seizure referred to in Section 9.34.050 to the final decision in forfeiture proceedings the city attorney/city prosecutor has discretion to resolve all proceedings under this chapter on such terms as may be, in the judgment of the city attorney/city prosecutor, in the best interests of the City of Calabasas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.34.120 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter is found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.35 - STREET RACING—MOTOR VEHICLE FORFEITURE AND SEIZURE 
 
9.35.010 - Findings. 
The city council of the City of Calabasas has determined that: 
A.  Residents of the City of Calabasas in both urban and rural areas of the city have complained about the nuisances created in their neighborhoods by vehicles that are used in motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed; 
B.  Persons who use their vehicles for motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed endanger the lives of residents of the City of Calabasas, create excessive noise that disturbs the peace and quiet of the city's neighborhoods, threaten the rural aesthetic and cultural resources of officially designated scenic corridors, public parkland, and nationally designated recreation areas, and often bring increased traffic, crowds, litter, drinking in public, gambling, fights, trespassing, graffiti, vandalism, and blight into the areas where the speed contests and exhibitions of speed occur; 
C.  Persons who engage in speed contests and exhibitions of speed frequently make alterations to the vehicles utilized by removing environmental restraints, for example, modifying exhaust systems of the vehicles in order to increase the potential speed of the vehicles, thereby polluting the environment and further endangering residents of the city; and 
D.  Speed contests, exhibitions of speed, and the vehicles used in those activities are a public nuisance, and the seizure and forfeiture of such vehicles will abate the nuisances caused by these activities in that the vehicles used for these purposes will no longer be available, and furthermore, other persons contemplating engaging in these activities will be deterred from using vehicles for these purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.35.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined as: 
A.  "Authorized public officer" is a peace officer with authority to arrest under California Penal Code sections 830 through 830.14, inclusive or as each of those statutes may be amended or reenacted. 
B.  "Driver" is any person who drives a vehicle. 
C.  "Exhibition of speed" is a willful act of showing off or displaying a dangerous or imprudent speed in a vehicle on a highway, including, without limitation, excessive acceleration in such a manner as to cause the vehicle's tires to lose traction on the highway, where the presence of another person is known to the driver or may reasonably be anticipated by him or her. In order to constitute an exhibition of speed under this section, there must be spectators or other participants present. 
D.  "Highway" is a way or place of whatever nature which is used by the public for vehicular travel. It does not include a facility which is specifically designed and legally maintained for the purposes of speed contests or exhibitions of speed. 
E.  "Speed contest" is a contest where a vehicle is raced on a highway against another vehicle, a clock, or other timing device. In order to constitute a speed contest under this section, at least two (2) vehicles must be assembled or spectators must be present at the event. An event where the time to cover a prescribed route of more than twenty (20) miles is measured, but where the vehicle does not exceed the speed limit, is not a speed contest. 
F.  "Vehicle" is any transportation device that requires the driver to have in his or her immediate possession a valid driver's license for the appropriate class of vehicle being driven and which transportation device is equipped with a motor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.35.030 - Abatement of nuisance vehicle by seizure and forfeiture. 
A.  Any vehicle used in a speed contest is a nuisance and the vehicle shall be enjoined and abated as provided in this section. 
B.  Any vehicle used in an exhibition of speed is a nuisance and the vehicle shall be enjoined and abated as provided in this section. 
C.  Any person or his or her servant, agent, or employee who owns, leases, conducts, or maintains any vehicle used for any of the purposes or acts set forth in this section is responsible for creating a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.35.040 - Vesting of title. 
All rights, title, and interest in any vehicle described in Section 9.35.030 shall vest in the City of Calabasas upon commission of the act giving rise to the nuisance under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.35.050 - Seizure of vehicle. 
A.  An authorized public officer may seize a vehicle subject to forfeiture under this chapter upon the issuance of an order by a court having jurisdiction of the vehicle. An authorized public officer may seize a vehicle subject to forfeiture under this chapter, without court order, in any of the following circumstances: 
1.  The seizure is incident to an arrest or search under a search warrant; or 
2.  There is probable cause to believe the vehicle was used in violation of this chapter. 
B.  An authorized public officer seizing a vehicle under this section shall complete a receipt in accordance with Penal Code section 1412 and deliver it to the person from whose possession the vehicle was seized. 
C.  An immediate investigation shall be made by the seizing public agency as to any potential claimant to a seized vehicle whose right, title, interest, or lien is of record in this or any other state or appropriate federal agency. Within two (2) business days of the vehicle's seizure, the public agency shall send a notice of seizure to all potential claimants whose right, title, interest, or lien did not arise subsequent to the date and time of seizure of the vehicle, if that person or entity was not previously given a notice of seizure, and to the city attorney/city prosecutor for the City of Calabasas. 
D.  The notice of seizure shall include the following: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of the agency providing the notice; 
2.  Identifying information for the vehicle seized and the authority and reason for the seizure; 
3.  A statement that in order to receive their post-seizure hearing, the potential claimant shall request the hearing in person, in writing, or by telephone within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the notice; and 
4.  The time in which a claim of interest in the vehicle seized or subject to forfeiture is required to be filed. 
E.  The seizing public agency shall provide any potential claimants discovered as a result of the investigation set out in subsection C of this section with the opportunity for a post-seizure hearing to determine the validity of the seizure. The post-seizure hearing shall be conducted within two (2) business days of the request for the hearing. The public agency may authorize its own officer or employee to conduct the hearing if the hearing officer is not the same person who directed or participated in the seizure of the vehicle. Failure of the potential claimant to request or attend a scheduled hearing within the appropriate time frame shall satisfy the post-seizure requirement. 
F.  A vehicle seized pursuant to this section may be held as evidence in any proceeding brought by the city attorney/city prosecutor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.35.060 - Forfeiture and notice of intended forfeiture of vehicle. 
A.  Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the notice of seizure required in Section 9.35.050, the city attorney/city prosecutor may pursue the forfeiture of vehicles seized under this chapter, as provided in this section. If the city attorney/city prosecutor does not commence forfeiture procedures under this section within that fourteen-day period, title shall revert to the owner and the seized vehicle shall be returned to the owner. If the seized vehicle is returned to the owner because the city attorney/city prosecutor has not commenced forfeiture procedures within said fourteen-day period, the City of Calabasas shall reimburse the public agency which seized the vehicle for the costs associated with the towing, storage, and release of that vehicle. 
B.  If the city attorney/city prosecutor determines that forfeiture of the seized vehicle is warranted, the city attorney/city prosecutor shall serve a notice of intended forfeiture upon any person who has an interest in the seized vehicle. The notice shall be served as soon as practicable, but in any event within thirty (30) calendar days of the seizure of the vehicle subject to forfeiture. 
C.  The notice of intended forfeiture shall be served as follows: 
1.  By personal delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested, upon any person who has an interest in the seized vehicle as determined pursuant to Subsection 9.35.050C. 
2.  In the event that the person entitled to service refuses to accept certified return receipt mail or cannot be personally served, service may be made by substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished by any one (1) of the following methods: 
a.  By leaving a copy during usual business hours at the recipient's business with the person who is apparently in charge, and by thereafter mailing by first-class mail a copy to the recipient where the copy was left; or 
b.  By leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual place of abode, in the presence of a competent member of the household and thereafter mailing by first-class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left. 
3.  If the person entitled to service lives out of state and will not accept certified return receipt mail, then service may be made by first-class mail. 
4.  If the person entitled to notice cannot be located, or service cannot be effected as set forth in this subsection, service may be made by publication in a Los Angeles newspaper of general circulation. Service shall be deemed sufficient when it is accomplished pursuant to Government Code section 6063. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.35.070 - Claim opposing forfeiture and court proceedings. 
A.  A person claiming an interest in the seized vehicle must, within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the notice of intended forfeiture or within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of first publication of the notice of intended forfeiture, file with the superior court of the county in which the vehicle was seized, a Claim Opposing Forfeiture, verified in accordance with section 446 of the Code of Civil Procedure, stating his, her, or its interest in the vehicle. An endorsed copy of the claim shall be served upon the city attorney/city prosecutor within ten (10) calendar days of the filing of the claim. 
B.  If a verified claim is filed in accordance with this section, the forfeiture proceeding shall be set for hearing within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the claim is filed with the court. The city attorney/city prosecutor shall file a petition for forfeiture with the court within ten (10) calendar days of service of the claim upon the city attorney/city prosecutor. A copy of the petition shall be served upon the claimant. 
C.  The hearing shall be before the superior court of Los Angeles County. The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply to proceedings under this section unless otherwise inconsistent with the provisions or procedures set forth in this section. However, in proceedings under this section, there shall be no joinder of actions, coordination of actions, except for forfeiture proceedings, or cross-complaints, and the issues shall be limited strictly to the questions related to this section. Trial shall be by court or jury. 
D.  With respect to vehicles described in subsection B of Section 16.82.060 for which forfeiture is sought and as to which forfeiture is contested, the city attorney/city prosecutor shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used as set forth in Section 9.35.030 
E.  Upon proof that the vehicle was used for any of the purposes set forth in Section 9.35.030, the court shall declare the vehicle a nuisance and order that the vehicle be forfeited, sold, and the proceeds distributed as set forth in Section 9.35.080. The court may make a different distribution of the proceeds if the court finds that the claimant did not know that the vehicle was used for a purpose that constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
F.  If the court rules that the vehicle shall not be forfeited or the city attorney/city prosecutor abandons the forfeiture proceedings prior to a ruling by the court, title to the vehicle shall revert to the owner, the vehicle shall be returned to the owner, and the City of Calabasas shall be responsible for payment of the costs associated with the towing, storage, and release of that vehicle. 
G.  If no claims are timely filed, the city attorney/city prosecutor shall prepare a written declaration of forfeiture of the vehicle to the county. A written declaration of forfeiture signed by the city attorney/city prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to provide good and sufficient title to the forfeited vehicle. The proceeds from the disposal of the vehicle declared forfeited by the city attorney/city prosecutor shall be distributed in accordance with Section 9.35.080. The city attorney/city prosecutor ordering forfeiture pursuant to this section shall provide a copy of the declaration of forfeiture to any person who received notice of the forfeiture proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.35.080 - Disposal of Vehicle and Distribution of Proceeds. 
The proceeds of the sale of any vehicle forfeited to the city, or if cash is paid as settlement in lieu of forfeiture of the vehicle, the proceeds of the settlement shall be distributed and used in decreasing order of priority as follows: 
A.  To pay costs associated with the towing, storage, and release of any vehicle seized under this section. 
B.  To pay costs associated with the sale of the vehicle. 
C.  To pay a lien holder of record, if any, up to the amount of his, her, or its unsatisfied lien on the vehicle. 
D.  The remaining funds shall be distributed as follows: 
1.  First, to the city attorney/city prosecutor in an amount equal to all expenditures, other than personnel costs or costs provided for in subsections A, B, and C of this section, made or incurred in connection with the enforcement of this chapter, including but not limited to, costs for equipment, investigation, supplies, litigation, insurance, and liability resulting from enforcement of this chapter and costs of publication of the notices set forth in Section 9.35.060 
2.  Second, to the public agency which seized the vehicle under this chapter in an amount equal to all expenditures, other than personnel costs or costs provided for in subsections A, B, and C of this section, made or incurred in connection with enforcement of this chapter, including but not limited to, costs for equipment, investigation, and supplies related to the enforcement. 
3.  Of any remaining funds, sixty percent (60%) to the seizing public agency, forty percent (40%) to the City of Calabasas general fund, provided that such funds shall be used for the purpose of abating or deterring speed contests and exhibitions of speed and may not be used for personnel costs. 
E.  For budgeting purposes, funds attributable to this ordinance shall not be considered anticipated general fund revenue. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.35.090 - Stolen vehicles. 
A vehicle that has been reported stolen prior to a seizure under this chapter shall not be subject to forfeiture unless the identity of the registered owner cannot be reasonably ascertained or the registered owner fails to redeem the vehicle within sixty (60) days of the seizure. The registered owner of the vehicle may claim the vehicle upon payment of tow storage and release charges, provided the vehicle is not subject to any holds for traffic or parking violations and the vehicle registration is current. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.35.100 - Recovery of monetary loss. 
Nothing in this section shall preclude an owner of a vehicle who suffers a monetary loss from the forfeiture of a vehicle under this chapter from recovering the amount of the actual monetary loss from the person who committed the act giving rise to forfeiture under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.35.110 - Discretion of the city attorney/city prosecutor. 
From the time the city attorney/city prosecutor receives the notice of seizure referred to in Section 9.35.050 to the final decision in any subsequent forfeiture proceedings, the city attorney/city prosecutor has discretion to resolve all proceedings under this chapter on such terms as may be, in the judgment of the city attorney/city prosecutor, in the best interests of the City of Calabasas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
9.35.120 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter is found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2016-338 , § 1(Exh. B), 9-28-2016)  
Chapter 9.36 - UNRULY GATHERINGS ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY 
 
9.36.010 - Definitions. 
A.  For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  "Loud or unruly gathering" means a gathering of eight (8) or more persons for a social occasion or any other activity at any residential unit or accessory structure on the same parcel as a residential unit during which loud or unruly conduct occurs. 
2.  "Responsible person" means and includes without limitation: 
a.  Any person(s) who is present at and rents, leases or otherwise is in charge of the residential unit where a loud or unruly gathering or a gathering that becomes loud and unruly occurs; 
b.  Any person(s), including any business, company or entity, who organizes or sponsors a loud or unruly gathering or a gathering that becomes loud and unruly; or 
c.  Any person(s) who attends or is present at a loud or unruly gathering or a gathering that becomes loud and unruly and engages in loud or unruly conduct. 
d.  If the responsible person is a juvenile, then the parent(s) or guardian(s) of that juvenile shall also be considered a responsible person. 
3.  "Residential unit" means any residential "dwelling unit," such as a single-family dwelling or residence, and each unit of all multiple dwelling unit properties that were developed as apartment buildings, duplexes triplexes, fourplexes, cooperatives ("co-ops"), condominiums, or townhomes. A residential unit also includes: 
a.  Any other buildings, structures and improvements on the parcel, as well as balconies, decks, patios, yards, and all other interior and exterior areas; and 
b.  Common use or other areas of multiple dwelling unit properties. "Residential unit" also includes any dwelling unit or other residential structure that has been permitted or used for any transient or short-term commercial use. 
4.  "Owner" means any person(s), including any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, business, corporation, company or other entity, who owns the residential unit where a loud or unruly gathering occurs. "Owner" also includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Any person who has a possessory or use interest in a residential unit, whether as a lessee, sublessee, licensee, guest, promoter or sponsor, 
b.  Managers, members, officers, general partners or trustees of an owner; and to 
c.  Agents thereof with actual or apparent authority, possession, or control of a residential unit. 
5.  "Juvenile" means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years old. 
6.  "Minor" means any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years old. 
B.  As used in this chapter, "loud or unruly conduct" includes, without limitation, any or all of the following: 
1.  Loud or other noise from any activity, cause or source that results in a violation of Section 9.28.010 of the Code, or any successor provision thereof; 
2.  Obstruction or congestion(whether partial or complete) of public streets, public rights-of-way, or private streets by persons or vehicles; 
3.  Obstruction or congestion (whether partial or complete) of fire lanes, emergency access streets, driveways, and fire access zones on properties by people or vehicles; 
4.  Public drunkenness or drinking in public; 
5.  The service of alcohol to minors; 
6.  The service of alcoholic beverages without a state license; 
7.  Possession and/or consumption of alcohol by minors; 
8.  Assaults, batteries, fights, domestic violence or other disturbances of the peace; 
9.  Vandalism or destruction of real or personal property; 
10.  Littering of any trash, debris, bottle, cans or other items of personal property on real property, or on any public right-of-way or other public property; 
11.  Urinating or defecating in public; 
12.  Violation of any local, state, or federal law regulating controlled substances or drug paraphernalia, except that conduct authorized by and compliant with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1 et seq., shall not be a violation of this chapter; or 
13.  Trespassing. 
14.  Public assemblies in violation of state fire and building codes in combination with one (1) or more other instances of conduct described in this subsection; 
15.  Use or maintenance of any device or equipment allowing for the amplification of sound (including but not limited to voice and music) that violates Section 9.28.010, or any successor provision thereof. This subsection shall not apply to alarm or security systems that are installed at a residential unit. 
C.  "Loud or unruly conduct" does not include any activity that is protected by Article 1, Section 4 of the California Constitution, protected by the First or Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, or exclusively regulated by and compliant with the California Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. 
(Ord. No. 2018-358 , § 4, 1-24-2018)  
9.36.020 - Loud or unruly gathering—Public nuisance. 
A.  It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance for any owner or responsible person to cause or allow a loud or unruly gathering to occur at any residential unit within the city. A loud or unruly gathering may be abated by the city by all reasonable means, including, but not limited to: 
1.  An order of a peace officer to an owner or responsible person to immediately terminate the occasion or activity; 
2.  An order of a peace officer to all nonresident persons who are engaging in loud or unruly conduct at a gathering to immediately leave the premises; 
3.  An order of a peace officer issued under Chapter 9.04; and/or 
4.  Any other lawful order or abatement method provided for by this Code and applicable law. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to fail to comply with an order of a peace officer that is issued in connection with a loud or unruly gathering under this section or any other applicable provision of this Code. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose liability on an owner, resident of the residential unit, the person in charge of the residential unit, or the organizer or sponsor of the gathering, for the conduct of persons who are present without the express or implied consent of the owner, resident, person in charge of the residential unit or the organizer or sponsor, as long as the owner, resident, person in charge of the residential unit or the organizer or sponsor has taken all available steps necessary to exclude such uninvited persons from the residential unit, such as, prior to the loud or unruly gathering, actively terminating a tenancy as evidenced by a properly served notice to quit and/or by an unlawful detainer lawsuit that has been filed with the Los Angeles County Superior Court and served on the defendant(s) prior to the loud or unruly gathering occurring, or filing a police report of a trespasser's presence. 
(Ord. No. 2018-358 , § 4, 1-24-2018)  
9.36.030 - Posting of notice of violation regarding loud or unruly gathering. 
A.  A city code enforcement officer or any peace officer responding to a loud or unruly gathering may post, on the front entrance of the residence at which the loud or unruly gathering occurs, a notice of violation pursuant to the requirements set forth in Section 1.17.040 of this Code. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, tamper with or deface a posted notice described in Subsection (1) of this section, or remove it prior to thirty (30) days from the date of the posting. 
C.  A copy of the notice posted pursuant to Subsection (1) of this section and containing a reference to this Chapter 9.36 shall be served on the owner by personal service or by depositing in the mail for delivery by the United States Postal Service, in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner shown on the county's last equalized property tax assessment roll. Another copy of the notice shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2018-358 , § 4, 1-24-2018)  
9.36.040 - Citation and other remedies. 
A.  In addition to any other remedies and penalties available under this Code and applicable law, a city code enforcement officer may issue a citation to the owner and/or responsible person or persons for a violation of Sections 9.36.020 or 9.36.030, pursuant to the requirements and procedures set forth in Chapter 1.17 of this Code. 
B.  As a further alternative and notwithstanding Section 1.17.080 of this Code, a city code enforcement officer may issue a citation to the owner and/or responsible person or persons for a violation of Sections 9.36.020 or 9.36.030, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
C.  Any violation of Sections 9.36.020 or 9.36.030 may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor. In cases where the city prosecutor elects to criminally prosecute such a violation, the defendant shall be subject to the penalties provided for by this chapter in addition to the fines, penalties, and maximum term of imprisonment specified in Section 1.16.020 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-358 , § 4, 1-24-2018)  
9.36.050 - Fines and penalties for violations. 
An owner and/or responsible person issued a citation for a violation of Sections 9.36.020 or 9.36.030 shall be subject fines and penalties as set by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2018-358 , § 4, 1-24-2018)  
Chapter 9.37 - GUN SAFETY 
 
9.37.010 - Definitions of specialized terms and phrases. 
"Firearm" shall mean any revolver, rifle, shotgun or any other device designed to be used as a weapon from which a projectile is expelled through a barrel by the force of an explosion or any other form of combustion, including any device defined as a firearm by the California Penal Code as it now reads or may hereafter be amended to read. 
"Locked container" shall mean a secure container which is fully enclosed and locked by a padlock, key lock, combination lock or similar locking device. 
"Residence" means any structure intended or used for human habitation, including, but not limited to, houses, condominiums, rooms, accessory dwelling units, motels, hotels, single room occupancies, time-shares, recreational and other vehicles where human habitation occurs. 
"Trigger lock" shall mean a trigger lock that is listed in the California Department of Justice's list of approved firearm safety devices and that is identified as appropriate for the firearm by reference to either the manufacturer and model of the firearm or to the physical characteristics of the firearm that match those listed on the roster for use with the device under Penal Code Section 23655, subdivision (d). 
(Ord. No. 2019-378 , § 2, 8-28-2019)  
9.37.020 - Prohibition on improper storage. 
No person shall keep a firearm within any residence unless the firearm is stored in a locked container or disabled with a trigger lock that has been approved by the California Department of Justice. 
(Ord. No. 2019-378 , § 2, 8-28-2019)  
9.37.030 - Exemption. 
Section 9.37.02 shall not apply when the firearm is carried on the person of an individual over the age of eighteen (18) or under the control of a peace officer under Penal Code Section 830 and is otherwise in compliance with state and federal statutes governing the ownership and possession of lawful firearms. 
(Ord. No. 2019-378 , § 2, 8-28-2019)  
9.37.040 - Reporting lost or stolen firearms. 
To encourage reporting, a person who files a report with a law enforcement agency notifying the agency that a firearm has been lost or stolen shall not be subject to prosecution for violation of this chapter for the lost or stolen firearm. 
(Ord. No. 2019-378 , § 2, 8-28-2019)  
9.37.050 - Penalty. 
(a)  Every violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor under Calabasas Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. Nothing in this chapter shall limit enforcement of a violation of this chapter using alternative remedies under Calabasas Municipal Code Section 1.16.030 (civil remedies) or Chapter 1.17 (administrative enforcement). 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent a person from being prosecuted, convicted, or sentenced for a violation of any related state or federal statutes which might impose more severe penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2019-378 , § 2, 8-28-2019)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - PARKING CITATION PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the Parking Citation Processing Ordinance of the City of Calabasas. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 3, 1993)  
10.04.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions provided in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter. 
"Agency" means the processing agency, as defined in this section. 
"City" at all times refers to the City of Calabasas. 
"Contestant" means any operator or registered owner, as defined in this section, who contests a parking citation. 
"Department" means the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
"Hearing examiner" means any individual selected by the city, or if the city elects to contract for parking citation processing services, that individual selected by the processing agency authorized to administratively adjudicate parking citation contests. 
"Issuing agency" means the city or its authorized agent that issues parking citations. 
"Issuing officer" means a peace officer as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of the California Penal Code, or the successor statutes thereto, or any other person authorized by the city to issue a parking citation. 
"Operator" means any individual driving and/or in possession of a vehicle at the time a citation is issued or the registered owner. 
"Parking citation" means a notice that is personally given or mailed to the operator, or attached to the operator's vehicle, informing the operator of a parking, equipment and/or other vehicle violation and the operator's right to elect to pay the fine for the violation or contest the citation. 
"Parking penalty" means and includes, but is not limited to, the parking penalty for the particular violation, as well as late payment penalties, administrative fees, assessments, costs of collection as provided by law, and other related fees. 
"Processing agency" means the city or its authorized agent that processes parking citations and issues notices of delinquent parking violations on behalf of the city. 
"Registered owner" means the individual or entity whose name is recorded with the Department of Motor Vehicles as having ownership of a particular vehicle. 
"Vehicle" means a vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle Code. 
"Violation" means any parking, equipment or other vehicle violation as established pursuant to state law or local ordinance. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 4, 1993)  
10.04.030 - City authority to contract with outside agencies. 
A.  The city may issue and/or process parking citations and notices of delinquent parking violations, or it may enter into a contract for that purpose with a private parking citation processing agency, or with another city, county, or other public issuing or processing agency. 
B.  Any contract entered into pursuant to this section shall provide for monthly distribution of amounts collected between the parties, except amounts payable to the county pursuant to Chapter 12 (commencing with Section 76000) of Title 8 of the California Government Code, or the successor statutes thereto, and amounts payable to the department pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 4763 or the successor statute thereto. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 5, 1993)  
10.04.040 - Parking citation—Issuance. 
Parking citations shall be issued in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  If a vehicle is unattended at the time that the parking citation is issued for a parking violation, the issuing officer shall securely attach to the vehicle the parking citation setting forth the violation, including reference to the section of the California Vehicle Code, this Code, or other parking regulation violated; the approximate time of the violation; the location of the violation; and the date by which the operator is to deposit the parking penalty or contest the parking citation pursuant to Section 10.04.130 of this chapter. The citation shall state the amount of the parking penalty and the address of the agent authorized to receive deposit of the parking penalty. 
The parking citation shall also set forth the vehicle license number and registration expiration date, if such date is visible; the last four digits of the vehicle identification number, if that number is visible through the windshield; the color of the vehicle; and, if discernable, the make of the vehicle. 
B.  The parking citation, or copy thereof, shall be considered a record kept in the ordinary course of business of the issuing agency and the processing agency, and shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. 
C.  Once the parking citation is prepared and attached to the vehicle pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, the issuing officer shall file notice of the parking violation with the processing agency. 
D.  If during issuance of the parking citation, without regard to whether the vehicle was initially attended or unattended, the vehicle is driven away prior to attaching the parking citation to the vehicle, the issuing officer shall file the notice with the processing agency. The processing agency shall mail, within fifteen (15) days of issuance of the parking citation, a copy of the parking citation to the registered owner at the address reflected in the records of the department. 
E.  If after a copy of the parking citation is attached to the vehicle, or personally given to the operator, the issuing agency or the issuing officer determines that the issuing officer was in error in issuing the parking citation, the issuing officer or the issuing agency may recommend, in writing, that the parking citation be canceled. The recommendation shall state the reason or reasons for cancellation and shall be filed with the processing agency. 
Under no circumstance shall a personal relationship with any public official, officer, issuing officer or law enforcement agency be grounds for cancellation. 
F.  If a processing agency makes a finding that there are grounds for cancellation as set forth in the city's administrative policy, or pursuant to any other basis provided by law, then the finding or findings shall be filed with the processing agency, and the parking citation shall be canceled pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of Section 10.04.130 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 7, 1993)  
10.04.050 - Parking penalties. 
A.  Parking penalties shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
B.  All parking penalties received by the processing agency shall accrue to the benefit of the city. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 8, 1993)  
10.04.060 - Parking penalties—Payment received—Option to contest. 
A.  If payment of the parking penalty is received by the processing agency and there is no contest by the date fixed on the parking citation, all proceedings as to that parking citation shall terminate. 
B.  If the operator contests the parking citation, the processing agency shall proceed in accordance with Section 10.04.130 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 9, 1993)  
10.04.070 - Parking penalties—Payment not received—Notice. 
A.  If payment of the parking penalty is not received by the processing agency by the date fixed on the parking citation, the processing agency shall deliver to the registered owner a notice of delinquent parking violation pursuant to Section 10.04.080 of this chapter. 
B.  Delivery of a notice of delinquent parking violation may be made by personal service or by first-class mail addressed to the registered owner of the vehicle as shown on the records of the department. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 10, 1993)  
10.04.080 - Notice of delinquent parking violation—Contents. 
A.  The notice of delinquent parking violation shall contain the information required to be included in a parking citation pursuant to Section 10.04.040 of this chapter. The notice of delinquent parking violation shall also contain a notice to the registered owner that, unless the registered owner pays the parking penalty or contests the citation within ten days after mailing the notice of delinquent parking violation or completes and files an affidavit of nonliability that complies with Section 10.04.100 or 10.04.110 of this chapter, the vehicle registration shall not be renewed until the parking penalties have been paid. In addition, the notice of delinquent parking violation shall contain, or be accompanied by, an affidavit of nonliability and information concerning what constitutes nonliability, information as to the effect of executing an affidavit, and instructions for returning the affidavit to the issuing agency. 
B.  If the parking penalty is paid within ten days after the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation, no late penalty or similar fee shall be charged to the operator. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 11, 1993)  
10.04.090 - Copy of citation issued upon request by registered owner—Cancellation. 
A.  Within fifteen (15) days of request, made by mail or in person, the processing agency shall mail or otherwise provide to the registered owner, or the registered owner's agent, who has received a notice of delinquent parking violation, a copy of the original parking citation. The issuing agency may charge a fee sufficient to cover the actual cost of copying and/or locating the original parking citation, not to exceed two dollars ($2.00). Until the issuing or processing agency complies with a request to provide a copy of the parking citation, the processing agency may not proceed to immobilize the vehicle in question merely because the registered owner has received five or more outstanding parking violations over a period of five or more days. 
B.  If the description of the vehicle on the parking citation does not substantially match the corresponding information on the registration card for that vehicle the processing agency shall, on written request of the operator, cancel the notice of parking violation. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 12, 1993)  
10.04.100 - Affidavit of nonliability—Leased or rented vehicle. 
A registered owner shall be released from liability for a parking citation if the registered owner files with the processing agency an affidavit of nonliability in a form satisfactory to the processing agency and such form is returned within thirty (30) days after the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation together with proof of a written lease or rental agreement between a bona fide rental or leasing company and its customer which identifies the renter or lessee and provides the operator's driver's license number, name and address. The processing agency shall serve or mail to the renter or lessee identified in the affidavit of nonliability a notice of delinquent parking violation. The processing agency shall inform the renter or lessee that he or she must pay the full amount of the fine, or provide notice to the processing agency that he or she intends to contest the parking citation pursuant to Section 10.04.130 of this chapter within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation. If the processing agency does not receive payment of the parking citation or does not receive notice of an intent to contest within fifteen (15) days, the processing agency may proceed against the renter or lessee pursuant to Section 10.04.140 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 13, 1993)  
10.04.110 - Affidavit of nonliability—Sale of vehicle. 
A.  A registered owner of a vehicle shall be released from liability for a parking citation issued to that vehicle if the registered owner served with a notice of delinquent parking violation files with the processing agency, within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of delinquent parking violation, an affidavit of nonliability together with proof that the registered owner served with a notice of delinquent parking violation has made a bona fide sale or transfer of the vehicle and has delivered possession thereof to the purchaser prior to the date of the alleged violation. The processing agency shall obtain verification from the department that the former owner has complied with the requirements necessary to release the former owner from liability pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 5602 or the successor statute thereto. 
B.  If the registered owner has complied with California Vehicle Code Section 5602, or the successor statute thereto, the processing agency shall cancel the notice of delinquent parking violation with respect to the registered owner. 
C.  If the registered owner has not complied with the requirements necessary to release the owner from liability pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 5602, or the successor statute thereto, the processing agency shall inform the registered owner that the citation must be paid in full or contested pursuant to Section 10.04.130 of this chapter. If the registered owner does not comply, the processing agency shall proceed pursuant to Section 10.04.140 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 14, 1993)  
10.04.120 - Administrative review process—Contest. 
The processing agency may review appeals or other objections to a parking citation pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. 
A.  For a period of twenty-one (21) days from the issuance of the parking citation, or ten days from the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking citation, an operator may request initial review by the processing agency. The request for initial review may be made in writing, by telephone or in person. 
B.  The initial review by the processing agency shall consist of those procedures outlined in subdivision (A)(1) of Section 10.04.130 of this chapter. 
C.  Contest. 
1.  If the operator is dissatisfied with the results of the initial review, the operator may contest the parking citation or notice of delinquent parking violation through an administrative hearing review process as outlined in Section 10.04.130 of this chapter. 
2.  In order to contest the parking citation, the operator must deposit with the processing agency the full amount of the parking penalty on or before the fifteenth (15th) day following the mailing to that operator of the results of the processing agency's initial review. At the same time, the operator must provide a written explanation of the reason or reasons for contesting the parking citation on a form provided by the processing agency. If the operator is unable to deposit the full amount of the parking penalty, the operator must provide verifiable and substantial proof of an inability to deposit the parking penalty. Upon presentation of such proof, the processing agency shall proceed with the contest procedure despite the operator's failure to deposit the full amount of the parking penalty. If it is ultimately determined that the operator is not liable for the parking violation, then the full amount of the parking penalty deposited shall be refunded. 
3.  The contestant may contest the parking citation either by written declaration, on forms provided by the processing agency, or by personal appearance before a hearing examiner. 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (C) of this section, if the vehicle has been immobilized or impounded for unpaid parking citations, the processing agency shall permit the registered owner of the vehicle to contest the parking citations upon which the seizure was based, without requiring a deposit of the parking penalty; provided, that the vehicle remains under the control of the immobilizing or impounding agency. 
E.  The processing agency shall provide, through an administrative policy, a procedure for contesting parking citations and notices of delinquent parking violations. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 6, 1993)  
10.04.130 - Contest of parking citation—Procedure. 
A.  If an operator or registered owner contests a parking citation or a notice of delinquent parking violation, the processing agency shall do all of the following: 
1.  First, either investigate with its own records and staff or request that the issuing agency investigate the circumstances of the citation with respect to the contestant's written explanation of the reason or reasons for contesting the parking citation. 
If, based on the results of that investigation, the processing agency is satisfied that the violation did not occur, because the registered owner was not responsible for the violation by virtue of having sold, rented or leased the vehicle, or because legally supportable or mitigating circumstances as set forth in the city's administrative policy warrant a dismissal, the processing agency shall cancel the parking citation, and make an adequate record of the reason or reasons for canceling the parking citation. The processing agency shall mail the results of the investigation by first-class mail to the contestant within ten days of the decision. 
2.  If the contestant is not satisfied with the results of the investigation provided for in subdivision (1) of this subsection the contestant may, within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the results of the initial investigation, deposit the amount of the parking penalty or provide proof of an inability to deposit the parking penalty, and request an administrative hearing. 
3.  If the contestant prevails at the administrative hearing, then the full amount of the parking penalty deposited shall be refunded. 
B.  The administrative hearing procedure shall consist of the following: 
1.  The contestant shall make a written request for administrative hearing on a form and in a manner satisfactory to the processing agency, and may request to contest the parking citation either in person or by written declaration. 
2.  If the contestant is a minor, that person shall be permitted to appear at a hearing or admit responsibility for a parking citation without the necessity of the appointment of a guardian. The processing agency may proceed against the minor in the same manner as if the minor were an adult. 
3.  The administrative hearing shall be conducted before an examiner designated to conduct the hearing by the city council or by the processing agency. 
C.  The issuing officer shall not be required to participate in an administrative hearing. The issuing agency shall not be required to produce any evidence other than the parking citation or copy thereof, and information received from the department identifying the registered owner of the vehicle. This documentation in proper form shall be considered prima facie evidence of the violation. 
D.  The processing agency's final decision shall be in writing and delivered personally to the contestant or the contestant's agent, or delivered by first-class mail within ten working days following the hearing. 
E.  If the contestant is not the registered owner of the vehicle, all notices to the contestant required under this section shall also be given to the registered owner by first-class mail. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 15, 1993)  
10.04.140 - Processing agency—Collection of unpaid parking penalties. 
Except as otherwise provided below, the processing agency shall proceed under subsection (A) or (B) of this section, but not both, in order to collect an unpaid parking penalty: 
A.  File an itemization of unpaid parking penalties and other related fees with the department for collection pursuant to the California Vehicle Code Section 4760 or the successor statute thereto. 
B.  1. If more than four hundred dollars ($400.00) in unpaid parking penalties and other related fees have been accrued by any one registered owner or the registered owner's renter, lessee or sales transferee, proof thereof may be filed with the court which has the same effect as a civil judgment. Execution may be levied and such other measures may be taken for the collection of the judgment as are authorized for the collection of unpaid civil judgments entered against a defendant in an action against a debtor. 
2.  The processing agency shall send notice by first-class mail to the registered owner or renter, lessee or sales transferee indicating that a civil judgment has been filed and the date that the judgment shall become effective. The notice shall also indicate the time: that execution may be levied against that person's assets, that liens may be placed against that person's property, that the person's wages may be garnisheed, and that other steps may be taken to satisfy the judgment. The notice shall also state that the processing agency will terminate the commencement of a civil judgment proceeding if all parking penalties and other related fees are paid prior to the date set for hearing. If judgment is entered, then the city may file a writ of execution or an abstract with the court clerk's office identifying the means by which the civil judgment is to be satisfied. 
3.  If a judgment is rendered for the processing agency, that agency may contract with a collection agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 6850) of Division 3 of the California Business and Professions Code, or the successor statutes thereto, to collect the judgment. 
4.  The processing agency shall pay the established first paper civil filing fee at the time an entry of civil judgment is requested. 
C.  If the registration of the vehicle has not been renewed for sixty (60) days beyond the renewal date, and the citation has not been collected by the department pursuant to the California Vehicle Code Section 4760, or the successor statute thereto, then the processing agency may file proof of unpaid penalties and fees with the court which has the same effect as a civil judgment as provided in subsection (B) of this section. 
D.  The processing agency shall not file a civil judgment with the court relating to a parking citation filed with the department unless the processing agency has determined that the registration of the vehicle has not been renewed for sixty (60) days beyond the renewal date and the citation has not been collected by the department pursuant to the California Vehicle Code Section 4760 or the successor statute thereto. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 16, 1993)  
10.04.150 - Processing agency—Obligation when parking penalty paid. 
A.  If the operator or registered owner served with notice of delinquent parking violation, or any other person who presents the parking citation or notice of delinquent parking violation, deposits the penalty with the person authorized to receive it, the processing agency shall do both of the following: 
1.  Upon request, provide the operator, registered owner, or the registered owner's agent with a copy of the citation information presented in the notice of delinquent parking violation. The processing agency shall, in turn, obtain and record in its records the name, address and driver's license number of the person actually given the copy of the citation information; 
2.  Determine whether the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with the department or a civil judgment has been entered pursuant to Section 10.04.140 of this chapter. 
B.  If the processing agency receives full payment of all parking penalties and other related fees and the processing agency has neither filed a notice of delinquent parking violation nor entered a civil judgment, then all proceedings for that citation shall cease. 
C.  If the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with the department and has been returned by the department pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code and payment of the parking penalty has been made, along with any other related fees, then the proceedings for that citation shall cease. 
D.  If the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with the department and has not been returned by the department, and payment of the parking penalty along with any other fees applied by either the department or the processing agency or both have been made, the processing agency shall do all of the following: 
1.  Deliver a certificate of payment to the operator, or other person making payment; 
2.  Within five working days transmit payment information to the department in the manner prescribed by the department; 
3.  Terminate proceedings on the notice of delinquent parking violation; 
4.  Deposit all parking penalties and other fees as required by law. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 17, 1993)  
10.04.160 - Processing agency—Parking penalties—Deposit with city. 
A.  All parking penalties collected, including process service fees and costs related to civil debt collection, shall be deposited to the account of the processing agency, and then remitted to the city, if the city is not also the processing agency. 
B.  If the city is not the processing agency, then the city shall enter into an agreement with the processing agency for periodic transfer of parking citation receipts, along with a report setting forth the number of cases processed and the sums received. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 18, 1993)  
10.04.170 - Processing agency—Filing of annual reports. 
The processing agency shall prepare an audited report at the end of each fiscal year setting forth the number of cases processed, and all sums received and distributed, together with any other information that may be specified by the city or its authorized issuing agency or the State Controller. The report is a public record and shall be delivered to the city and its authorized issuing agency. 
(Ord. 93-65 § 19, 1993)  
Chapter 10.08 - PREFERENTIAL PARKING[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ord. 95-89. 
 
10.08.010 - Definitions. 
"Commuter vehicle" means a motor vehicle parked in a residential area which is not owned, leased or otherwise controlled by a resident who lives in the area. 
"Director" means the public works director or his/her designee. 
"Dwelling unit" means a house, apartment, condominium, mobile home or other type of residence, in conformance with other provisions of this Code and related zoning maps, having an address assigned consistently with the house numbering maps maintained by the city. Apartments having numbers or letters assigned in addition to the street address shall be deemed independent dwelling units. 
"Merchant" means any person who operates a commercial business involved in the retailing of goods or services within a preferential parking district. 
"Preferential parking district" or "district" means a commercial or residential area with streets or boundaries designated by the resolution establishing the district, wherein vehicles displaying a valid preferential parking permit shall be exempt from parking restrictions established pursuant to the chapter. 
Preferential parking district area shall include at least one (1) street block between intersections or any other street which, although not being between two (2) intersections, is deemed by the director as being the equivalent thereof and an appropriate location for a "district." (e.g. street between entrance to gated community and intersection.) 
"Resident" means a person who lives in a dwelling unit. 
(Ord. 2005-198 § 1 (part), 2005) 
( Ord. No. 2015-319, § 1 , 1-28-2015)  
10.08.020 - Designation of preferential parking districts. 
A.  The city council may, by resolution, designate one (1) or more preferential parking districts pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Section 22507(b) of the California Vehicle Code as it now reads or may hereafter be amended. 
B.  The director shall assess a proposed district for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The director may modify boundaries of a district to comply with Section 10.08.010(i). All affected property owners within a proposed district shall be notified prior to a modification. 
C.  In order to establish a preferential parking district, the city council must find that: 
1.  Commuter vehicles regularly interfere with available parking on public streets adjacent to residential property within the proposed preferential parking district and cause, or are the source of unreasonable noise, traffic hazards, environmental pollution, or other similar interference with the residential environment; 
2.  There is no reasonable alternative to the proposed preferential parking district which will reduce the identified street parking problem to acceptable levels; and 
3.  Commuter vehicles displaced by the proposed preferential parking district will not unduly impact residential areas surrounding the proposed district. 
D.  The director shall determine the days and/or hours during which a preferential parking district shall be in effect unless the council specifies otherwise by resolution. Unless otherwise determined by the director, the preferential parking district shall be in effect at all times after a preferential parking district is created and signs providing notice of the preferential parking district are erected pursuant to Section 10.08.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-198 § 1 (part), 2005) 
( Ord. No. 2015-319, § 2 , 1-28-2015)  
10.08.030 - Initiation of proposal for preferential parking district. 
A.  A preferential parking district may be initiated by either of the following methods: 
1.  A petition requesting the creation of the district is signed by residents of more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the residential properties abutting the streets within the proposed preferential parking district and submitted to the city; or 
2.  A proposal initiated by the city council, the traffic and transportation commission or the director, following notice sent to the residents of property abutting the streets within the proposed preferential parking district; provided, however, that such a proposal shall be terminated if: (a) one-third or more of such residents object to the creation of the zone in writing on a form provided by the city, or (b) less than a majority of residents who receive such notice respond to the city's request for input. 
B.  Upon initiation of a proposed preferential parking district, the director shall: 
1.  Prepare a study regarding the need for preferential parking restrictions; and 
2.  Make a recommendation to the traffic and transportation commission as to whether a preferential parking district should be established and the parking restrictions that should be imposed. 
C.  The traffic and transportation commission shall make a recommendation to the city council as to whether a preferential parking district should be established and the parking restriction that should be imposed. 
D.  Upon receipt of the recommendation of the traffic and transportation commission, the council shall act by resolution to terminate the proposal or to create the district under the standards set forth in Section 10.08.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-198 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.08.040 - Changes to a preferential parking district. 
Once established by the city council, a preferential parking district shall continue to exist until the city council adopts a resolution to dissolve or modify the district upon: 
A.  A recommendation of the director, the traffic and transportation commission or one or more members of the city council; or 
B.  A petition signed by seventy-five percent (75%) of the residents of property abutting the streets within the proposed preferential parking district is submitted to the city. 
(Ord. 2005-198 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.08.050 - Parking within preferential parking districts. 
A.  Persons may park motor vehicles displaying a valid preferential parking permit issued pursuant to this chapter within the preferential parking district for which the permit was issued without respect to restrictions imposed on non-permitted vehicles in that district. 
B.  No person may stop, stand or park a motor vehicle that does not display a valid preferential parking permit issued pursuant to this chapter within any preferential parking district other than in accordance with the parking restrictions established for that district except: 
1.  Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, fuel or delivery vehicles while such vehicles are doing business in the preferential parking district; 
2.  Vehicles necessary to the provision of gardening services within the preferential parking district while gardening services are being provided; 
3.  Vehicles delivering life-support and health services to residents and schools located in the preferential parking district; 
4.  Government vehicles while the operator of such vehicle is engaged in the performance of public duties; and 
5.  Vehicles displaying distinguishing handicapped license plates or placards issued pursuant to Sections 9105 or 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code. 
C.  A preferential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder of the permit an on-street parking space within the designated preferential parking district. 
(Ord. 2005-198 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.08.060 - Individuals authorized to apply for a preferential parking permit. 
A.  The following persons may apply for preferential parking permits: 
1.  Residents of a preferential parking district shall be eligible to obtain all authorized types of parking permits within the district in which he or she resides; 
2.  Merchants that operate a business within a preferential parking district shall be eligible to receive permanent and guest preferential parking permits within the district in which the merchant's business operates. Merchants shall not be eligible for any other class of preferential parking permit; and 
3.  Nonresident owners of property within a preferential parking district are eligible to obtain one guest preferential parking permit annually for use in the preferential parking district in which the owner's property is located for the property owner's personal use and are not eligible for any other class of preferential parking permit. 
B.  No permit may issue to any person with outstanding parking tickets that are not subject to a pending review under Chapter 10.04 of this Code. 
C.  A resident within overlapping preferential parking districts may be issued a guest preferential parking permit for either district as the resident may choose. Residents within such overlapping districts may only use the permit in the district for which a permit has been issued. 
(Ord. 2005-198 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.08.070 - Application for and issuance of permits. 
A.  The director shall issue such permits under the standards of this chapter. 
B.  An applicant for a preferential parking permit shall submit an application on a form approved by the director, which application shall include: 
1.  Proof, satisfactory to the director, of residency on a street in the preferential parking district or, in the case of a merchant, ownership of a business located in the preferential parking district; 
2.  Payment of the preferential parking permit fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per year (annually indexed for inflation after January 20, 2005 in proportion to the increase in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for the Los Angeles Metropolitan Area) or such other amount as is established by resolution of the city council; 
3.  The make, model and license plate number of each motor vehicle for which the applicant seeks a permanent preferential parking permit; and 
4.  Any other information required by the director or by this chapter. 
C.  The director shall accept as proof of residency or ownership of a business within a preferential parking district a current vehicle registration, a current driver's license, a recent utility bill, a current lease, photocopies of any of these, or such other evidence as the director deems credible. 
D.  The director shall maintain records of the number of preferential parking permits issued to each dwelling unit and merchant in each district, the names of permit holders, the license plate numbers of vehicles for which a permit has been issued, permit numbers, a notation of the documents checked to establish residency and vehicle ownership, and such other information as shall be necessary or useful in the administration of the city's preferential parking program. 
(Ord. 2005-198 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.08.080 - Classes of preferential parking permits. 
A.  Permanent Preferential Parking Permits. 
1.  A maximum of three permanent preferential parking permits may be issued for a single dwelling unit or merchant located within a preferential parking district in any twelve (12) month period. 
2.  Permanent parking permits shall be affixed to front, driver's side windshield of the vehicle for which it is issued. 
3.  A permanent preferential parking permit is valid for a year from the date it is issued. 
B.  Guest Preferential Parking Permits. 
1.  A maximum of two permanent guest preferential parking permits shall be issued for each dwelling unit or to each merchant within a preferential parking district in any twelve (12) month period. 
2.  Guest preferential parking permits shall be made of brightly colored, durable material and must be displayed on the front driver's side dash board of the vehicle to be parked pursuant to the permit. 
3.  A guest preferential parking permit is valid for a year from the date it is issued. 
C.  Temporary Preferential Parking Permits. 
1.  No more than fifty (50) temporary preferential parking permits shall be issued for a single dwelling unit for a single event and no more than four hundred (400) temporary preferential parking permits shall be issued for a single dwelling unit in any twelve (12) month period. 
2.  Applications for temporary preferential parking permits shall be submitted at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the event for which guest parking is expected. 
3.  The temporary preferential parking permit shall be of a different color than permanent and guest preferential parking permits and shall state the first and last day on which the temporary preferential parking permit will be valid. No temporary preferential parking permit shall be valid for more than three days. 
4.  Each temporary preferential parking permit shall contain a space for the user of the permit to indicate the license plate number of the motor vehicle in which the permit is displayed. A temporary preferential parking permit shall not be valid unless it displays the license plate number of the motor vehicle in which it is displayed. 
(Ord. 2005-198 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.08.090 - Notice of determination of application for preferential parking permit. 
The director shall either grant or deny an application for any preferential parking permit within ten (10) working days of receipt of a completed application. If the director denies a permit, the written reasons for the denial shall be provided to the applicant, in person or by mail. 
(Ord. 2005-198 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.08.100 - Revocation of preferential parking permit. 
The director may revoke any preferential parking permit(s) of any person known to the director to no longer be eligible for a permit(s). The director may revoke any preferential parking permit if the permit is displayed in any vehicle for which delinquent unpaid parking tickets not subject to a pending review under Chapter 10.04 of this Code remain outstanding. The director shall give written notice to the permit holder of any revocation, the reasons therefor, and that the permit shall be confiscated by the city. 
(Ord. 2005-198 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.08.110 - Appeal. 
Any person who has been denied a permit(s) or had a permit(s) revoked by the director may appeal that decision to the traffic and transportation commission within ten (10) days after the decision of the director. 
(Ord. 2005-198 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.08.120 - Posting of permit parking area. 
Upon the designation of a preferential parking district, the director shall cause appropriate signs to be erected providing adequate notice of the parking restrictions imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-198 § 1 (part), 2005)  
10.08.130 - Permit usage and penalty provisions. 
A.  Unless exempted by this chapter, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any preferential parking district in violation of any parking restrictions established pursuant to this chapter. Any vehicle parked in a preferential parking district in violation of this chapter may be cited and/or towed at the owner's expense. 
B.  No person shall falsely represent himself as eligible for a parking permit or furnish false information to the city in an application for a preferential parking permit. 
C.  No permit issued pursuant to this section shall thereafter be assigned, transferred or used for any consideration, monetary or otherwise. 
D.  No person shall copy, produce or create a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit, nor shall any person use or display a facsimile or counterfeit preferential parking district permit. 
E.  Preferential parking permit holders shall report to the director a lost, stolen or missing permit within ten (10) days of loss, at which time that permit shall be canceled and a new permit issued upon payment of a replacement fee to be established from time to time by the director. 
F.  Preferential parking permits shall be returned to the city when the permit holder moves out of a preferential parking district or is otherwise ineligible to hold the permit. 
G.  No person shall misuse a preferential parking permit or display a stolen permit. Any such misuse or display on a vehicle shall be cause for citation and towing at the vehicle owner's expense. Misused permits shall be confiscated by the city. 
H.  No person shall alter, deface, or intentionally conceal an expiration date or otherwise attempt to present false information as true and genuine, on the face of a preferential parking permit displayed in a vehicle parked within a preferential parking district. 
I.  A violation of subsections B, D or H of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to Section 1.16.020(A) of this Code; by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) or, in the discretion of the prosecutor, as an infraction pursuant to Section 1.16.020(B) of this Code. Any other violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction punishable pursuant to Section 1.16.020(B) of this Code. 
(Ord. 2005-198 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 10.10 - OVERSIZE VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.10.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Oversize Vehicles Ordinance of Calabasas." 
(Ord. 2001-162 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.10.020 - Findings, authority and purpose. 
A.  The city council finds that excessive use of the public rights-of-way by oversize vehicles causes damage to public property, increases air pollution, noise, traffic congestion and risk of public safety. 
B.  The city is authorized to regulate and require permits for the use of the public rights-of-way by oversize vehicles under Vehicle Code Sections 35701, 35780 and 35782. 
C.  The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the health, safety, property and public welfare of the city's residents, businesses and visitors by establishing the regulation of routes for oversize vehicles, the issuance of permits and enforcement. 
(Ord. 2001-162 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.10.030 - Definitions. 
The following definitions are applicable to the provisions of this chapter: 
"City" means the City of Calabasas. 
"Manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating" means the weight in pounds of the chassis of a truck or truck tractor with lubricants, radiator full of water, full fuel tank or tanks plus weights of the cab or driver's compartment, body, special chassis and body equipment and payload as authorized by the chassis manufacturer. 
"Oversize vehicle" means any vehicle having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating in excess of fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds. 
"Trip" means a single or one-directional vehicle movement. 
(Ord. 2001-162 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.10.040 - Oversize vehicles. 
A.  No person shall operate upon any public street within the city streets any oversize vehicle except by special permit. 
B.  Exceptions. 
1.  Emergency Repairs. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any oversize vehicle that is actually being repaired in an emergency situation. 
2.  Merchandise Deliveries. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any oversize vehicle making less than three pickups or deliveries of goods, wares or merchandise, which shall not include building materials or supplies, from or to any building or structure within the city. 
3.  Public Utility Vehicles. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility within the city. 
4.  Authorized City Owned or Operated Vehicles. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any authorized city owned or operated vehicle while such vehicle is being used for official business. 
5.  Passenger Buses. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to passenger buses authorized and regulated by the public utilities commission and any vehicles used subject to Sections 1031 to 1036, inclusive, of the Public Utilities Code. 
6.  Garbage, Rubbish, Refuse or Recycled Materials Trucks. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to vehicles for the collection of garbage, rubbish, refuse or recycled materials owned by persons holding a valid permit or franchise granted by the city. 
7.  Private Recreational Vehicles. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to privately owned and licensed recreational vehicles. 
8.  Preempted Vehicles. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any vehicles preempted by the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 2001-162 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.10.050 - Notice. 
Appropriate signs shall be erected as the city determines will best serve to give notice of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-162 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.10.060 - Special permit. 
Any person may apply for a special permit for operation of oversize vehicles on city streets. The application for a special permit shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the city and filed with the transportation department, along with a filing fee to be set by city council resolution. In order to reduce air pollution and encourage the use of "clean" energy source vehicles, the filing fee for a special permit shall be waived if the applicant covenants to use only low emission vehicles ("LEV") or ultra low emission vehicles ("ULEV"). 
(Ord. 2001-162 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.10.070 - Authority to specify conditions of permit. 
A.  If a special permit is issued, the city is authorized to prescribe conditions of operation of the vehicles to protect public health and safety; prevent interference with the orderly flow of traffic; control air pollution, dust and noise; and to assure against undue damage to the road foundation, surfaces and structures. 
B.  The conditions which may be imposed upon the grant of a special permit include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Limits on the number of trips per day; 
2.  Limits on the times and seasons of operation; 
3.  Prohibitions on the stacking of vehicles; 
4.  Extra insurance or other financial security for unusually large loads or numerous trips; 
5.  Traffic controls; 
6.  Noise controls; 
7.  Dust and odor controls; 
8.  Litter controls; 
9.  Air quality controls; 
10.  Compliance with all federal, state and local laws and regulations; 
11.  Hold harmless and indemnification conditions; 
12.  Any other limits or conditions of operation necessary or appropriate to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 2001-162 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.10.080 - Contents of permit application. 
The application for any special permit shall be in writing and shall include at a minimum: 
A.  A completed environmental information form; 
B.  The proposed vehicle route; 
C.  Total number of proposed trips and number of vehicles per day; 
D.  The weight, length and height of the vehicle(s); 
E.  Time period over which vehicles propose to use city streets; 
F.  Material(s) to be hauled; 
G.  Type(s) of vehicle; 
H.  Type(s) of fuel to be used; 
I.  Purpose of the trips; 
J.  Proof of financial responsibility in accordance with Vehicle Code Sections 16500.5 and 16020; 
K.  Proof that no feasible alternative route is available; 
L.  If the trips are for construction, the applicant must submit a construction impacts mitigation plan; 
M.  Proof of good cause for the permit; 
N.  Name, address, telephone and fax numbers for notices; 
O.  Any other information the city may deem necessary; 
P.  Payment of fee, as established by the most recently adopted city council resolution. 
(Ord. 2001-162 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.10.090 - Review of applications. 
A.  For special permits requesting permission for us of the city streets by oversize vehicles, the city transportation director shall have the authority to review the application and grant the special permit upon the making of the findings that no feasible alternative route is available or to deny the permit if the findings cannot be made. The city transportation director may also impose conditions upon the grant of the special permit pursuant to Section 10.10.070. The decision of the city transportation director may be appealed to the city council, upon payment of an appeal fee set by city council resolution. 
B.  For special permits requesting permission for oversize vehicles to make more than ten (10) vehicle trips per day or more than thirty (30) total trips over the duration of the special permit, the transportation director shall review the application and make a report and recommendation to the city council. The city council may grant the permit upon the making of the findings that no feasible alternative route is available and good cause exists for the grant of the permit or deny the permit if the findings cannot be made. The city council may also impose conditions upon the grant of the special permit pursuant to Section 10.10.070. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 2001-162 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.10.100 - Authority to amend or revoke permit. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter for good cause may be amended or revoked by the transportation director by giving the permittee twenty-four (24) hours' written notice, by personal or facsimile service, setting forth the grounds for the amendment or revocation. 
(Ord. 2001-162 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.10.110 - Duration of the permit. 
No special permit shall be valid for more than six months. A permit may be renewed for an additional six months by the transportation director, if the transportation director finds that the applicant has complied with all of the permit conditions and no additional conditions are necessary or appropriate to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 2001-162 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.10.120 - Enforcement of special permit requirements. 
The transportation director shall enforce all special permit conditions and may further limit or stop oversize vehicle operations, if necessary, to enforce special permit conditions or abate violations. 
(Ord. 2001-162 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.10.130 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter is an infraction and is punishable according to the provisions of the city's enforcement code. 
(Ord. 2001-162 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 10.12 - COMMERCIAL AND OVERSIZE VEHICLE PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Commercial and Oversize Vehicle Parking Ordinance of Calabasas." 
(Ord. 95-88 § 1, 1995)  
10.12.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions are applicable to provisions of this chapter: 
"City" means the City of Calabasas. 
"Commercial vehicle" means a vehicle of a type required to be registered under the Vehicle Code used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit or designated, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
"Dwelling unit" means a house, apartment, condominium, mobilehome or other type of residence, in conformance with other provisions of this Code and related zoning maps, having an address assigned consistent with the house numbering maps maintained by the city. Apartments having numbers or letters assigned in addition to the street address shall be deemed as a dwelling unit. 
"High profile vehicle" means any vehicle which is six feet or more in height including any load thereon. 
"Manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating" means the weight in pounds of the chassis of a truck or truck tractor with lubricants, radiator full of water, full fuel tank or tanks plus weights of the cab or driver's compartment, body, special chassis and body equipment and payload as authorized by the chassis manufacturer. 
"Oversize commercial vehicle" means any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer's gross weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more. 
"Parking" means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
"Residential district" means any residential zone as defined by the city's Zoning Code and designated as such on the city's official zoning map as may be amended. 
(Ord. 95-88 § 2, 1995)  
10.12.030 - High profile vehicles. 
No person shall park or leave standing upon any public street or highway designated below, any high profile vehicle within one hundred (100) feet of an intersection at any time. 
A.  Designated Streets and Highways. The city may designate any streets or highways within the city's limits. 
(Ord. 95-88 § 3, 1995)  
10.12.040 - Oversize commercial vehicles. 
No person shall park or leave standing upon any public streets or highways in any residential district described below, any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more, at any time. 
A.  Designated Residential Districts. Any residential zone as defined by the city's Zoning Code and designated as such on the city's official zoning map as may be amended. 
B.  Exceptions. 
1.  Public Utility Vehicles. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. 
2.  Authorized City Owned or Operated Vehicles. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any authorized city owned or operated vehicle while such vehicle is being used for official city business. 
3.  Merchandise Deliveries. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any commercial vehicle making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted streets or highways. 
4.  Construction. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any commercial vehicle delivering materials to be used in the actual bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure located on the restricted streets or highways for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
(Ord. 95-88 § 4, 1995)  
10.12.050 - Posting signs in restricted areas. 
Appropriate signs or markings giving adequate notice of the restrictions provided for in this chapter shall be placed upon the affected streets and highways. 
(Ord. 95-88 § 5, 1995)  
10.12.060 - Violation—Penalty—Removal. 
A.  Infraction. Violation of the provisions of this chapter is an infraction and is punishable according to the provisions of the city's Enforcement Code. 
B.  Removal. Any vehicle parked or left standing on a designated public street or highway in violation of this chapter may be removed from the street or highway upon which such vehicle is parked or left standing. 
(Ord. 95-88 § 6, 1995)  
Chapter 10.14 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
10.14.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Traffic Control Devices Ordinance of Calabasas." 
(Ord. 2006-214 § 1 (part), 2006)  
10.14.020 - Approval and development of traffic control devices. 
A.  Whenever public safety and convenience requires, and the Vehicle Code permits, traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of the requirements of that code or other law, the city manager may install or cause to be installed necessary devices. 
B.  The city manager may place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as he or she may deem necessary or proper to regulate, guide or control traffic, but he or she shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations, and rules set forth in this chapter. 
C.  In executing the duties set forth in this chapter, the city manager shall: 
1.  Only expend monies appropriated by the city council by the adoption of a budget or otherwise; 
2.  Comply with any and all requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq., as it now exists or may hereafter be amended; 
3.  Act consistently with the City of Calabasas General Plan; and 
4.  Adhere to those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the most current version of the California Planning Manual—Part 8, Traffic, issued by the division of highways of the State Department of Public Works. 
D.  The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the health, safety, property and welfare of the city's residents, businesses and visitors by establishing the authority of the city manager to approve, develop and improve traffic control devices within the city. 
(Ord. 2006-214 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 10.16 - REGULATION OF ON-STREET PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, UTILITY TRAILERS AND CAMPERS 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Definitions. 
The words, terms, phrases, and their derivations set forth in this chapter have the meanings set forth below. 
"Camper" means a structure designed to be mounted upon a motor vehicle and to provide facilities for human habitation or camping purposes. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle or trailer which is capable of human habitation or designed or used for recreational camping or travel use, whether self-propelled or mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, or any structure inspected, approved and designated a recreational vehicle by and bearing the insignia of the state of California or any other state or federal agency having the authority to approve recreational vehicles. "Recreational vehicle" includes, without limitation, any of the following: (1) camp trailer, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 242; (2) fifth-wheel travel trailer, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 324; (3) house car, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 362; (4) trailer coach, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 635; (5) mobilehome, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 396; (6) boat, watercraft, and/or a trailer for a boat or watercraft; (7) trailers designed to carry persons, property or animals on its own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle; and (8) recreational vehicle, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 18010. 
"Utility trailer" means a nonmotorized vehicle designed to carry persons, property, animals, waste, materials, or any other items on its own structure and to be drawn by another motor vehicle which is not designed for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. 2008-250 § 1 (part), 2008)  
10.16.020 - On-street parking prohibition. 
A.  No person shall park or leave standing any recreational vehicle, utility trailer, or camper upon any public street or highway at any time within city limits. 
B.  This section shall not apply to any person who is actually engaged in the loading or unloading of any recreational vehicle, utility trailer, or camper or is actually engaged in making emergency repairs thereto. Further, this section shall not apply to any commercial vehicle making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on a public street or highway within the city or delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure within the city for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
C.  Violation of this section is deemed to be an infraction and is punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.16 of this Code. Furthermore, pursuant to Section 22651 of the California Vehicle Code, any recreational vehicle, utility trailer, or camper parked or left standing on a public street or highway within the city in violation of this section may be removed from the street or highway. 
(Ord. 2008-250 § 1 (part), 2008)  
10.16.030 - Parking pass. 
Notwithstanding Section 10.16.020 of this Code, a recreational vehicle, trailer, or camper may be parked in the city if a seventy-two (72) hour parking pass is issued pursuant to this section. The purpose of a parking pass is to allow users of recreational vehicles, utility trailers, and campers to park adjacent to their residences or businesses to load and unload and to allow out-of-town visitors to park in front of the residence which they are visiting for a limited time period. The provisions of this section shall not supersede any covenants, conditions and restrictions or other private agreements. The terms of such parking passes shall be as follows: 
A.  Issuance of Pass. Parking passes shall be issued by the city manager upon receipt of an application on a form the city manager shall establish for that purpose and upon payment of any application fee, established by resolution of the city council. Any resident of the city may obtain a parking pass authorizing him or her to park such a vehicle in front of his or her residence or place of business. Any out-of-town visitor of a residence may obtain a parking pass authorizing the visitor to park such vehicle in front of such residence, but may not reside in that vehicle overnight while it is so parked, or run water, waste or power lines to the vehicle over a public right-of-way. For purposes of this section, "out-of-town visitor" means any person who does not reside in the city. 
B.  Description of Pass—Display. The parking pass shall include the license number of the vehicle authorized to be parked, the date of issuance, and the day the parking pass is valid. Such pass shall be placed in the vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic enforcement officers. 
C.  Duration and Renewal. The parking pass shall be valid for seventy-two (72) hours. Upon expiration of a parking pass issued under this section, the applicant may apply for and be granted a parking pass if the applicant still qualifies under the conditions set forth herein. In no event shall more than two parking passes be issued to an applicant within a thirty (30) day period. 
(Ord. 2008-250 § 1 (part), 2008)  
10.16.040 - Posting of notice. 
Appropriate signs or markings giving adequate notice of the restrictions provided for in this chapter shall be placed upon the affected streets and highways. Notice of removal of vehicle for violation of this chapter shall also be provided. 
(Ord. 2008-250 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 10.18 - PARKING CODE 
Sections: 
 
10.18.010 - Adoption. 
Chapters 15.64 and Chapter 15.80 of the "Los Angeles County Traffic Code" as adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the County of Los Angeles as Ordinance No. 6544, as amended through and including November 9, 2011, are hereby adopted by reference as the Parking Code of the City if Calabasas, except the following sections, which are not hereby adopted: 
15.64.056 through 15.64.075 
15.64.195 
15.64.341(B) 
15.64.445 through15.64.446 
It is the intention of the city council to establish clear and unambiguous regulations for stopping and parking motor vehicles, trailers, and other devices subject to the Vehicle Code of the State of California inside city boundaries. Copies of the code provisions hereby adopted are on file with the city clerk and are open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2011-290, § 2, 11-9-2011)  
10.18.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever the "Los Angeles County Traffic Code" uses the following words or phrases, for purposes of this Code, they shall have the following meanings: 
1.  "County" or "County of Los Angeles" shall mean City of Calabasas, either the municipal corporation or its territory, as the context shall require. 
2.  "Board" or "board of supervisors" shall mean the city council. 
3.  "Commissioner" or "road commissioner" shall mean the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2011-290, § 2, 11-9-2011)  
10.18.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity to violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements, of this chapter. Any violation of any provision of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall be punishable as an infraction pursuant to section 1.16.020(B) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-290, § 2, 11-9-2011)  
Chapter 10.20 - REGULATION OF MOBILE BILLBOARD ADVERTISING DISPLAYS 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - The parking of mobile billboard advertising displays is unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing a mobile billboard advertising display on any public street or public lands in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-291, § 1, 12-14-2011)  
10.20.020 - Definition of mobile billboard advertising display. 
For purposes of this chapter, "mobile billboard advertising display" has the meaning provided by section 395.5 of the California Vehicle Code as it now reads and may hereafter be amended. That section presently states: 
395.5. A "mobile billboard advertising display" means an advertising display that is attached to a wheeled, mobile, non-motorized vehicle, that carries, pulls, or transports a sign or billboard, and is for the primary purpose of advertising. 
(Ord. No. 2011-291, § 1, 12-14-2011)  
10.20.030 - Removal of mobile billboard advertising displays authorized. 
Pursuant to Section 22651, Subdivision (v), of the California Vehicle Code, any peace officer, or any regularly employed and salaried employee of the city, who is engaged in directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations may remove a mobile billboard advertising display found upon any public street or any public lands in the city when all of the following are true: 
A.  The mobile billboard advertising display is parked or left standing in violation of this Code; 
B.  The registered owner of the mobile billboard advertising display was previously issued a warning citation for the same offense; 
C.  The warning citation was issued to a first-time offender at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal of the mobile billboard advertising display and the warning citation advised the registered owner of the mobile billboard advertising display that he or she may be subject to penalties upon a subsequent violation that may include the removal of the mobile billboard advertising display. 
Pursuant to Section 22651(v)(2) of the California Vehicle Code, the city is not required to provide further notice for any subsequent violation prior to enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 2011-291, § 1, 12-14-2011)  
10.20.040 - Post storage impound hearing. 
Pursuant to section 22852 of the California Vehicle Code: 
A.  Whenever agency peace officer, non-sworn code enforcement officer, or non-sworn parking enforcement officer of the city directs the storage or impoundment of a mobile billboard advertising display, the city shall direct the storage operator to provide the registered and legal owner(s) of record of the mobile billboard advertising display, or their agent(s), opportunity for a post-storage hearing to determine whether reasonable grounds justified the removal. Notice of the storage shall be mailed or personally delivered to the registered and legal owner(s) within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays. 
B.  The owner(s) of record, or their agent(s), must request a hearing in writing, within ten (10) days of the date appearing on the notice or the right to hearing is waived. 
C.  The city shall conduct the hearing within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, of receipt of the request under subsection B of this section. The city shall inform the person requesting the hearing of the time and place for the hearing. 
D.  The city may authorize any officer or employee to conduct the hearing, provided that the hearing officer is not the person who directed the storage of the vehicle. The hearing officer shall determine the validity of the removal and storage of the mobile billboard advertising display at the conclusion of the hearing. 
E.  Following the hearing, if the hearing officer finds that the mobile billboard advertising display was improperly removed and stored, it shall be released to the owner at the storage facility and the city shall bear the cost of removal and storage. Otherwise, the mobile billboard advertising display shall be returned to the owner only after payment of any and all fines or fees, including, but not limited to: penalties under section 10.20.050 of this chapter; any outstanding amounts owed to the city for previous violations involving the same or similar mobile billboard advertising display; and the costs of removal and storage incurred by the city up to the time of release. The hearing officer shall determine the total amount to be paid prior to release of the mobile billboard advertising display, consistent with this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2011-291, § 1, 12-14-2011)  
10.20.050 - Violation—Penalties. 
After an initial warning citation, any subsequent offense of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable pursuant to section 1.16.020 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-291, § 1, 12-14-2011)  
10.20.060 - Construction. 
It is the intent of this chapter to implement the provisions of the California Vehicle Code authorizing the city to regulate the parking of mobile billboard advertising displays. Reference to any section of the Vehicle Code is for the convenience of those governed by this chapter and those who must enforce it and does not imply that other, relevant provisions of the Vehicle Code are not applicable, nor is this chapter intended to duplicate, vary from or be preempted by the Vehicle Code. This chapter shall be construed in light of this intent. 
(Ord. No. 2011-291, § 1, 12-14-2011)  
Chapter 10.22 - REGULATING PARKING OF VEHICLES AND USES OF CITY-OWNED AND CITY-OPERATED OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES 
 
10.22.010 - Title. 
(Ord. No. 2016-336 , § 1, 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-344 , § 1, 1-11-2017)  
10.22.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions are applicable to provisions of this chapter: 
"Camper" means a structure designed to be mounted onto a motor vehicle and to provide facilities for human habitation or for camping purposes. 
"City" means the City of Calabasas. 
"Director" means the Public Works Director or his/her designee. 
"Mobile Billboard" means an advertising display that is attached to a wheeled, mobile, non-motorized vehicle, that carries, pulls, or transports a sign or billboard, and is for the primary purpose of advertising. 
"Oversize Commercial vehicle" means a vehicle of a type required to be registered under the Vehicle Code, used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit, or designated, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property, having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more, at any time. 
"Parking" means the parking or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
"Parking Facility" means any City-owned and City-operated off-street parking facility, including, but not limited to, a Park and Ride Lot. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle or trailer capable of human habitation—-designed or used for recreational camping or for travel, whether self-propelled or mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, or any structure inspected, approved and designated to be a recreational vehicle by and bearing the insignia of the state of California or any other state or federal agency having the authority to approve recreational vehicles. "Recreational vehicle" includes, without limitation, any of the following: (1) camp trailer, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 242; (2) fifth-wheel travel trailer, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 324; (3) house car, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 362; (4) trailer coach, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 635; (5) mobile home, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 396; (6) boat, watercraft, and/or a trailer for a boat or watercraft; (7) trailers designed to carry persons, property or animals on its own structure and drawn by a motor vehicle; and (8) recreational vehicle, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 18010. 
"Utility trailer" means a non-motorized vehicle designed to carry persons, property, animals, waste, materials, or any other items on its own structure and to be drawn by another motor vehicle which is not designed for recreational purposes. 
"Vehicle" means an automobile or motorcycle, as defined in California Vehicle Code (CVC) Sections 465 and 400. 
(Ord. No. 2016-336 , § 1, 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-344 , § 1, 1-11-2017)  
10.22.030 - Parking Restrictions. 
1.  No person shall park or leave standing in a parking facility any oversize commercial vehicle, recreational vehicle with or without camper and utility trailer. 
2.  No vehicle shall be parked or left standing adjacent to a red curb or line painted red. 
3.  No vehicle shall be parked or left standing in any parking space or area marked with a sign or diagonal white solid cross hatching pavement markings. 
4.  No vehicle shall be parked or left standing within two (2) or more designated parking spaces or in a manner that inhibits the use of adjacent parking space. 
5.  Parking of vehicles is permitted only in designated spots. 
6.  No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle in driveways. 
7.  No loitering in parking facility. 
8.  No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle overnight in the parking facility. 
9.  No parking of vehicles in violation of any applicable requirements of the California Vehicle Code, including without limitation, restrictions on parking in parking space for the exclusive use of those physically handicapped persons whose vehicles display the distinguishing license plates or placards issued to disabled persons pursuant to Section 22511.5 of the Vehicle Code, or to disabled veterans as specified in Section 5007 of the Vehicle Code. 
10.  No parking or leave standing a mobile billboard advertising display in parking facility. 
11.  Other general parking restrictions for the safety and welfare of the public as directed by the City Manager or Public Works Director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-336 , § 1, 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-344 , § 1, 1-11-2017)  
10.22.040 - Loading and unloading of merchandise. 
Loading and unloading activity by any commercial vehicle shall be prohibited in the parking facility. Signage will be posted in the parking facility prohibiting this activity. 
(Ord. No. 2016-336 , § 1, 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-344 , § 1, 1-11-2017)  
10.22.050 - Valet service. 
Valet service shall not be permitted in the parking facility. Signage will be posted in the parking facility prohibiting such service. 
(Ord. No. 2016-336 , § 1, 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-344 , § 1, 1-11-2017)  
10.22.060 - Posting of notice. 
The parking restrictions set forth in Section 10.22.040 this chapter shall be posted on signs or on pavement markings, providing notice of all applicable regulations and restrictions, at the parking facility. 
Any sign indicating that vehicles violating the parking restrictions may be removed at the owner's expense shall contain the telephone number of the local traffic law enforcement agency where a person, whose vehicle has been removed from the parking facility, may find out the status of the vehicle and the location to where it has been removed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-336 , § 1, 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-344 , § 1, 1-11-2017)  
10.22.070 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or cause, allow, or permit to be parked, a vehicle in any parking facility in violation of signs erected and/or pavement markings pursuant to this chapter. 
It is unlawful for any person to cause, allow, or permit any vehicle to remain in or upon any parking facility for more than the time indicated by signs erected pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-336 , § 1, 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-344 , § 1, 1-11-2017)  
10.22.080 - Removal of vehicle from parking facility. 
Pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22651(n), any peace officer, or the City's contracted vendor, who is engaged in enforcing parking laws and regulations for the City, may remove vehicles parked in the parking facility that violate the following: 
1.  The vehicle is parked or left standing adjacent to a red curb or line painted red. 
2.  The vehicle is parked in stalls dedicated and designated by appropriate markings to the exclusive use of those physically handicapped persons or to disabled veterans. 
3.  In any area with posting of notice in accordance with CVC 22658. 
(Ord. No. 2016-336 , § 1, 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-344 , § 1, 1-11-2017)  
10.22.090 - Parking citation procedures. 
Parking citations issued in the parking facility shall follow the ordinance codified in Chapter 10.04 in the City of Calabasas' Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-336 , § 1, 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-344 , § 1, 1-11-2017)  
10.22.100 - Mobile billboard advertising display. 
Parking citations issued in the parking facility for this violation shall follow the ordinance codified in Chapter 10.20 in the City of Calabasas' Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-336 , § 1, 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-344 , § 1, 1-11-2017)  
10.22.110 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is found to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections of this chapter. The City Council declares that it has adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or sections declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2016-336 , § 1, 9-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-344 , § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.08 - COMMUNITY TREE MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 
 
12.08.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The city of Calabasas lies in a unique area of Los Angeles County, the beauty and welfare of which is greatly enhanced by the presence of mature, healthy trees in public places. These benefits include beautification, shade, energy conservation and wildlife habitat. The proper planting, maintenance and removal of these community trees are required to insure that these trees continue to provide such benefits to the community. 
B.  This chapter sets forth the policies of the city with respect to the planting, maintenance and removal of all community trees. This chapter also defines the management and enforcement policies required to implement said policies. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
12.08.020 - Definitions. 
"City" means the city of Calabasas. 
"City arborist" means an arborist certified through the International Society of Arboriculture and designated by the city engineer to provide technical expertise with respect to arboricultural matters. 
"Community tree" means any tree now or hereafter growing on any public place. 
"Community trees" means the collection of community trees that grow on any public place. 
"Community Tree Master Plan" means a written document that guides the work of the Tree Board, the city arborist and city staff in connection with this chapter. 
"DBH" or "diameter at breast height" means the average diameter of a tree measured at a height of four and one-half feet above natural grade. 
"Park" means any public park having an individual name. 
"Parkway" means that part of a street, not covered by sidewalk, lying between the property line and the edge of a street. 
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
"Property line" means the outer edge of a street right-of-way. 
"Property owner" means any person owning a property as shown on the tax roll of the assessor of the county of Los Angeles. 
"Public place" includes all grounds, streets, parkways, parks and public open spaces owned by the city and public rights-of-way. 
"Street" means the entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic. 
"Topping" means removal of a branch to a stub, bud or lateral branch not large enough to assume a terminal role. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
12.08.030 - Community Tree Master Plan. 
The Tree Board shall formulate a Community Tree Master Plan with the advice of the city arborist, city agencies, public hearings and the approval of the city council. The Community Tree Master Plan shall include but not be limited to an inventory of tree resources, potential tree projects, community tree palettes, species and age diversity goals, standard tree planting and maintenance specifications, criteria for tree removal, and permit procedures. The city arborist, with the approval of the Tree Board and the city council, shall have the authority to amend or add to the Community Tree Master Plan at any time. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
12.08.040 - Responsibility for community tree care. 
A.  The city engineer shall generally be responsible for the care of community trees and the community services director is in charge of all park trees. All actions involving community trees, including sidewalk and street repairs shall be reviewed and approved by the city arborist in accordance with the criteria in the Community Tree Master Plan. The value of the tree, including its historical or other significance, versus the magnitude of the hardscape damage shall be considered in determining the work to be performed. 
B.  Property owners shall generally be responsible for the proper watering of community trees located with the parkway along their property. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
12.08.050 - Permits required. 
No person shall plant, prune, remove or otherwise disturb any community tree without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the public works department. An encroachment permit shall be required for the following activities: 
A.  Planting. 
1.  Application Data. When making application for an encroachment permit to plant a community tree, the applicant shall illustrate the number, size, species and location of each tree to be planted. 
2.  Justification. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed tree planting complies with the Community Tree Master Plan palette for that site. 
3.  Proper Planting. Any community tree shall be planted, fertilized, staked, watered and mulched in accordance with the planting specifications in the Community Tree Master Plan or as otherwise specified by the city arborist. 
B.  Maintenance. 
1.  Application Data. When making application for an encroachment permit to perform maintenance activities on a community tree, the applicant shall illustrate the number, size, species, and location of each tree to be pruned. Pruning shall include root pruning as well as canopy pruning. A detailed description of the proposed work must be provided. A detailed description of the proposed work must be provided to the satisfaction of the city arborist. 
2.  Pruning for View. Any application requesting permission to prune a community tree to improve or maintain a view shall be referred to the Tree Board for review. The Tree Board shall consider the reasonableness of the request, as well as the assessment of the proposed procedure by the city arborist in making decision. Any approved pruning shall be paid for by the applicant. 
3.  Public Utilities. The city arborist shall annually issue area permits granting permission to public utilities to trim and maintain trees in public spaces. Nonemergency trimming shall be performed in accordance with the pruning standards of the western chapter of the International Society of Arboriculture and nearby neighbors must be informed by posted doorknob notices at least three weeks in advance. 
C.  Removal. 
1.  Application Data. When making application for an encroachment permit for removal of a community tree, the applicant shall illustrate the number, size, species and location of each tree to be removed. A detailed description of the proposed work must be provided to the satisfaction of the city arborist. All stumps shall be ground to the satisfaction of the city arborist. 
2.  Wherever it is necessary to remove a community tree in connection with the paving of a sidewalk, or the paving or widening of the portion of an entrance drive from a street used for vehicular traffic, the applicant shall replant such trees or replace them. If site conditions prevent replanting in parkways or along the right-of-way, this requirement shall be satisfied if an equivalent number of trees are planted in an attractive manner in an adjacent public space. Such activities are subject to the approval of the city arborist. 
3.  In general, removal of trees due to perceived sewer problems shall not be permitted. Alternative solutions shall be pursued by the property owner. 
4.  In general, the applicant or property owner shall bear the cost of removal of all trees removed under a removal permit. 
5.  Removal of trees for view purposes shall only be permitted in accordance with the criteria included within the Community Tree Master Plan. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
12.08.060 - Projects. 
All city projects shall be subject to the policies and procedures contained in the Community Tree Master Plan. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
12.08.070 - Abuse of community trees. 
No person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any community tree; damage any community tree with a string trimmer or other landscape maintenance equipment, attach any rope, wire, nails, advertisements, posters or other contrivance to any community tree; allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to trees to come into contact with any community tree; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
12.08.080 - Topping. 
No community tree shall be topped for any reason except in the case of an emergency or when the tree is approved for removal. Special design procedures, including pollarding, must be approved by the city arborist. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
12.08.090 - Interference with city arborist, city traffic engineer or public works department. 
No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the city arborist, city traffic engineer or public works department while engaged in carrying out the execution of this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
12.08.100 - Protection of community trees. 
All community trees shall be protected during construction. 
A.  Any community tree in a public space near any excavation or construction of any building, structure or street work shall be guarded with a barrier approved by the city arborist. The barrier shall be not less than four feet high and eight feet square, or at a distance in feet from the tree trunk equal to the diameter of the trunk at breast height (DBH) in inches, whichever is greater. All building materials, dirt, debris, equipment and vehicles shall be kept outside of the barrier. 
B.  No person shall alter natural drainage, excavate any ditches, tunnels, or lay any drive within a radius of ten feet from any community tree without first obtaining a written permit from the city arborist. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
12.08.110 - Tree valuation. 
When needed, the value of a community tree shall be determined in accordance with the current practice of the International Society of Arboriculture. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
12.08.120 - Placing materials on public property. 
No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public space, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any community tree growing therein. Sunlight to any community tree shall not be permanently blocked without written approval from the city arborist. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
12.08.130 - Enforcement, penalty and appeals. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be fined a sum of no less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Repeated violations by a person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined a sum of no less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or may imprisoned for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days, or both. Fines may also be assessed in accordance with the magnitude of any damage to a community tree. Fines collected shall be placed in a community tree fund and used for community tree projects. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
12.08.140 - Administrative guidelines. 
A.  Permits may be applied for as set forth below. 
1.  Application for permits must be made to the city arborist not less than forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the time the work is to be done. 
2.  Standards of Issuance. The city arborist shall issue the permit provided for in this chapter if, in his or her judgment, the proposed work is reasonable and the proposed method and workmanship thereof are of a satisfactory nature. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated. 
3.  Notice of completion shall be given within five days to the city arborist for his or her inspection. 
B.  Arboriculture specifications, horticultural standards and worker's qualifications shall be available within the Community Tree Master Plan or from the city arborist. These specifications, standards and qualifications are to be followed by any person or firm seeking a permit for work on community trees. 
1.  Arboricultural specifications include accepted, approved methods for maintenance and tree care, including fertilization, feeding, insect control, disease prevention and storm damage preparation and repair. 
2.  Horticultural standards include accepted, approved methods for tree planting, staking, guying, wrapping, balling, tree relocation, pruning, removal, stump grinding and clean up. Recycling of vegetative parts is also addressed in these standards. 
3.  Worker's qualifications include required or recommended education and training, practical experience, licensing and insurance requirements for workers and companies doing tree work in the city. 
C.  Approved Tree List. The approved tree list and/or tree palette for each public space shall be contained in the Community Tree Master Plan. No other species other than those included in this list may be planted in any public space without the written approval of the Tree Board and the city arborist. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
12.08.150 - Conflicts. 
Should any section, clause or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or parts thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
(Ord. 98-135 § 2 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 12.12 - BRIDGE AND ROADWAY CONSTRUCTION FEES 
Sections: 
 
12.12.010 - Fees established. 
A subdivider, as a condition of approval of a final map for property within an area of benefit, or a building permit applicant, as a condition of issuance of a building permit for property within an area of benefit, shall pay a fee as hereinafter established to defray the cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways and canyons, and/or constructing major thoroughfares. 
(Ord. 99-143 § 1 (part), 1999)  
12.12.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used are defined as follows: 
"Area of benefit" means a specified area wherein it has been determined that the real property located therein will benefit from the construction of a bridge and/or major thoroughfare. 
"Bridge facilities" means any crossing for a highway or local road, involving a railway, freeway, stream or canyon, which is required by the General Plan in order to accommodate new urban development within the area of benefit. 
"Construction" means and includes preliminary studies, design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts, and actual construction. 
"Major thoroughfare" means those roads designated in the transportation element of the General Plan, the primary purpose of which is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to the state highway system. 
(Ord. 99-143 § 1 (part), 1999)  
12.12.030 - General plan requirements. 
The provisions herein for payment of a fee shall apply only if the bridge and/or major thoroughfare has been included in an element of the General Plan adopted by the city council at least thirty (30) days prior to the filing of a map or application for a building permit on land located within the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(Ord. 99-143 § 1 (part), 1999)  
12.12.040 - Requirement for fees—Major thoroughfares. 
Payment of fees shall not be required unless any major thoroughfares are in addition to or a widening or reconstruction of any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(Ord. 99-143 § 1 (part), 1999)  
12.12.050 - Requirement for fees—Bridges. 
Payment of fees shall not be required unless any planned bridge facility is a new bridge serving the area or an addition to an existing bridge facility serving the area at a time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(Ord. 99-143 § 1 (part), 1999)  
12.12.060 - Public hearing for proposed area of benefit. 
Action to establish an area of benefit may be initiated by the city council upon its own motion or upon the recommendation of the traffic and transportation commission. The city council will set a public hearing for each proposed area benefitted. Notice of the time and place of said hearing, including preliminary information related to the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated costs, and the method of fee apportionment, shall be given pursuant to Section 65905 of the Government Code (Public hearing on application for variance or permit; Notice). 
(Ord. 99-143 § 1 (part), 1999)  
12.12.070 - Procedure for public hearing, protests and adoption of resolution. 
A.  At the public hearing, the city council will consider the testimony, written protests and other evidence. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may, unless a majority written protest is filed and not withdrawn, determine to establish an area of benefit. If established, the city council shall adopt a resolution describing the boundaries of the area of benefit, setting forth the cost, whether actual or estimated, and the method of fee apportionment. A certified copy of such resolution shall be recorded with the county recorder. 
B.  Such apportioned fees shall be applicable to all property within the area of benefit, and shall be payable as a condition of approval of a final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for such property or portions thereof. Where the area of benefit includes lands not subject to the payment of fees pursuant to this section, the city council shall make provisions for the payment of the share of improvement costs apportioned to such lands from other sources. 
C.  Written protest will be received by the city clerk at any time prior to the close of the public hearing. If written protests are filed by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefitted by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented by the protests to less than one-half of the area to be benefitted, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned and the city council shall not, for one year from the filing of said written protests, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement under the provisions of this section. Any protest may be withdrawn by the owner making the same, in writing, at any time prior to the close of the public hearing. 
D.  If any majority protest is directed against only a portion of the improvement, then all further proceedings under the provisions of this section to construct that portion of the improvement so protested against shall be barred for a period of one year, but the city council shall not be barred from commencing new proceedings not including any part of the improvement so protested against. Such proceedings shall be commenced by a new notice and public hearing as set forth above. 
E.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city council, within such one-year period, from commencing and carrying on new proceedings for the construction of an improvement or portion of the improvement so protested against if it finds, by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of its members, that the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefitted are in favor of going forward with such improvement or portion thereof. 
(Ord. 99-143 § 1 (part), 1999)  
12.12.080 - Fees deposited in separate funds. 
Fees paid pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a planned bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare fund. A fund shall be established for each planned bridge facility project and/or each planned major thoroughfare project If the benefit area is one in which more than one bridge and/or major thoroughfare is required to be constructed, a separate fund may be established covering all of the bridge projects and/or major thoroughfares in the benefit area. Moneys in such fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of the improvement serving the area to be benefitted and from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, or to reimburse the city for the costs of constructing the improvement. 
(Ord. 99-143 § 1 (part), 1999)  
12.12.090 - Considerations in lieu of fees. 
The city council may approve the acceptance of considerations in lieu of the payment of fees established herein. 
(Ord. 99-143 § 1 (part), 1999)  
12.12.100 - Advancement of money from general fund. 
The city council may approve the advancement of money from the general fund to pay the costs of constructing the improvements covered herein and may reimburse the general fund for such advances from planned bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare funds established pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 99-143 § 1 (part), 1999)  
12.12.110 - Incurring indebtedness. 
The city may incur an interest-bearing indebtedness for the construction of bridge facilities or major thoroughfares. However, the sole security for repayment of that indebtedness shall be moneys in planned bridge facility or major thoroughfares funds. 
(Ord. 99-143 § 1 (part), 1999)  
12.12.120 - Reimbursement agreement with subdividers. 
If a subdivider, as a condition of approval of a subdivision, is required or desires to construct a bridge and/or major thoroughfare, the city council may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider. Such agreement may provide for payments to the subdivider from the bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare fund covering that specific project to reimburse the subdivider for costs not allocated to the subdivider's property in the resolution establishing the area of benefit. If the bridge and/or major thoroughfare fund covers more than one project, reimbursements shall be made on a pro rata basis, reflecting the actual or estimated costs of the projects covered by the fund. 
(Ord. 99-143 § 1 (part), 1999)  
12.12.130 - Funding of costs not allocated to area of benefit. 
Nothing in this chapter precludes the city from providing funds for the construction of bridge facilities or major thoroughfares to defray costs not allocated to the area of benefit. 
(Ord. 99-143 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 12.13 - NEWSRACKS 
Sections: 
 
12.13.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to advance, improve and promote aesthetic concerns as well as public health, safety and welfare of the residents, citizens and visitors to the city of Calabasas. In order to advance these purposes, it is necessary to control the number, size construction, placement and appearance of newsracks. This chapter is intended to accomplish these goals, without restricting the free dispersal of information guaranteed by the constitutions of the United States and the state of California, through regulations on the placement, appearance and servicing of newsracks in the public rights-of-way so as to: 
A.  Provide sufficient clearance and visibility for safety and convenience of the pedestrian and driving public. 
B.  Avoid unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including ingress and egress from any residence or place of business or from the street to the sidewalks by persons crossing or exiting/entering parked or standing vehicles. 
C.  Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of utility poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants and mail boxes, and access to locations used for benches and public transportation purposes. 
D.  Eliminate poorly maintained newsracks which have resulted in a visual blight on the public rights-of-way, or which may unreasonably detract from the aesthetics of existing structures. 
E.  Maintain and protect the values of surrounding properties. 
F.  Reduce the unnecessary exposure of the city to personal injury and property damage claims. 
G.  Provide for and maintain the freedom of speech for newspapers or periodicals through the use of newsracks for distribution purposes. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.020 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all newsracks, whether installed and maintained prior to or after the effective date of any of the provisions of this chapter. Those newsracks installed prior to the effective date of any provision enacted hereunder shall be brought into compliance with such provisions within thirty days of the effective date thereof. 
B.  Any newsrack not brought into compliance within the aforementioned time period shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.030 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them unless otherwise noted: 
"Newsracks" means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or news periodicals. 
"Parkway" means that area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. "Parkway" shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel. 
"Roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
"Sidewalk" means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
"Street" means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.040 - Certain newsracks prohibited. 
A.  No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack or other structure which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street. 
B.  No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near such location, or when such newsrack interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.050 - Permit required. 
No person shall place, construct or maintain a newsrack on or projecting onto a public right-of-way, highway, parkway, roadway or sidewalk unless and until an encroachment/construction permit for newsracks has been obtained from the city's public works department. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.060 - Permit application. 
A.  A written application for a newsrack encroachment/construction permit shall be filed with the public works department on the city's encroachment/construction permit form and shall include, without limitation: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, owner and/or distributor; 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of a representative of the applicant or other responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant's newsrack(s); 
3.  Proof that the type of newsrack is consistent with the requirements of the city's policies and guidelines, including a photograph of the newsrack and mount; 
4.  A picture map showing and identifying the number of newsracks, the exact proposed location of each newsrack (hereinafter "site") and the order of all newsracks at that location; 
5.  The name of the newspaper, publication or periodical to be contained in each newsrack; 
6.  A written statement agreeing to hold harmless and indemnify the city for any newsrack(s) to be installed or maintained over any public sidewalk or parkway in accordance with this chapter; 
7.  An application fee and inspection and enforcement costs, in an amount set by the city of Calabasas fee schedule. 
B.  A single application for a permit may include up to ten proposed sites for newsracks to be installed within the city. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.070 - Application review—Issuance, conditions and terms for permit. 
A.  The public works department shall have the authority to process, review and approve or deny permits for the installation of newsrack(s) in the public right-of-way. In issuing a permit or rejecting sites, the public works department shall be guided solely by the standards and criteria set forth in this chapter and by any policies and guidelines established by the city. 
B.  Permits may be issued for the installation of newsrack(s) only after city inspection of the proposed site(s), and the installation, use or maintenance thereof shall be conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Applicant shall provide the insurance and indemnification required by this chapter at the time the permit is issued for the newsrack(s). 
D.  If an application for a proposed site is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the specific reason for such denial. In any case where the public works department disapproves of a particular location, such disapproval shall be without prejudice to the applicant who may designate a different site or locations. 
E.  Each permit shall expire on the last day of June of each year, and may be renewed by the public works department after the public works department confirms the applicant's compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit and all existing laws and regulations. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.080 - Standards for installation, maintenance and operation. 
Any newsrack placed, in whole or in part, upon, in or over any public property or public right-of-way shall comply with each of the following standards: 
A.  Newsracks shall be of the type listed in the policies and guidelines established by the city and shall be mounted on a permanently fixed single pedestal (or multi pedestal for groupings of newsracks) mount bolted to the paved area. No newsrack with mount or stand shall exceed forty-eight inches in height, thirty inches in width or twenty-four inches in thickness. All opaque surfaces of the newsracks and mounts shall be painted the same color. 
B.  Identification. The name, address and phone number of a responsible person who may be contacted at any time concerning the newsrack shall be displayed on the newsrack in such a manner as to be readily visible and readable to a prospective customer thereof. 
C.  Permit Sticker. The permittee shall affix to each newsrack specified in the permit issued by the public works department, a sticker or stickers evidencing the permit in the manner specified by the department of public works. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.090 - Location, placement and number of newsracks. 
A.  No proposed site and no newsrack shall be placed, installed, used, or maintained in the following locations: 
1.  Within five feet of any marked crosswalk; 
2.  Within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalks; 
3.  Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box, or other emergency facility; 
4.  Within five feet of any driveway; 
5.  Within five feet ahead of and fifteen (15) feet to the rear of any sign or pavement marking for a designated bus stop measured parallel to the flow of traffic; 
6.  Within five feet of any bus bench; 
7.  At any location where the newsrack causes, creates or constitutes a line of sight problem or a traffic hazard; 
8.  At any location where the newsrack unreasonably obstructs or interferes with the pedestrian access to abutting property; 
9.  On a sidewalk or parkway opposite a newsstand or another newsrack; 
10.  Within three feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees; within three feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or highway; or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes as determined by the city; 
11.  Where the newsrack will endanger persons using the sidewalk or property; 
12.  Where the newsrack will unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the safe flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the public right-of-way; 
13.  At any location which creates less than a four-foot wide path of travel as required by Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations and the Americans with Disabilities Act; 
14.  Facing another newsrack when separated or divided only by the width of a sidewalk or pedestrian walk; 
15.  On an access ramp or curb cut for disabled persons. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.100 - Display of publications in areas where minors are not excluded—Harmful matter restricted. 
No persons shall display or cause to be displayed, in any public place where minors are not excluded, any harmful matter, as defined in Section 313 of the California Penal Code, unless such matter is displayed in newsracks equipped with devices commonly known as blinder racks affixed in such a manner that the lower two-thirds of the matter is not exposed to view. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.110 - Insurance, indemnification and hold harmless. 
As part of the permit application, every person who places or maintains a newsrack on public property or the public right-of-way shall indemnify, defend and hold the city, its officers, employees and agents free and harmless from any claim, damage, liability, demand or judgment in favor of any person or entity, arising out of the location, operation and use of any newsrack(s) located upon, in or over a public right-of-way or other public property. The applicant shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance or other documentation, as required by the city attorney, evidencing that a liability insurance policy in the minimum amounts set by the city attorney has been issued, naming the city as an additional insured, and containing a provision that the policy cannot be canceled except upon thirty days' written notice to the city of the fact of such cancellation. If such insurance is canceled at any time during the time the newsrack(s) is installed or maintained on public property, said newsrack shall be removed at the permittee's cost in accordance with the provisions of Section 12.13.120. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.120 - Impoundment of racks—Correction or other disposal authorized when. 
A.  The sheriff or the public works director or their designates: 
1.  May immediately correct any violation of this chapter, and may do so without impounding if such correction can be accomplished simply, easily, quickly and without expense. 
2.  May, notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, immediately remove and impound any newsrack in violation of this chapter if the violation is creating a dangerous or hazardous condition which cannot be corrected simply, easily, quickly, and without expense. Notice of such action and the right to request a hearing in accordance with this chapter shall be mailed to the permittee, or person, if known, maintaining such newsrack, within five working days after such action. 
3.  May notify the permittee, or person, if known, maintaining a newsrack found in violation of this chapter, either in person, by telephone or by mail, in their discretion, and/or by affixing a notice to the newsrack, that unless the violation is corrected or a hearing requested, within two working days if the notice is in person or by telephone, within five working days if the notice is by mail, or within seven working days if the notice is by affixing a notice to the newsrack, of the date of the notice, the newsrack will be impounded. 
4.  May impound any newsrack in accordance with the decision of any hearing requested pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  If a hearing on the impounding of the newsrack is not timely requested or if the newsrack is not returned in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the sheriff or the public works director or their designates may sell or otherwise dispose of the newsrack, and its contents, and deposit the proceeds, if any, from any such sale or other disposition, and any moneys contained in said newsrack with the city, in the case of impounding by the sheriff, or in the road fund, in the case of impounding by the public works director. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.130 - Return of impounded newsracks. 
A.  Unless the newsrack and its contents are being held as evidence in a criminal prosecution, the permittee or if there is not known permittee, a claimant who provides sufficient proof of ownership of an impounded newsrack may, at any time up to and including the thirtieth day after the impounding, and if a hearing pursuant to this chapter is held concerning the newsrack may, at any time up to and including the thirtieth day after the decision at such hearing becomes final, obtain a return of the newsrack and its contents, upon paying an impound fee of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) plus the reasonable additional cost, if any, of impounding the newsrack in excess of sixty-five dollars ($65.00). 
B.  The public works director or his or her designate may, after a hearing in accordance with this chapter, order the newsrack returned without payment of any impound fee; or, if an impound fee has previously been paid, may order return of any such impound fee. 
C.  A court before whom criminal charges concerning an impounded newsrack are pending may, upon dismissal of the charges of a finding of acquittal, in its discretion order an impounded newsrack returned without payment of an impound fee or the return of the impounded fee paid. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.140 - Hearings on impoundment. 
A.  Request for Hearing. Any permittee or person maintaining a newsrack found in violation of this chapter may, at any time within thirty (30) days of the alleged violation, request in writing a hearing before the public works director or his or her designate. 
B.  Stay Pending Decision. A timely request for a hearing made prior to any impounding shall operate to stay any impounding until five working days after the decision is rendered, unless further stayed pending any appeal therefrom. 
C.  Conduct of Hearing. A hearing shall be held, unless continued by agreement, within five working days of the request for a hearing. At the hearing, any person may present evidence or argument as to whether the newsrack was in violation of this chapter or whether the newsrack should be returned without payment of an impound fee. 
D.  Decision. A decision shall be rendered within five working days after the close of the hearing. 
E.  Notice of Decision. The public works director or his or her designate may give oral notice of the decision at the close of the hearing or may send notice of the decision by mail. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.150 - Appeal after hearing. 
A.  Appeal. Any person who requested a hearing may, within five days after notice of the decision therein is given pursuant to this chapter, appeal such decision to the city council. 
B.  Contents of Appeal. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state the legal factual basis upon which the appeal is to be based, and shall be filed with the public works director or his or her designate, who shall forthwith forward the appeal, together with a copy of the decision, to the city clerk. 
C.  Stay Pending Appeal. A timely appeal of the decision shall operate to stay any impounding pending action taken on the appeal by the city council pursuant to this section. 
D.  Action by the City Council. Upon receipt of the appeal and decision, and as soon as practical, the city council may take any one of the following actions: 
1.  Grant a stay of the decision or any impounding pending further consideration by the city council; 
2.  Approve the decision and order; 
3.  Refer the matter back to the public works director with instructions; 
4.  Set the matter for public hearing before itself. Such public hearing shall be held de novo as if no hearing previously had been held. 
E.  Stay Pending Action by City Council. Action taken by the city council pursuant to subsections (D)(3) or (D)(4) of this section shall operate to stay the decision or any impounding pending final resolution of the issue of whether the newsrack was in violation of this chapter or whether the newsrack should be returned without payment of an impound fee. 
F.  Effective Date of City Council Action. Action taken by the city council pursuant to subsection (D)(2) of this section shall be effective two working days after said action is taken. 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
12.13.160 - Violation—Penalty. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. 2000-155 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 15.04 - CONSTRUCTION CODES ADOPTED[1] 
Sections: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, adopted February 22, 2017, amended chapter 15.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 15.04, §§ 15.04.010—15.04.980, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Article I. - California Building Code 
 
15.04.010 - 2016 California Building Code adopted. 
A.  The 2016 California Building Code and appendix H, which regulate the erection, construction, enlargements, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, use, equipment, height, area, security, abatement, and maintenance of buildings or structures within the city provide for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, and provide for penalties for violation thereto, are hereby adopted by reference, and conflicting ordinances are hereby repealed. 
B.  All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said codes, together with the appendices specifically referenced above, one copy of which will be on file and accessible to the public for inspection at the city clerk's office, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter with the exceptions, deletions, additions, and amendments thereto as set forth in this subchapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
15.04.030 - 2016 California Building Code Administrative Provisions adopted. 
A.  The Administrative Provisions of the 2016 California Building Code contained in Division II of Chapter I of Part 2 of Title 24 California Code of Regulations are hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Government Code sections 50022.2 through 50022.10. 
B.  All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said division, together with the appendices specifically identified here within, one copy of which will be on file and accessible to the public for inspection at the city clerk's office, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
C.  Appeals boards. Administrative Provisions Section 113, of Chapter I Division II of the 2016 California Building Code, is amended to read as follows: 
113 Appeals Boards. 
113.1 General. 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations of the building official regarding materials or methods of construction pertaining to: the Building Code, Residential Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Electrical Code, Energy Code, Historical Building Code, Fire Code, Existing Building Code, or the Green Building Standards Code, where necessary the City Council shall appoint upon nomination of the City Manager a Board of Appeals under this code with appropriate technical qualifications. Such nominees shall not include city employees. 
113.2 Limitations on Authority. 
(a)  An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that a decision of the building official to prohibit the use of materials or methods of construction reflects one of the following errors: (i) the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, (ii) the provisions of this code do not fully apply according to their terms, or (iii) the materials or methods of constructions proposed are equally well or better suited to accomplish the purposes of this code than those otherwise required by this code. 
(b)  The Board of Appeals shall have no authority to: (i) waive the requirements of this code, (ii) to consider, decide or rule on the existence or nonexistence of any activity, condition, or use involving real property and/or any structure and other improvements on real property that the building official or another authorized agent of the city has determined to violate Title 15 or any other provision of the Calabasas Municipal Code, or (iii) consider, decide or rule whether persons are or are not responsible for violations of the Calabasas Municipal Code or public nuisances or what actions are required by responsible persons to correct or abate violations of the Calabasas Code or public nuisances. 
113.3 Procedures. 
A person seeking an appeal under this Section 113 shall file an appeal on a form furnished by the building official and pay an appeal fee in an amount established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. That fee shall be sufficient to cover the cost of the building official's obtaining a written interpretation of relevant provisions of this Title 15 by the International Code Council or any successor thereto. The Board of Appeals may, after hearing, adopt that written interpretation as the decision of the Board. If the Board of Appeals does not adopt that written interpretation, it shall state its reasoning in writing. The Board may establish, by a regulation published in the manner required of ordinances of the City Council, procedures for the conduct of appeals under this Section 113. Judicial review of a decision of the Board of Appeal under this Section 113 may be had pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. Judicial review of any decision of the building official not subject to appeal under this Section 105 may be had pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1085. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
15.04.050 - Safety assessment placards. 
A.  Intent. This section established standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy. The section further authorizes the building official and his or her authorized representatives to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. 
B.  Application of Provisions. The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the city of Calabasas. The city council may extend the provisions as necessary. 
C.  Definitions. "Safety assessment" means a visual, nondestructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy. 
D.  Placards. The following are verbal descriptions of the official placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures. 
1.  "INSPECTED—Lawful Occupancy Permitted" is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure. 
2.  "RESTRICTED USE" is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy. 
3.  "UNSAFE—Do Not Enter or Occupy" is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the building official, or his or her authorized representative. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered. 
The ordinance number, the name of the jurisdiction, its address, and phone number shall be permanently affixed to each placard. 
Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the building official. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter, remove, cover or deface a placard unless authorized pursuant to this section. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
Article II. - California Residential Code 
 
15.04.100 - 2016 California Residential Code adopted. 
A.  The 2016 California Residential Code, which regulate the erection, construction, enlargements, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, use, equipment, height, area, security, abatement, and maintenance of buildings or structures of detached one-and-two-family dwelling, townhouse not more than three stories above grade plane in height, provide for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore, and provide for penalties for violation thereto, are hereby adopted by reference, and conflicting ordinances are hereby repealed. 
B.  All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said codes, together with their appendices, one copy of which will be on file and accessible to the public for inspection at the city clerk's office, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter with the exceptions, deletions, additions, and amendments thereto as set forth in this subchapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
15.04.140 - 2016 California Residential Code Administrative Provisions adopted. 
A.  Chapter I Division II Administrative Provisions of the 2016 California Residential Code are hereby adopted by reference. 
B.  The 2016 California Residential Code Chapter I Division II Board of Appeals Section R112 is amended to read as follows: 
R112 Board of Appeals. Appeals pertaining to the Residential Building Code, shall be governed by Calabasas Municipal Code Section 15.04.030. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
Article III. - California Mechanical Code 
 
15.04.180 - 2016 California Mechanical Code adopted. 
A.  The 2016 California Mechanical Code, which regulate and control the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of heating, venting, cooling, refrigeration systems, or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances in the city, provides for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore and provides for penalties for the violation thereof, with certain changes and amendments thereto, is hereby adopted by reference, and all conflicting ordinances are hereby repealed. 
B.  All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said codes, together with their appendices, one copy of which will be on file and accessible to the public for inspection at the city clerk's office, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter with the exceptions, deletions, additions, and amendments thereto as set forth in this subchapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
15.04.200 - 2016 California Mechanical Code Administrative Provisions adopted. 
A.  Division II of Chapter I Administrative Provisions of the 2016 California Mechanical Code are hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Government Code Sections 50022.2 through 50022.10. 
B.  The 2016 California Mechanical Code Division II of Chapter I Section 108.0 Board of Appeals is amended to read as follows: 
108.0 Board of Appeals. 
Appeals pertaining to the Mechanical Code, shall be governed by Calabasas Municipal Code Section 15.04.030. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
Article IV. - California Plumbing Code 
 
15.04.240 - 2016 California Plumbing Code adopted. 
A.  The 2016 California Plumbing Code inclusive of 2016 California Plumbing Code Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendix C, Appendix D, Appendix F, Appendix G, Appendix H, Appendix I, and Appendix L, which provide minimum requirements and standards for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare by regulating the installation or alteration of plumbing and drainage, materials, venting, wastes, traps, interceptors, water systems, sewers, gas piping, water heaters and other related products, and workmanship in the city, provide for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, and provide for penalties for the violations thereof, with certain changes and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference, and conflicting ordinances are hereby repealed. 
B.  All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said codes, together with their appendices, one copy of which will be on file and accessible to the public for inspection at the city clerk's office, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter with the exceptions, deletions, additions, and amendments thereto as set forth in this subchapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
15.04.280 - 2016 California Plumbing Code Administrative Provisions adopted. 
A.  Division II of Chapter I Administrative Provisions of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Government Code Sections 50022.2 through 50022.10. 
B.  All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said division, together with their appendices, one copy of which will be on file and accessible to the public for inspection at the City Clerk's office, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
C.  The 2016 California Plumbing Code Division II of Chapter I Section 107 Board of Appeals is amended to read as follows: 
107 Board of Appeals. 
Appeals pertaining to the Plumbing Code, shall be governed by Calabasas Municipal Code Section 15.04.030. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
Article V. - California Electrical Code. 
 
15.04.300 - 2016 California Electrical Code adopted. 
A.  The 2016 California Electrical Code, together with the appendices, which provides minimum requirements and standards for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare by regulating the installation or alteration of electrical wiring, equipment, materials, and workmanship in the city, provides for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor and provides penalties for the violations thereof, with all changes and amendments thereto, is hereby adopted by reference, and all conflicting ordinances are hereby repealed. 
B.  All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said codes, together with their appendices, one copy of which will be on file and accessible to the public for inspection at the city clerk's office, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter with the exceptions, deletions, additions, and amendments thereto as set forth in this subchapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
15.04.350 - 2016 California Electrical Code—General Code Administrative Provisions adopted. 
A.  California Electrical Code Article 89, General Code Provisions, are hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Government Code sections 50022.2 through 50022.10. 
B.  All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said division, together with their appendices, one copy of which will be on file and accessible to the public for inspection at the City Clerk's office, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
C.  Article 89 of the 2016 California Electrical Code, General Code Provisions, Section 89.108.8, Appeals Board is amended to read as follows: 
89.108.8 Appeals Board. 
Appeals pertaining to the California Electrical Code shall be governed by Calabasas Municipal Code Section 15.04.030. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
Article VI. - California Energy Code 
 
15.04.400 - 2016 California Energy Code adopted. 
A.  The 2016 California Energy Code, together with the appendices, which regulate the building envelope, space-conditioning systems, water-heating systems, outdoor lighting systems and signs located either indoors or outdoors within the city, are hereby adopted by reference, and conflicting ordinances are hereby repealed. 
B.  All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said codes, together with their appendices, one copy of which will be on file and accessible to the public for inspection at the city clerk's office, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter with the exceptions, deletions, additions, and amendments thereto as set forth in this subchapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
Article VII. - California Historical Building Code 
 
15.04.450 - 2016 California Historical Building Code adopted. 
A.  The 2016 California Historical Building Code, which provides regulations, minimum requirements and standards for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, relocation of buildings or properties designated as historical building or properties, with all changes and amendments thereto, is hereby adopted by reference, and all conflicting ordinances are hereby repealed. 
B.  All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said codes, together with their appendices, one copy of which will be on file and accessible to the public for inspection at the city clerk's office, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter with the exceptions, deletions, additions, and amendments thereto as set forth in this subchapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
Article VIII. - California Fire Code 
 
15.04.500 - 2016 California Fire Code. 
A.  The 2016 California Fire Code, which regulates the erection, construction, enlargements, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, use, equipment, height, area, security, abatement, and maintenance of buildings or structures within the city provide for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, and provide for penalties for violation thereto, are hereby adopted by reference, and conflicting ordinances are hereby repealed. 
B.  All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said codes, one copy of which will be on file and accessible to the public for inspection at the city clerk's office, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter with the exceptions, deletions, additions, and amendments thereto as set forth in this subchapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
Article IX. - California Green Building Standards Code 
 
15.04.550 - 2016 California Green Building Standards Code adopted. 
A.  The 2016 California Green Building Standards Code, together with its appendices, which regulate the planning, design, construction, operation, replacement, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenance connected or attached to such building structures throughout the State of California, are hereby adopted by reference, and ordinances of the city which conflict with that Code are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
B.  All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code, together with its appendices, one copy of which will be on file and accessible to the public for inspection at the city clerk's office, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter with the exceptions, deletions, additions, and amendments thereto as set forth in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
Article X. - Expedited Permitting Process For Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy Systems and Electrical Vehicle Charging Stations[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-357 , § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2017, amended the title of Art. X to read as herein set out. Former Art. X was titled, "Permitting Of Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy Systems And Electrical Vehicle Charging Stations." 
 
15.04.600 - Expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems and electrical vehicle charging stations. 
Part A Expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems. 
1.  A "small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
1.1.  A photovoltaic solar energy system that is (i) no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal and (ii) with all photovoltaic panels mounted on the rooftop of a single or duplex family residential structure. 
1.2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City and paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code. 
1.3.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the Calabasas Land and Development Use Code. 
2.  The following definitions apply to this Section: 
2.1.  "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by a city, county, or city and county on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code. 
2.2.  "Solar energy system" has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or re-designated from time to time. 
2.3.  "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
3.  The City shall not condition approval for any solar energy system permit on the approval of a solar energy system by an association, as that term is defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code. 
4.  Section 65850.5 of the California Government Code provides that, on or before September 30, 2015, every city, county, or city and county shall adopt an ordinance that creates an expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems. 
5.  Section 65850.5 of the California Government Code provides that in developing an expedited permitting process, the city shall adopt a checklist of all requirements with which small rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to develop and adopt such checklist. 
6.  The intent of this article, is to substantially conform the City's expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems with the recommendations for expedited permitting, including the eligibility checklists and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
7.  The small residential rooftop solar energy system eligibility checklist developed and promulgated by the building official shall be published on the city's internet website. The applicant may submit the permit application and associated documentation to the City's building division by personal, mailed, or electronic submittal together with any required permit processing and inspection fees. In the case of electronic submittal, the electronic signature of the applicant on all forms, applications and other documentation may be used in lieu of a wet signature. Should the City not have the capability to accept electronic signatures, no signature shall be required. 
8.  "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
8.1.  E-mail, 
8.2.  The internet, 
8.3.  Facsimile. 
9.  Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall: 
9.1.  Verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and 
9.2.  At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads. 
10.  An application that satisfies the information requirements in the eligibility checklist, as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the building official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. 
11.  Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the eligibility checklist, the building official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider's electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider. 
12.  For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner and includes a consolidated inspection by building and safety staff, as agreed to by the County of Los Angeles Fire Department. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized, however the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this subdivision. 
Part B Expedited permitting process for vehicle charging stations. 
1.  The following definitions shall apply to this section: 
1.1.  "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by a city, county, or city and county on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. 
1.2.  "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.2.1.  Email. 
1.2.2.  The Internet. 
1.2.3.  Facsimile. 
1.3.  "Electric vehicle charging station" or "charging station" means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of this section, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. 
1.4.  "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
2.  Purpose. The purpose of the section is to adopt an expedited, streamlined electrical vehicle charging station permitting process that complies with the Electrical Vehicle Charging Stations Open Access Law and AB 1236 to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of electric vehicle charging stations. The section encourages the use of electrical vehicle charging stations by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City, and expanding the ability of property owners to install electrical vehicle charging stations. The section allows the City to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
3.  Applicability. 
3.1.  This ordinance applies to the issuance of building permits for electric vehicle charging stations in the City. All requirements of building permit applications in Title 24 for electric vehicle charging stations that are not addressed in this section shall remain in effect. 
3.2.  Electric vehicle charging stations legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance are not subject to the requirements of this ordinance unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of an electronic vehicle charging station in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance shall not require a permit. 
4.  Electric Vehicle Charging Station Requirements. 
4.1.  All electric vehicle charging stations shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the City. 
4.2.  Electric vehicle charging stations shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
5.  Duties of Engineering/Project Management Division. 
5.1.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited electric vehicle charging station building permit application shall be made available on the City Web site. 
5.2.  Electronic submittal of the required building permit application and documents by email, the internet, or facsimile shall be made available to all electric vehicle charging station permit applicants. 
5.3.  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. However, the final permit must be signed at the counter until the City develops an electronic permit issuance registration. 
5.4.  The Engineering/Project Management Division shall adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
5.5.  The electric vehicle charging stations permit process and checklist shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist contained in the most current version of the Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook" adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
6.  Permit Review and Inspection Requirements. 
6.1.  The City shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of electrical vehicle charging stations. The Engineering/Project Management Division should issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit as expeditiously as possibly upon receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. 
6.2.  Review of the application shall be limited to the Building Official's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. 
6.3.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
6.4.  The Building Official may require an applicant to apply for a Use Permit if the Official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to Chapter 17.74. 
6.5.  If a Use Permit is required, the Planning Commission may deny such application if it makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. 
6.6.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
6.7.  The City shall not condition approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of an electric vehicle charging station by an association, as that term is defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017; Ord. No. 2017-357 , § 2, 10-11-2017)  
Article XI. - California Existing Buildings Code 
 
15.04.700 - 2016 California Existing Building Code adopted. 
A.  The 2016 California Existing Building Code, which regulate the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing buildings provide for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore, and provide for penalties for violation thereto, are hereby adopted by reference, and conflicting ordinances are hereby repealed. 
B.  All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said codes, together with appendices A1 - A4, one copy of which will be on file and accessible to the public for inspection at the city clerk's office, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter with the exceptions, deletions, additions, and amendments thereto as set forth in this subchapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
15.04.740 - 2016 California Existing Building Code Administrative Provisions adopted. 
A.  Chapter I Division II Administrative Provisions of the 2016 California Existing Building Code are hereby adopted by reference. 
B.  The 2016 California Existing Building Code Chapter I Division II Board of Appeals Section 112 is amended to read as follows: 
112 Board of Appeals. 
Appeals pertaining to the Existing Building Code, shall be governed by Calabasas Municipal Code Section 15.04.030. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
Article XII. - Fees 
 
15.04.800 - Establishing fee. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, the amount of every fee set forth in the code shall be the fee set forth in the most current resolution of the city council establishing fees. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
Article XI. - Violations Abatement and Penalties 
 
15.04.840 - Violation—Nuisance—Civil remedies available. 
A.  A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the codes adopted shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. 
B.  Penalty. Every person violating any provision of this chapter, including but not limited to any provision of the Building Code, Residential Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Electrical Code, Energy Code, Historical Building Code, Fire Code, or the Green Building Standards Code, or of any permit or license granted thereunder, or any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof, he or she shall be punishable by a fine not-to-exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment not-to-exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of such penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
C.  When seeking remedies under this Section 15.04.990.1, the city may seek either or both remedies hereunder. 
( Ord. No. 2017-349 , § 1, 2-22-2017)  
Chapter 15.10 - GRADING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
15.10.010 - Title and purpose. 
This chapter and Chapter 15.11 are and may be cited as the city of Calabasas grading ordinance. These provisions are enacted for the purpose of regulating grading within the city, and establish standards for grading, including filling and excavation activities, to: 
A.  Minimize hazards to life and property; 
B.  Protect against soil erosion, and the pollution of watercourses with nutrients, sediments, or other earthen materials generated on or caused by surface runoff on or across an area of approved grading; 
C.  Protect the safety, use and stability of public rights-of-way and drainage channels; 
D.  Protect fish and wildlife habitats, and promote the retention and restoration of riparian vegetation; 
E.  Protect the scenic character and value of the city; and 
F.  Ensure that the intended use of a graded site is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.10.020 - Applicability of grading regulations. 
A.  Compliance Required. The provisions of this chapter and Chapter 15.11 apply to all excavation, fill, or other grading activities occurring within the city. The grading standards in Chapter 15.11 apply to all grading activities regardless of whether a permit is required by Section 15.10.030. It is unlawful and a violation of this grading ordinance for any person to: 
1.  Cause, conduct, allow or furnish equipment or any labor for any grading activities without first obtaining any land use permit required by Chapter 17.02, a grading permit when required by Section 15.10.030 and complying with all applicable grading standards of Chapter 15.10; or 
2.  Violate or fail to comply with any term or condition of the approval of any grading permit issued in compliance with this chapter. 
B.  Prior Project Approval Required. No grading permit shall be issued and no grading shall occur unless a project has been first authorized on the site through site plan review (Section 17.62.020), development plan approval (Section 17.62.070), administrative plan review (Section 17.62.090), or tentative map approval (Chapter 17.41). 
C.  Liability. Nothing in this chapter, or the issuance of a grading permit, compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any permit conditions shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to other persons or property, nor impose any liability upon the city, its officers, agents or employees, for damage to other persons or property. 
D.  Hazards. Whenever the city engineer determines that any excavation, embankment or fill on private property constitutes a hazard to public safety, endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of adjacent property, an overhead or underground utility, or a public way, watercourse or drainage channel, or could adversely affect the water quality or any water bodies or watercourses, the owner or other person in control of the subject property shall be contacted and advised of the problem. Upon receipt of written notice from the city engineer, the property owner shall repair or eliminate the excavation, embankment or fill so as to eliminate the hazard and conform with the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 15.11. Any grading performed in violation of this section shall be deemed a nuisance, and full abatement and restoration may be required and an assessment of cost may be levied in compliance with Section 15.10.100. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.10.030 - Grading permit requirements. 
A.  Permit Required. A grading permit shall be required for any of the following grading activities, except where exempted from permit requirements by subsection (C) of this section: 
1.  Any excavation or fill; 
2.  Dredging activities involving wetlands or riparian areas; 
3.  Earthwork, paving, surfacing or other construction that alters any natural or other existing drainage pattern, including but not limited to any change in the direction, velocity or volume of flow; 
4.  Grading within any scenic corridor identified by the General Plan; or 
5.  Any other grading activity that causes quantities of dirt, soil, rock, debris or other material substantially in excess of natural levels to be washed, eroded or otherwise moved from the site, except in compliance with a grading permit. 
A separate grading permit shall be obtained for each site, and may cover both excavations and fills. 
B.  Grading Designation. Grading in excess of one thousand (1,000) cubic yards shall be performed in compliance with an approved grading plan prepared by a California registered civil engineer, and shall be designated "engineered grading." Grading involving less than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards shall be designated "precise grading" unless the grading is located on a hillside or on property not previously graded or the permittee chooses to have the grading performed as rough grading, or the city engineer determines that special conditions or unusual hazards exist, in which case grading shall conform to the requirements for rough grading. 
Excavations affecting or disturbing areas of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, parcel, under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists, and less than fifty (50) cubic yards, shall be designated exploratory excavations and shall be subject to Section 15.10.035. 
C.  Exemptions from Permit Requirements. The following grading activities are exempt from the provisions of this section and may be conducted without first obtaining a grading permit; provided that all grading shall still be subject to the grading standards of Chapter 15.11, and no exempt grading shall occur until the property owner has obtained written certification of the exemption from the department. 
1.  Basements and Footings. Where authorized by a valid building permit, excavations below existing or finish grade for basements, and footings of a building, retaining walls or other structures; provided that this shall not exempt any fill using material from the excavation, nor exempt any excavation where the natural slope of the site exceeds twenty (20) percent, or any excavation with an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of the structure. 
2.  Cemeteries. Routine excavations and fills for graves. 
3.  Conservation Projects. Grading that is a soil or water conservation project regulated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, or the California Department of Water Resources. 
4.  Cultivation. Agricultural cultivation activities where allowed by Article II of Title 17 including preparation of land for cultivation, other than grading for roadwork or pads for structures, and not including any tree removal, where the cultivation activities do not create an excavation greater than two feet in depth, or more than one foot of fill. 
5.  Minor Excavations. See Figure 15.10.030.01, An excavation less than two feet in total depth; or that does not create a cut slope greater than five feet in height and steeper than two horizontal to one vertical and is: 
a.  Not proposed where the natural slope of the site exceeds twenty (20) percent; 
b.  Less than fifty (50) cubic yards; and 
c.  Not less than one hundred (100) feet from any drainage course. 
6.  Minor Fills. See Figure 15.10.030.01, A fill less than one foot in total depth and placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical, or less than three feet in depth, not intended to support structures, which does not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards, and is not less than one hundred (100) feet from any drainage course. 
  
7.  Road Maintenance. The grading or resurfacing of an existing approved road for maintenance purposes, where neither the width nor length of the road, nor the height of cuts or the depth of fills is increased. 
8.  Subdivision Improvements. Excavations or fills for subdivision map or public projects conducted, or approved and inspected by the city engineer. 
9.  Wells, Pipelines and Utilities. Excavations for wells and tunnels; routine pipeline maintenance practices disturbing areas less than one thousand (1,000) square feet; or installation, testing, placement in service, or the replacement of any necessary utility connection between an existing facility and an individual customer or approved development, for utilities regulated by the Public Utilities Commission, including electrical, water, sewage disposal or natural gas lines, on a single site or within a public right-of-way. 
Exemption from the permit requirements shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
D.  Other Permits may be Required. Nothing in this chapter shall eliminate the need for development activities involving grading to also obtain an oak tree permit (Chapter 17.32 of Title 17), and/or any other land use or construction permits, subdivision approvals, or permits or authorizations required by the Municipal Code, other provisions of Title 17 or required by state or federal agencies. 
E.  Issuance of Other City Permits. All city departments, officials and employees that are vested with the duty or responsibility to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and shall issue no permit or license for uses, structures or purposes where they would be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, or for a site where a violation of this chapter exists. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.10.035 - Geologic/geotechnical exploratory excavation permits. 
A.  Permit Required. A permit shall be required for geologic/geotechnical exploratory excavations, as described below, including access road or pads created for exploratory excavation. 
Exploratory excavation conducted in conjunction with the preparation of soils or other geotechnical reports that affect or disturb areas of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet on a single parcel, under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists, and less than fifty (50) cubic yards, on a single parcel shall receive a permit prior to commencement of exploration. A geologic/geotechnical exploratory excavation permit application form shall be filed with the department, together with all fees, maps, and other information as required by the permit form and this section for review. The maps and required information shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  A completed geologic/geotechnical exploratory excavation permit application; 
2.  A written description describing the type of work to be done, which shall include, but not be limited to, the dates for the work, any vehicles and equipment to be used, how the excavations are to be completed (hand tools or machinery), the amount, if any, proposed grading of access roads. 
3.  A topographic map in a drawing size sufficient in scale to clearly show the proposed exploratory site(s). The map shall include locations of all trees being impacted by this work, access routes and paths of travel for vehicles and equipment, and any other impacted areas. 
4.  A restoration plan that provides detailed information on how the impacted areas will be restored to their pre-excavation state. Exploratory excavations must be restored to existing conditions, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
5.  A local storm water pollution prevention plan/wet weather erosion control plan (SWPPP/WWECP) or, when required a storm water mitigation plan (SWMP) pursuant to Title 8 of the Municipal Code. 
6.  Any special reports (e.g., compaction, geotechnical, etc.) required by the city engineer. 
7.  Any required filing fees. 
8.  An oak tree permit for any work located within the protected zone of an oak tree. 
B.  Permit Issuance. The department shall issue the permit upon approval by the community development director and the city engineer. All exploratory work shall be performed in compliance with this section, all applicable building code requirements, and any applicable policies and procedures (including any department manuals regarding the preparation of geologic and geotechnical reports). Exploratory excavations must be restored to existing conditions, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.10.040 - Grading permit application—Filing and processing. 
A.  Preparation and Filing. Grading permit applications shall be filed with the department on a city application form, together with all fees, plans, maps, reports and other information prepared as required by the grading permit application, the department's adopted policies and procedures. The plans and reports submitted with the application shall include, but not be limited to, the following, where required by the city engineer: 
1.  A grading plan; 
2.  A drainage plan with hydrology calculations; 
3.  A geotechnical and geologic investigation report shall be submitted prior to or concurrent with items listed in this subsection. The geotechnical report shall address the potential for liquefaction to occur at the site (including lateral spread and seismically-induced settlement) and identify whether the site is located within a Liquefaction Hazard Zone. The report shall be based upon the Seismic Hazards Maps published by the CDMG, the expert's experience in Calabasas, or that of others, or review of geotechnical studies on adjacent sites. Proposed new development that qualifies as a "project" under CEQA must perform a comprehensive liquefaction evaluation in conformance with CDMG Special Publication 117 and the SCEC "Guidelines for Analyzing and Mitigating Liquefaction in California" (Southern California Earthquake Center, March 1999); 
4.  A local storm water pollution prevention plan/wet weather erosion control plan pursuant to Title 8 of the Municipal Code; 
5.  A segmented gravity retaining wall plan identifying location of reinforced material and calculations, if applicable; 
6.  Any supplemental reports (e.g., compaction, geotechnical, etc.) required by the city engineer; 
7.  A biological survey for grading proposed within fifty (50) feet of a parcel designated Open Space-Development Restricted (OS-DR) or that has a conservation easement; 
8.  Engineer's cost estimate; 
9.  Title report, prepared within six months of grading permit application, accompanied by a copy of all instruments as recorded against the property. 
B.  Ministerial Projects. Projects with less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic yards of earth moving on slopes of less than ten (10) percent shall be issued permits on a ministerial basis. All other permit applications shall be issued on a discretionary basis. 
C.  Environmental Review and Class 4 Categorical Exemptions. All grading permit applications shall be subject to environmental review to the extent required by the California Environmental Quality Act, and any applicable city of Calabasas Environmental Quality Act Local Implementation Guidelines. Grading permits shall not be considered exempt pursuant to 14 CCR § 15304 (relating to certain grading on slopes of less than ten (10) percent) if grading will occur within one hundred (100) feet of a watercourse, wetland or environmentally sensitive habitat, or is not visible from Highway 101 or any scenic corridor. 
D.  Referral to Other Agencies. Before approval of a grading permit application in compliance with Section 15.10.050, the city engineer may refer an application to other interested public agencies for their comments and recommendations. 
E.  Change in Ownership. If there is a change in ownership of a site prior to final grading approval, the new owner shall obtain a grading permit issued in the name of the new owner. Fees shall be assessed incompliance with Section 15.10.050 E. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.10.050 - Grading permit approval and issuance. 
The approval of a grading permit application and issuance of a grading permit by the city engineer shall occur as follows: 
A.  Criteria for Approval. The city engineer shall approve a grading permit application and issue a permit only when the following requirements are first satisfied: 
1.  Ministerial Projects. Ministerial grading projects as described in Section 15.10.040(B) shall be approved when the city engineer determines that proposed grading will comply with the following: 
a.  The proposed grading shall comply with i) all applicable provisions of Chapters 15.10 and 15.11, ii) the department's adopted policies and procedures and iii) all other applicable provisions of the Municipal Code including, but not limited to, the oak tree permit requirements of Chapter 17.32 of Title 17; 
b.  The project for which the grading is intended shall first be authorized by site plan review (Section 17.62.020), administrative plan review (Section 17.62.090) or development plan approval (Section 17.62.070), in compliance with Title 17; and 
c.  Any permits required by state or federal agencies for the proposed grading have been obtained (including but not limited to streambed alteration permits from the California Department of Fish and Game and Section 404 permits for grading within wetlands and certain watercourses from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers), or are required by conditions of approval to be obtained before grading work is started. 
2.  Discretionary Projects. Grading projects that are not ministerial or categorically exempt as provided by Section 15.10.040(B) may be approved only when the city engineer first makes the following findings, in addition to determining that the proposed grading will satisfy the requirements of subsection (A)(1) of this section: 
a.  The proposed grading conforms with all applicable provisions of the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, the grading ordinance and the department's adopted policies and procedures; 
b.  The extent and nature of proposed grading is appropriate to the use proposed, and will not create site disturbance to an extent greater than that required for the use; 
c.  Proposed grading will not result in erosion, stream sediment or other adverse off-site effects or hazards to life or property; and 
d.  The proposed grading will not create substantial adverse long-term visual effects visible from off-site. 
B.  Permit Conditions. In granting a grading permit for a discretionary grading project, the city engineer may impose any condition determined to be necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare, to prevent the creation of hazards to property, and to ensure proper completion of grading. These conditions may include, but shall not be limited to requirements for: 
1.  Bringing proposed grading into conformity with the provisions of the grading ordinance and the department's adopted policies and procedures, relate including but not limited to the findings required by subsection (A) of this section; 
2.  Mitigation of adverse environmental impacts identified through the environmental review process; 
3.  Improvement of any existing grading on the site to comply with the standards of this chapter; 
4.  Fencing or other protection of grading that would otherwise be hazardous; 
5.  The control of dust, erosion, sediment, noise, hours of operation and season of work, weather conditions, sequence of work, access roads and haul routes; 
6.  Safeguarding both natural and constructed watercourses from excessive deposition of sediment or debris in quantities exceeding natural levels, and from the removal of riparian vegetation or the destruction of animal habitats or other sensitive environmental features; 
7.  Safeguarding any areas reserved for on-site sewage disposal; 
8.  Assurance that any area of proposed grading where habitable structures are proposed is not subject to hazards of landslide, significant settlement or erosion, and that the hazards of flooding can be eliminated or adequately reduced; 
9.  Safeguarding existing water wells; 
10.  Limitations on the commencement of grading until any permits required by state or federal agencies are first obtained and copies are submitted to the city engineer; 
11.  Fencing or other appropriate method for preserving the protected zone of an oak tree in compliance with Chapter 17.32 of Title 17; or 
12.  The stockpiling and re-use of topsoil. 
C.  Effect of Permit and Approved Plans. 
1.  Compliance with Plans Required. All work shall be done in compliance with the approved plans. The grading plans and specifications approved by the issuance of a grading permit shall not be changed without the written approval of the city engineer. 
2.  Modifications. Proposed modifications shall be submitted to the city engineer in writing, together with all necessary soils and geotechnical information and design details. A proposed modification shall be approved only if the city engineer first determines that the modification is in compliance with all applicable subdivision and/or land use permit requirements. 
D.  Distribution and Use of Approved Plans. Two sets of approved plans and specifications shall be retained by the city engineer and one or more sets of approved and dated plans and specifications shall be provided to the applicant or their engineer. One set of approved plans and the permit shall be retained on the site at all times during the work. 
E.  Grading Fees. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this section. The amount of the fees shall be as specified in the most current adopted fee schedule. 
1.  Plan Review Fees. When a plan or other data are required to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submittal of plans and specifications for review. Separate plan review fees shall apply to segmented gravity retaining wall or major drainage structures as required elsewhere in this code. 
2.  Grading Permit Fees. A fee for each grading permit shall be paid to the city engineer at or prior to the time of issuance of the permit. Separate permits and fees shall apply to retaining walls or major drainage structures as required elsewhere in this code. For excavation and fill on the same site, the fee shall be based on the volume of excavation or fill, whichever is greater. 
3.  Site Inspection Fee. When the city engineer finds that a visual inspection of the site is necessary to establish drainage requirements for the protection of property, existing buildings or the proposed construction, a site inspection shall be made during plan check of grading plans. A fee for such inspection shall be paid to the city engineer at the time of issuance of a grading permit. Additional fees may be requested if additional inspections are necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.10.060 - Grading permit time limits and extensions. 
A.  Grading Permit Time Limits. Approved grading shall be completed in compliance with an issued grading permit within one hundred eighty (180) days from the effective date of the permit, or the permit shall expire, unless an extension has been granted in compliance with subsection (B) of this section. 
If a permit is not secured within twelve (12) months after plans have been filed for plan checking, the city shall grant a single extension of one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request submitted by the applicant and payment of sufficient deposit to complete additional reviews, if the request and payment are received by the city prior to the expiration of the one-year period reviews. If the permit has expired and the period has exceeded one year, the applicant may reapply and pay for a new grading permit review and fees. 
B.  Extension of Grading Permit. Any permittee holding an unexpired grading permit may apply for an extension of the time within which grading operations are to be begun or completed. The city engineer may extend the expiration date of the permit for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days, where the permittee has requested the extension in writing and has shown that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented grading from being started or completed, and any applicable land use permit has not expired. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.10.070 - Security for performance. 
A.  Improvement Security. Prior to issuance of a grading permit, the applicant shall provide improvement security to ensure proper completion of grading in compliance with the permit, in the event of default on the part of the permittee. The amount of security shall be determined by the city engineer and based on the number of cubic yards of material in excavation or fill, whichever is greater, plus the number of cubic yards of material in over-excavation plus the cost of all drainage or other protective devices or work necessary to eliminate geotechnical hazards. 
B.  Performance Security Guarantees. A permit applicant may be required by conditions of approval or by action of the city engineer to provide adequate security to guarantee the faithful performance and proper completion of any approved work, and/or compliance with conditions of approval imposed by the review authority. 
C.  Maintenance Security. In addition to any improvement security required to guarantee proper completion of work, the city engineer may require security for maintenance of the work, in an amount determined by the city engineer to be sufficient to ensure the proper maintenance and functioning of improvements. 
D.  Any security required by subparts A, B, or C of this section shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Form and Amount of Security. All required security shall be in the form of a cashier's check or certified check deposited with the city's finance department. Where approved by the director, a letter of credit may be used, with the city named as beneficiary, where the security pledges that funds necessary to meet these requirements are on deposit and guaranteed for payment to the city when required by the city. Unless otherwise provided, the amount and form of security shall be as determined by the city engineer. 
2.  Duration of Security. Unless otherwise specified in the permit, required improvement security shall remain in effect until final inspections have been made and all work has been accepted by the city engineer. Unless otherwise specified in the permit, maintenance security shall remain in effect for one year after the date of final inspection. 
3.  Release or Forfeit of Security. Upon satisfactory completion of work and the approval of a final inspection (or after the end of the required time for maintenance security), the improvement, performance, and/or maintenance security shall be released. However, upon (i) failure to complete the work, (ii) failure to comply with all of the terms of any applicable permit, or (iii) failure of the completed improvements to function properly, the city may do the required work or cause it to be done, and collect from the permittee or surety all the costs incurred by the city, including the costs of the work, and all administrative and inspection costs. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee after deduction of the cost of the work by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.10.080 - Grading operations and inspections. 
All grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection as required by the city engineer to ensure compliance with the approved plans and any permit conditions. 
A.  Preconstruction Consultation. A preconstruction consultation meeting between the permittee and designated city staff to review the construction schedule and procedures before the commencement of work shall be required unless, the city engineer determines that the type or scale or grading operations does not necessitate this coordination. 
B.  Site Access. The permittee shall provide adequate access to the site for inspection by inspectors designated by the city engineer during the performance of all work and for a minimum of one year after final inspection. 
C.  Special Inspections and Certifications. The city engineer may require any special inspections or certifications deemed necessary to ensure proper completion of grading work, and/or to mitigate or avoid environmental impacts, or to avoid hazards to property or the public. 
1.  Type of Inspections and Certifications. Special inspections and certifications may include, but shall not be limited to requiring: the permittee to provide a private geotechnical engineer and/or other consultants approved by the city engineer to perform continuous inspection of work in progress and to certify the proper completion of work; inspection and testing by an approved testing agency; and/or the submittal of periodic progress reports. 
2.  Notification of Noncompliance. Where the use of special inspectors, engineers or consultants is required, these personnel shall immediately report in writing to the city engineer and permittee any instance of work not being done in compliance with the grading ordinance and the department's adopted policies and procedures, other applicable codes, or the approved grading plans, and shall also provide recommendations for corrective measures, if determined by the inspector to be necessary. 
3.  Transfer of Responsibility for Approval. If the required special inspectors, engineers or consultants are changed during the course of work, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has notified the city engineer of their agreement to accept the responsibility within the area of their technical competence for approval upon completion of the work. 
D.  Inclement Weather. The city engineer may require that grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur that result in weather-generated problems not considered at the time the permit was issued. 
E.  Field Changes. After the commencement of grading operations, no change to the extent, volume or type of proposed grading shall occur without the prior approval of the city engineer, or the planning commission or city council in the case of a project which received land use permit approval from the planning commission or city council. In the event a permittee wishes to change the volume (cubic yards), cut or fill height of grading in the approved permit by five percent or more, work shall stop, and an amendment to the approved permit shall be filed and approved before work is resumed. 
F.  Stop Work Orders. The city engineer may order that any grading operations performed contrary to the requirements of the grading ordinance and the department's adopted policies and procedures, other applicable codes, the approved plans and specifications, or any permit conditions, or any grading operations that have otherwise become hazardous to property or the public, be immediately stopped. It is unlawful and a violation of the grading ordinance for any person to resume grading operations that were ordered to be stopped by the city engineer, unless the city engineer has first required and the permittee has agreed to any necessary corrective measures and the city engineer has authorized resumption of work in writing. 
G.  Other Responsibilities of Permittee. The permittee shall also be responsible for the following: 
1.  Protection of Utilities. The prevention of damage to any public utility facilities. 
2.  Protection of Adjacent Property. The prevention of damage to adjacent property. No person shall excavate on land close enough to a property line to endanger any adjacent public street, sidewalk, alley, other public or private property, or easement, without supporting and protecting the property from any damage that might result from grading operations. 
3.  Advance Notice. The permittee shall notify the city engineer at least twenty-four (24) hours before starting any work under an approved permit. 
4.  Erosion and Sediment Control. The permittee shall prevent discharge of sediment from the site in quantities greater than before the grading occurred, to any watercourse, drainage system, or adjacent property and to protect watercourses and adjacent properties from damage by erosion, flooding or deposition that may result from the permitted grading. 
H.  Transfer of Responsibility. If the field engineer, the geotechnical engineer, or the engineering geologist of record is changed after grading has commenced, the city engineer may stop the grading until the permittee has identified a replacement and the replacement has agreed in writing to assume responsibility for those parts of the grading project that are within the replacement's area of technical competence. It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the city engineer in writing of such change prior to the recommencement of such grading. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.10.090 - Completion of work. 
A.  Final Reports. Upon completion of rough grading and at the completion of finish grading work as determined by the city engineer, the city engineer may require the following plans and reports, supplements thereto, or other documentation deemed necessary by the city engineer, prepared by the appropriate professionals in the format required by the city engineer. 
1.  As-Built Grading Plan. A plan including original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns and locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities. 
2.  Testing Records. A complete record of all field and laboratory tests, including the location and elevation of all field tests. 
3.  Professional Opinions. Professional opinions regarding slope stability, soil bearing capacity, and any other information pertinent to the adequacy of the site for its intended use. 
4.  Development Recommendations. Recommendations regarding foundation design, including soil bearing potential and building restrictions or setbacks from the top or toe of slopes. 
5.  Declarations About Completed Work. Declarations by the special inspectors, a civil engineer, geotechnical engineer, geologist, landscape architect, and other project consultants required by the city engineer in compliance with Section 15.10.080(B), that all work was done in substantial compliance with the recommendations contained in the soil or geology reports as approved, and in compliance with the approved plans and specifications. 
B.  Final Inspection. No permittee shall be deemed to have complied with the provisions of this chapter until a final inspection of the work has been completed and approved by the department. The permittee shall notify the city engineer when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including the installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all erosion and sediment control measures, have been completed as provided by the approved plans and specifications, and all reports required as set forth in subsection (A) of this section have been submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.10.100 - Violations and remedies. 
A.  Purpose. The provisions of this section are intended to ensure compliance with the requirements of this grading ordinance and any conditions applied to any permit authorized by the grading ordinance, to promote the city's planning and engineering efforts and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
B.  Violations. 
1.  Any property which was graded in violation of this code, or in any way contrary to any conditions of approval, is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. 
2.  Any person, partnership, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or failing to comply with any provision(s) of the grading ordinance or any condition imposed on any grading permit shall be subject to the sanctions that are set forth in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
3.  Any grading in violation of the grading ordinance or any condition placed on a grading permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stop work order. Any violation of a stop work order shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
C.  Remedies are Cumulative. All remedies contained in this section for the handling of violations or enforcement of the provisions of the grading ordinance shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other applicable provisions of city, county or state law. Should a person be found guilty and convicted of a misdemeanor or infraction for the violation of any provision of the grading ordinance, the conviction shall not prevent the city from pursuing any other available remedy to correct the violation. 
D.  Inspection. Every applicant seeking a permit or any other action in compliance with the grading ordinance shall allow the city officials handling the application access to any premises or property which is the subject of the application. If the permit or other action in compliance with the grading ordinance is approved, the owner or applicant shall allow appropriate city officials access to the premises in order to determine continued compliance with the approved permit and/or any conditions of approval. 
E.  Legal Remedies. The city may choose to undertake any of the following legal actions to correct and/or abate nuisances or violations of the grading ordinance. 
1.  Civil Actions. 
a.  Injunction. At the request of the city engineer, the district attorney or city attorney may apply to the Superior Court for injunctive relief to terminate a violation of the grading ordinance. 
b.  Abatement. Where any person, firm or corporation fails to abate a violation and/or nuisance after being provided a notice thereof and the opportunity to correct or end the violation, the city engineer may request the city attorney or district attorney to apply to the Superior Court of Los Angeles County for an order authorizing the city to undertake actions necessary to abate the violation and requiring the violator to pay for the cost of the actions. 
c.  Nuisance Abatement. The city may, in its discretion, elect to exercise the administrative procedures in Chapter 8.20 of the Calabasas Municipal Code to cause the abatement of a public nuisance. 
2.  Civil Remedies and Penalties. 
a.  Civil Penalties. Any person who willfully violates the provisions of the grading ordinance or any permit issued in compliance with the grading ordinance shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each day that the violation continues to exist. 
b.  Costs and Damages. Any person violating any provisions of the grading ordinance or permits issued in compliance with the grading ordinance shall be liable to the city for the costs incurred and the damages suffered by the city, its agents, and agencies as a direct result of the violations. 
c.  Procedure. In determining the amount of the civil penalty to impose, the court shall consider all relevant circumstances, including the extent of the harm caused by the conduct constituting a violation, the nature and persistence of the conduct, the length of time over which the conduct occurred, the assets, liabilities and net worth of the defendant, whether corporate or individual, and any corrective action taken by defendant. 
3.  Criminal Actions and Penalties. Persons who violate the grading ordinance are subject to the sanctions contained in Sections 1.16.010 and 1.16.020 of the Calabasas Municipal Code. 
F.  Prohibition on New Permits on Properties in Violation of Code. This section is intended to aid enforcement of the grading ordinance by preventing those who own or control a property in a condition, other than a legal nonconforming use, which violates the provisions of the grading ordinance from increasing the extent to which a property is out of compliance with the ordinance and to avoid confusion as to the relationship between legal and illegal improvements on the site and the facts surrounding each. 
1.  Prohibition Against Permit Issuance. No permit under this title may be issued for any property on which the city engineer finds a violation of the grading ordinance exists until such violation(s) is corrected to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
2.  Exceptions. Notwithstanding the prohibition contained in subsection 1, of A, this section F, this section F shall not apply where the city engineer, in his or her sole discretion, finds that an emergency exists necessitating the issuance of a permit, or where the issuance of a permit is necessary to correct the existing code violation(s). In such case, a permit may issue but shall be conditioned on a requirement that the illegal condition be corrected in conjunction with the permitted development on the property. 
3.  Cost of Additional Services. If deemed necessary by the city engineer, additional sheriff, code enforcement, fire, and other city services shall be provided for inspection of construction of other services to confirm that existing violations of this code are properly abated in conjunction with development on the property permitted pursuant to subsection 2B of this section F. The cost of such additional services shall be paid in advance to the city by the applicant prior to the issuance of any permit in an amount reasonably estimated by the city engineer. 
4.  Additional Conditions. The city engineer may impose any conditions found necessary to protect the public health safety and welfare on a permit issued under subsection 2 of this section F. 
5.  Appeal Procedures. A decision of the city engineer to issue, conditionally issue, or deny a permit under this section shall be final unless appealed pursuant to chapter 17.74. Notwithstanding anything in that section to the contrary, the city council and/or planning commission may hear the appeal, or call for review of the matter pursuant to the procedures of 17.74. All provisions of that section shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with this intent. 
G.  Permit Revocation. 
1.  Public Hearing. The review authority that approved the permit or entitlement must hold a public hearing in order to revoke or modify any permit or entitlement granted in compliance with the provisions of the grading ordinance. Ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be delivered in writing to the applicant and/or owner of the property for which the permit was granted. Notice shall be deemed delivered two days after being mailed, first class postage paid, to the owner as shown on the current tax rolls of the county of Los Angeles, and/or the project applicant. 
2.  Permit Revocation. A permit may be revoked or modified by the review authority if any one of the following findings can be made: 
a.  The project required a temporary use permit or conditional use permit and one or more of the required findings for in Section 17.62.030 (relating to temporary use permits) or 17.62.060 (for conditional use permits) can no longer be made; 
b.  That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud; 
c.  That the improvement authorized in compliance with the permit had ceased or was suspended for six or more months; 
d.  That one or more of the conditions of the permit have not been met; 
e.  That the improvement authorized in compliance with the permit is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation; or 
f.  That the grading would be in violation is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law, or regulation 
g.  That the improvement allowed by the permit is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or constitutes a nuisance. 
H.  Recovery of Costs. This section establishes procedures for the recovery of administrative costs, including staff time expended on the enforcement of the provisions of the grading ordinance in cases where no permit is required in order to correct a violation. The intent of this section is to recover city administrative costs reasonably related to enforcement. 
1.  Record of Costs. The department shall maintain records of all administrative costs, incurred by responsible city departments, associated with the processing of violations and enforcement of the grading ordinance, and shall recover the costs from the property owner in compliance with this section. Staff time shall be calculated at an hourly rate as established and revised from time to time by the council. 
2.  Notice. Upon investigation and a determination that a violation of any of the provisions of the grading ordinance is found to exist, the city engineer shall notify the record owner or any person having possession or control of the property by mail, of the existence of the violation, the department's intent to charge the property owner for all administrative costs associated with enforcement, and of the owner's right to a hearing on any objections they may have. The notice shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. 
3.  Summary of Costs and Notice. At the conclusion of the case, the city engineer shall send a summary of costs associated with enforcement to the owner and/or person having possession or control of the property by certified mail. The summary shall include a notice in a form approved by the city attorney, advising the responsible party of their right to request a hearing on the charges for city cost recovery within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, and that if no such request for hearing is filed, the responsible party will be liable for the charges. In the event that no request for hearing is timely filed or, after a hearing the city engineer affirms the validity of the costs, the property owner or person in control shall be liable to the city in the amount stated in the summary or any lesser amount as determined by the city engineer. These costs shall be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the city, in any court of competent jurisdiction within the city. 
4.  Request for Hearing on Costs. Any property owner, or other person having possession and control of the subject property, who receives a summary of costs shall have the right to a hearing before the city engineer on their objections to the proposed costs. 
a.  A request for hearing shall be filed with the department within ten (10) days of the service by mail of the department's summary of costs, on a form provided by the department. 
b.  Within thirty (30) days of the filing of the request, and on ten (10) days' written notice to the owner, the city engineer shall hold a hearing on the owner's objections, and determine their validity. 
c.  In determining the validity of the costs, the city engineer shall consider whether total costs are reasonable in the circumstances of the case. Factors to be considered include, but are not limited to: whether the present owner created the violation; whether there is a present ability to correct the violation; whether the owner moved promptly to correct the violation; the degree of cooperation provided by the owner; and whether reasonable minds can differ as to whether a violation exists. 
d.  The city engineer's decision shall be appealable to the council. 
H.  Retroactive Permit Requirements. If any person grades any parcel or establishes a land use, or erects, constructs, alters, enlarges, moves or maintains any structure without first obtaining any permit required by the grading ordinance, that person shall be required to fully comply with applicable permit application processes and requirements of the grading ordinance including the payment of the additional permit processing fees established by the city fee resolution prior to the city's issuance of any permit for any building, structure or use on the site. At the discretion of the city engineer, the city shall not be obligated to process permits for work or improvements on the property until all documented code violations are first remedied. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 15.11 - GRADING, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
15.11.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
This chapter provides standards for the proper conduct of grading operations and design standards for excavations and fills as well as site development activities not involving grading permits. All grading operations shall be conducted in a manner consistent with the requirements of this chapter, regardless of whether a grading permit is required by Section 15.10.030. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.11.020 - Excavations and fills. 
A.  General Standards. All excavations and fills shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the following standards. 
1.  Area of Cuts and Fills. Cuts and fills shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary to provide stable building pad and embankments for required parking areas or street rights-of-way, structural foundations, and adequate residential yard area or outdoor storage or sales area incidental to a nonresidential use. 
2.  Grading on Hillsides. Hillside grading shall comply with the grading provisions of the Performance Standards for Hillside Development in Section 17.20.150. Grading shall be prohibited on slopes of thirty (30) percent or greater except where authorized through permit or site plan approval in compliance with Chapter 17.62. 
3.  Retention of Natural Features. Grading operations shall be designed and conducted to maximize retention of natural land forms and features (e.g. rolling hills, ridgetops, areas of extensive vegetation, watercourses, etc.). 
4.  Final Contours. Contours, elevations and shapes of finished surfaces shall be blended with adjacent natural terrain to achieve a consistent grade and natural appearance. 
a.  Borders of cut slopes and fills shall be rounded off to a minimum radius of five feet to blend with the natural terrain. Large flat planes or sharp angles at intersections with natural terrain shall be prohibited. 
b.  Manufactured slopes in excess of five feet in height and/or two hundred (200) feet in length shall be landform graded in compliance with the grading provisions of the Performance Standards for Hillside Development in Section 17.20.150, with a variety of slope ratios applied to the cut or fill slopes. 
c.  For individually developed lots, all cut or fill slopes shall be landform graded when a building pad area is more than four thousand five hundred (24,500) square feet, or when the total graded area of the lot is more than nine thousand (9,000) square feet. The maximum allowed slope shall be determined for cuts and fills by subsections (B) and (C) of this section. 
5.  Archeological Resources. If archeological resources are unearthed or discovered during any construction activities, construction activities shall cease, the community development director and city engineer shall be notified, and the proper disposition of resources shall be accomplished as required by Chapter 17.36. 
6.  Grading in Hazardous Areas. Grading proposed within areas determined by the city engineer to be subject to geologic, flooding or fire hazards shall comply with applicable provisions of the seismic and geologic hazards management, storm water management and flooding, and fire hazard management performance standards of Section 17.20.150. 
B.  Standards for Excavations. Cuts shall be designed and constructed consistent with the following provisions, except where approved soils engineering and/or engineering geology reports recommend other standards, and except where the city engineer waives these standards for minor cuts not intended to support structures or surcharges. 
1.  Slope. The slope of permanent cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use, but in no event more than two feet horizontal to one vertical. Variable slope ratios shall be used when required by subsection (A)(4) of this section. 
2.  Drainage and Terracing. Drainage and terracing of cuts shall be provided as required by subsection (D) of this section. 
C.  Standards for Fills. Fills shall be designed and constructed consistent with the following provisions, except where an approved soils engineering report recommends other standards, and except where the city engineer waives these standards for minor fills not intended to support structures. 
1.  Fill Location. Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes that are steeper than two feet horizontal to one foot vertical. 
2.  Preparation of Ground. Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (fifty (50) percent slope). The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, topsoil and other unsuitable materials (including any existing fill that does not meet the requirements of this chapter), and scarifying the ground to provide a bond with the fill material. 
Subdrains shall be provided under all fills placed in natural drainage courses and in other locations where seepage is evident, except where the geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist recommends otherwise. Such sub-drainage systems shall be of a material and design approved by the geotechnical engineer and acceptable to the city engineer. The geotechnical engineer shall provide continuous inspection during the process of subdrain installations. The location of the subdrains shall be shown on a plan prepared by the geotechnical engineer. Excavations for the subdrains shall be inspected by the engineering geologist when such subdrains are included in the recommendations of the engineering geologist. 
3.  Benching. Where existing grade is at a slope steeper than five units horizontal to one unit vertical (twenty (20) percent) and the depth of the fill exceeds five feet (1.5 m), benching shall be provided into sound bedrock or material determined to be competent by the geotechnical engineer. The ground preparation shall be in accordance with Figure 15.11.20.01 or as determined by the geotechnical engineer. When fill is to be placed over a cut, a key shall be provided which is at least ten (10) feet (3.0 m) in width and two feet (0.6 m) in depth. The area beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain shall be constructed thereon. The geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist or both shall inspect and approve the cut as being suitable for the foundation and placement of fill material before any fill material is placed on the excavation. 
  
Figure 15.11.20.01 
4.  Fill Material. Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in fills. No rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than twelve (12) inches shall be buried or placed in fills, except where the city engineer allows the placement of larger rock when the geotechnical engineer devises a proper method of placement, continuously inspects its placement, and approves fill stability, subject also to the following requirements: 
a.  Potential rock disposal areas shall be shown on the grading plan; 
b.  Rock sizes greater than twelve (12) inches in maximum dimension shall be placed ten (10) feet or more below grade, measured vertically; 
c.  Rocks shall be placed so as to ensure filling all voids with well graded soil; 
d.  No rock shall be within ten (10) feet of rough grade, if any portion of the rock is greater than six inches in diameter. No rock may constitute more than twenty (20) percent of the engineered fill without special provisions provided by the geotechnical engineer. Remaining fill materials shall consist of a suitable gradation as recommended by the geotechnical engineer and approved by the city engineer. 
e.  The location of oversized rock dispersal areas shall be shown on the as-built plan. 
5.  Fill Placement. Fills shall be constructed in layers. The loose thickness of each layer of engineered fill placement material before compaction shall not exceed eight inches or as determined by a geotechnical engineer and approved by the city engineer. Completed fills shall be stable masses of well-integrated material bonded to adjacent materials and to the materials on which they rest. Fills shall be competent to support anticipated loads and be stable at the design slopes shown on the plans. For engineered grading, the geotechnical engineer shall provide sufficient inspections during the preparation of the natural ground and the placement and compaction of the fill to ensure that the work is performed in accordance with the conditions of plan approval. The geotechnical engineer shall provide continuous inspection during the entire fill placement and compaction of fills. 
6.  Depth of Fill. The depth of fill from the substructure to finished grade across a certified rough grading and building pad shall be consistent with surrounding soil and shall not exceed the depth recommended by the geotechnical engineer. 
7.  Compaction. All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety (90) percent of maximum density or as justified by the geotechnical engineer and approved by the city engineer. Relative compaction shall comply with the following compaction density where applicable: 
i.  Fills deeper than twenty-five (25) feet shall be compacted at a minimum of ninety-three (93) percent of maximum density. 
ii.  Fills deeper than fifty (50) feet in thickness, shall be compacted at a minimum of ninety-five (95) percent of maximum density, with additional special provisions provided by geotechnical engineer and approved by city engineer. 
iii.  The upper twelve (12) inches of pavement soil sub grade shall be shall be compacted at a minimum of ninety-five (95) percent of maximum density. 
iv.  All utility trench backfill (above spring line) shall be compacted at a minimum of ninety-five (95) percent of maximum density. 
8.  Slope. The slope of permanent fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use, but in no event more than two feet horizontal to one vertical. Variable slope ratios shall be used when required by subsection (A)(4) of this section. 
9.  Drainage and Terracing. Drainage and terracing of fills shall be provided as required by subsection (D) of this section. 
D.  Drainage and Terracing of Cuts and Fills. Proper drainage and terracing of cuts and fills shall be constructed as set forth in this subsection, to ensure the continuing integrity of fills. The following requirements apply only to cuts and fills with surface slopes steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, except where otherwise required on approved grading plans by the city engineer. Additional standards applicable to the provision of storm drainage facilities as part of grading projects are established by Section 15.11.100. 
1.  Terraces. Terraces at least eight feet in width shall be established at not more than thirty-foot vertical intervals on all cut or fill slopes to control surface drainage and debris, except that where only one terrace is required, it shall be at midheight. 
a.  For all cut or fill slopes greater than sixty (60) feet and up to one hundred twenty (120) feet in vertical height, one terrace at approximately midheight shall be twenty feet in width. Terrace widths and spacing for cut and fill slopes greater than one hundred twenty (120) feet in height shall be designed by the civil engineer and subject to the approval of the city engineer. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance. 
b.  Swales or ditches on terraces shall: 
i.  Have a minimum gradient of five percent and a maximum gradient of twelve (12) percent; 
ii.  Be paved with reinforced concrete not less than three inches in thickness, reinforcement with six inch by six inch, number ten by number ten welded wire fabric or equivalent reinforced centered in the concrete slab, or an equivalent provided by the project geotechnical engineer and approved by the city engineer. 
iii.  Have a minimum depth of one foot and a minimum paved width of five feet. 
c.  A single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from: a tributary area exceeding thirteen thousand five hundred (13,500) square feet (projected), or a horizontal run of no more than three hundred (300) lineal feet without discharging into a down drain. 
2.  Subsurface Drainage. Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability. 
3.  Disposal. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practicable drainage way approved by the city engineer and/or other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place to deposit the waters. Erosion of ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of nonerosive downdrains or other approved devices. 
4.  Building Pad Drainage. Building pads shall have a minimum drainage gradient of two percent toward approved drainage facilities. 
5.  Interceptor Drains. Paved interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of all graded slopes greater than five feet in height receiving drainage from a slope with a tributary width greater than thirty (30) feet measured horizontally. Interceptor drains shall be paved with a minimum of three inches of concrete or gunite and reinforced. They shall have a minimum depth of twelve (12) inches and a minimum paved width of thirty (30) inches measured horizontally across the drain. The slope of the drain shall be approved by the city engineer, but shall not be less than fifty (50) units horizontal to one unit vertical (two percent). 
6.  Drainage Facility Design. Nonundergrounded drainage facilities shall be designed with integral color (e.g., muted earth tones and other similar colors) and materials (e.g., rock, landscaping and other similar materials) to minimize visibility. Unless otherwise approved by the city engineer, down-drains on highly visible slopes shall be installed underground. 
7.  Berms. Berms used for slope protection at the top of slopes, shall be at least one foot above the certified finished pad elevation and at least four feet wide. 
E.  Protection of Adjacent Property. Footings that may be affected by any excavation shall be underpinned or otherwise protected against settlement and shall be protected against lateral movement. No excavations or construction activities shall remove the lateral confining pressure of any adjacent property without the completion of city approved protection measures. Fills or other surcharge loads shall not be placed adjacent to any building or structure unless the building or structure is capable of withstanding the additional loads caused by the fill or surcharge. The rights of adjacent affected property owners shall be as set forth in Section 832 of the California Civil Code. 
F.  Drainage Across Property Lines. Drainage across property lines shall not exceed that which existed prior to grading. Excess or concentrated drainage shall be contained on site or directed to an approved drainage facility. Erosion of the ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of nonerosive down drains or other devices approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.11.030 - Grading during the rainy season. 
Grading shall be prohibited from October 1 st through April 15 th , unless the city engineer determines that soil conditions at the site are suitable, and adequate and effective erosion and sediment control measures will be in place during all grading operations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.11.040 - Removal of native vegetation. 
Grading shall be designed and grading operations shall be conducted to minimize the removal or disturbance of native vegetation to the maximum extent feasible. 
A.  Trees not approved for removal in a grading permit or an oak tree permit issued pursuant to Chapter 17.32 shall be protected from damage by proper grading techniques and fencing, and no grading or heavy equipment operations shall be conducted within the protected zone of the tree, as that term is defined in Chapter 15.12. 
B.  The limits of grading shall be clearly defined and marked to prevent damage to native vegetation by grading or construction equipment. 
C.  All trees to be removed and retained, and all markings and protective devices shall be inspected and approved by the department prior to the commencement of grading operations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.11.050 - Revegetation and slope surface stabilization. 
Where natural vegetation has been removed through grading in areas that are not to be occupied by structures, the areas shall be replanted in compliance with an approved revegetation plan and this section to prevent erosion after construction is completed. 
A.  Preparation for Revegetation. Topsoil removed from the surface in preparation for grading and construction shall be stored on or near the site and protected from erosion while grading operations are underway, provided that topsoil storage shall not be located where it would cause suffocation of root systems of trees intended to be preserved. After completion of grading, topsoil shall be restored to exposed cut and fill embankments or areas around building pads to provide a suitable base for seeding and planting. 
B.  Methods of Revegetation. Acceptable methods of revegetation include hydro-mulching, or the planting of native plant materials with equivalent germination rates. Where lawn or turf grass is to be established, lawn grass seed or other appropriate landscape cover shall be sown at not less than four pounds to each one thousand (1,000) square feet of land area. Other revegetation methods offering equivalent protection may be approved by the city engineer. Plant materials shall be watered at intervals sufficient to ensure survival and growth. The use of drought-tolerant, fire-resistive native plant materials is encouraged. 
C.  Timing of Revegetation Measures. Revegetation for the purpose of erosion and sediment control (Section 15.11.030) shall be installed within thirty (30) days after completion of grading on all surfaces disturbed by vegetation removal, grading, haul roads, or other construction activity that alters natural vegetative cover. Other permanent revegetation or landscaping should begin on the construction site as soon as practical and shall begin no later than six months after achieving final grades and utility emplacements. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.11.060 - Protection of watercourses. 
Grading, dredging or diking shall not alter any intermittent or perennial stream, or natural body of water shown on any United States Geological Survey (USGS) 7-1/2 minute topographic map, except as permitted through approval of a grading permit in compliance with this article, any land use permits required by Title 17, and any permits required by the California Department of Fish and Game or Army Corp of Engineers. 
A.  Protection Standards. Grading operations within, adjacent to or involving the alteration of watercourses shall be conducted as follows: 
1.  The flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated portion of a watercourse shall be maintained. 
2.  Watercourses shall not be obstructed unless an alternate drainage facility is approved. 
3.  Fills placed within watercourses shall have suitable protection against erosion during flooding. 
4.  Grading equipment shall not cross or disturb channels containing live streams without siltation control measures approved by the city engineer in place. 
5.  Excavated materials shall not be deposited or stored in or adjacent to a watercourse where the materials can be washed away by high water or storm runoff. 
B.  Required Agency Notification. Where the alteration of a watercourse is proposed or allowed within an area determined by the city engineer to be subject to flooding, any responsible agency shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and evidence of the notification shall be submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.11.070 - Setbacks for cut and fill slopes. 
Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from property lines as provided by this section. The required setback dimensions shall be as shown in Figure 15.11.70.01. 
A.  Top of Slope. Except where otherwise provided by this section, the top of cut slopes shall be set back from adjacent property lines a distance of at least one-fifth (H/5) of the vertical height of the cut with a minimum of two feet and a maximum of ten (10) feet unless the geotechnical engineer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city engineer that a reduced setback would be safe and no increased hazard to any habitable structure will occur. Greater distances may be required to accommodate any necessary interceptor drains. 
B.  Toe of Fill Slope. Except where otherwise provided by this section, the toe of a fill slope shall be set back from adjacent property lines a distance of at least one-half the height of the slope (H/2), with a minimum of two feet and a maximum of twenty (20) feet unless the geotechnical engineer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city engineer that a reduced setback would be safe and no increased hazard to any habitable structure will occur. Where a fill slope is to be located near a property line and the adjacent property is developed, the city engineer may require additional precautions to protect the adjacent property from damage as a result of grading. The precautions may include the measures specified in Section 15.11.020(E), additional setbacks, provisions for retaining or slough walls, mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope surface to minimize erosion, or additional provisions for the control of surface waters. 
  
C.  Setback Exceptions. The city engineer may approve alternatives to the setbacks required by subsections (A) and (B) of this section, based on investigations and recommendations from a qualified engineer or engineering geologist. 
D.  Buffers from Watercourses and Environmentally Sensitive Habitats. No grading shall be allowed within one hundred (100) feet of any area determined by the city engineer to be an environmentally sensitive habitat area, or from the top of the bank of a watercourse as determined by the city engineer, unless the grading is approved as a discretionary project in compliance with Section 15.10.050(A) (2), and is subject to environmental review in compliance with Section 15.10.040(B). 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.11.080 - Storm drainage and runoff. 
A.  Design and Construction. Drainage systems and facilities that are proposed within existing or future public rights-of-way shall be designed and constructed as set forth in Section 17.46.030 of Title 17. The design and construction of drainage facilities required for cuts and fills are subject to Section 15.11.040(D). Other drainage systems and facilities shall be designed in compliance with good engineering practices. 
B.  Natural Channels and Runoff. Proposed grading projects shall include design provisions to retain off-site natural drainage patterns, and limit the quantities and velocities of peak runoff to predevelopment levels. 
C.  Areas Subject to Flooding. Grading or structures are not permitted in an area determined by the city engineer to be subject to flood hazard by reason of inundation, overflow, high velocity or erosion, except where the grading or structures are in conformity with the standards of Section15.11.030, and the following provisions. 
1.  Hazard Elimination. The grading and/or structures shall be designed and constructed to incorporate provisions to eliminate identified hazards to the satisfaction of the city engineer. These provisions may include providing adequate drainage facilities, protective walls, suitable fill, raising the floor level of buildings or by other means. In the application of this standard the city shall enforce at a minimum the current federal floodplain management regulations as defined in the National Flood Insurance Program authorized by United States Code Sections 4001-4128 and contained in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59 et seq., which are adopted and incorporated into this chapter by reference as though they were fully set forth here. 
2.  Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). Where the city engineer approves grading and/or structures within an area subject to flooding on the basis of proposed protective measures to eliminate flooding hazards, the applicant shall file a letter of map revision (LOMR) for the applicable Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the approval of a final building inspection by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.11.090 - Dust prevention and control. 
A.  Applicability. To protect the health, safety and general welfare, the permittee shall make all reasonable efforts to prevent or control blowing dust and debris from the construction site. 
1.  Property owners and/or permittees shall be responsible for maintaining their property in such a manner that dust and other wind borne debris transported to adjacent properties are kept to reasonable minimal levels. 
2.  In the case of site grading and other construction operations, it will also be the responsibility of the permittee to make all reasonable efforts to control blowing dust and debris onto adjacent properties. 
3.  When grading operations involve the hauling of dirt from one site to another, it is also the permittee's responsibility to maintain the public streets in a clean condition and limit any spillage which would generate dust or other blowing debris. 
B.  Dust Prevention and Control Plan. A dust prevention and control plan shall be submitted in conjunction with a grading plan or other plan involving the movement of dirt. The city engineer may also require the submittal of a dust prevention and control plan for other development deemed necessary. 
1.  Plan Content. The plan shall demonstrate that the discharge of dust from the construction site will not occur, or can be controlled to an acceptable level depending on the particular site conditions and circumstances. 
a.  The plan shall address site conditions during construction operations, after normal working hours, and during various phases of construction. 
b.  The plan shall include the name and the twenty-four-hour phone number of a responsible party in case of emergency. 
c.  If the importing or exporting of dirt is necessary as demonstrated by the cut and fill quantities on the grading plan, the plan shall also include the procedures necessary to keep the public streets and private properties along the haul route free of dirt, dust and other debris. 
d.  When an entire project is to be graded and the subsequent construction on the site is to be completed in phases, the portion of the site not under construction shall be treated with dust preventive substance or plant materials and an irrigation system. 
e.  All phased projects shall submit a plan demonstrating that dust will not be generated from future phase areas. 
2.  Review and Use of Plan. The city engineer shall be responsible for the review and approval of the dust prevention and control plan. The plan shall be incorporated into the grading plan and constructive notice shall be placed on the grading plan to notify the owner and contractors of the need to comply with the dust prevention and control plan. 
C.  Inadequate Dust Prevention and Control Measures. In the event that inadequate dust prevention and control measures are provided by the permittee, the city may respond as follows. 
1.  Site Investigation. If an investigation of the project site indicates that dust prevention and control measures are inadequate, the city engineer may limit or halt all activities on the site until adequate dust prevention and control measures are achieved. The city engineer may charge the property owner and/or contractor for reasonable costs related to providing the necessary site inspections to determine the adequacy of the dust control plan. 
2.  Time for Compliance and Enforcement. If it is determined that a property in violation of this section, the property owner and/or contractor will have twenty-four (24) hours to bring the site into compliance. If after twenty-four (24) hours, the site is not brought into compliance or an extension of time has not been granted by the city engineer, the building official may, at any time thereafter, determine the site to be substandard property and serve a written notice of violation. As substandard property, the site will be subject to all the provisions of Chapter 99 of the latest edition of Title 26 of the California Building Code as adopted by the city. Thereupon, the city engineer may enter the property for the purposes of installing, by city forces or by other means, adequate dust prevention and control measures (the cost of which shall be borne by the property owner), or the city engineer may cause the owner of the site to be prosecuted as a violator of this code, or the city engineer may take both actions. 
3.  Responsibility for Adequate Dust Prevention and Control. The approval of a dust prevention and control plan does not relieve the permittee of the responsibility to implement whatever additional measures may be required by the city engineer to properly prevent and control dust. 
D.  Compliance with NPDES Stormwater Regulations. The dust prevention and control plan and any additional measures that may be necessary for the adequate prevention and control of dust shall comply with the NPDES Stormwater Regulations as adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.11.100 - Erosion and sediment control. 
Drainage improvements for site runoff, including but not limited to runoff from all roadways and other impervious surfaces, shall be engineered to minimize erosion through the appropriate use of rocked culvert inlets and outfalls, energy dissipators, check dams, cribbing, riprap, proper location of culverts, revegetation of exposed slopes (see Section 15.11.070), and minimizing the use of artificial slopes. Erosion and sediment shall be controlled as provided by this section. 
A.  Best Management Practices for Projects Under Construction. The following best management practices which address the problem of urban runoff shall apply to all development and proposed land uses. The following requirements shall apply at the time of demolition of an existing structure or commencement of construction and until receipt of a certificate of occupancy. 
1.  Runoff Prohibited. Runoff, sediment and construction waste from construction sites and parking areas shall not leave the site. 
2.  Grading During the Rainy Season. Should grading be permitted during the rainy season (see Section 15.11.030), the smallest practicable area of erodible land shall be exposed at any one time during grading operations and the time of exposure shall be minimized. 
3.  Slope Surface Stabilization. Temporary mulching, seeding or other suitable stabilization measures approved by the city engineer shall be used to protect exposed erodible areas during construction. Earth or paved interceptors and diversions shall be installed at the top of cut or fill slopes where there is a potential for erosive surface runoff. 
4.  Use of Plastic Covering. On an emergency basis only, plastic covering may be utilized to prevent erosion of an otherwise unprotected area, along with runoff devices to intercept and safely convey the runoff. 
5.  Placement of Excavated Soil. Excavated soil shall be located on the site in a manner that eliminates the possibility of sediments running into the street or adjoining properties. Soil piles shall be covered until the soil is either used or removed. 
6.  Removal of Off-Site Sediments. Any sediment or other materials which are tracked off the site shall be removed the same day as they are tracked off the site. Where determined necessary by the city engineer, a temporary sediment barrier shall be installed. 
7.  Prohibition Against Washing Construction Vehicles. No washing of construction or other industrial vehicles shall be allowed adjacent to a construction site. No runoff from washing vehicles construction site shall be allowed to leave the site. 
8.  Erosion Control Devices. In order to prevent polluting sediment discharges, erosion and sediment control devices shall be installed as required by the city engineer for all grading and filling except as allowed by Chapter 8.26. Control devices and measures that may be required include, but are not limited to energy absorbing structures or devices to reduce the velocity of runoff water, detention ponds, sediment ponds, or infiltration pits, or downdrains, chutes or flumes. 
B.  Final Erosion Control Measures. Within thirty (30) days after completion of grading, all surfaces disturbed by vegetation removal, grading, haul roads, or other construction activity that alters natural vegetative cover, shall be revegetated to control erosion as provided by Section 15.11.070 unless covered with impervious or other improved surfaces authorized by approved plans. Erosion controls may include any combination of mechanical or vegetative measures, including those described in USDA National Resources Conservation Service Bulletin 347. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 15.12 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
15.12.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter provides definitions of terms and phrases used in the Chapters 15.10 and 15.11 that are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common usage. If a word is not defined in this chapter, or other titles of the Municipal Code, the most common dictionary definition is assumed to be correct. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
15.12.020 - Definitions of specialized terms and phrases. 
A. Definitions, A. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Approval" means when the proposed work or completed work conforms to this chapter, as determined by and to the satisfaction of the building official. 
"As-built" means a set of reproducible drawings which represent the actual installation/construction. 
B. Definitions, B. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Bedrock" means the relatively solid, undisturbed rock in place either at the ground surface or beneath superficial deposits of alluvium, colluvium and/or soil. 
"Bench" means a relatively level step excavated into sloping natural ground on which engineered fill or embankment fill is to be placed. 
"Best management practice (BMP)" means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, maintenance procedures, education programs, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, and drainage from raw materials storage. The California Storm Water Best Management Practice Handbooks for Municipal, Industrial/Commercial and Construction Activity provide a detailed discussion of BMPs. See also Chapter 8.28 of Title 8 in the Municipal Code. 
C. Definitions, C. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)" means state law (California Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.) requiring public agencies to document and consider the environmental effects of a proposed action, prior to allowing the action to occur. 
"California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC)" means the governmental agency which regulates the terms and conditions of the public utilities in the state of California. 
"City" means the city of Calabasas, state of California, referred to in this development code as "city." 
"City Council" means the City Council of the city of Calabasas, state of California. 
"City Engineer" means the City Engineer of the city of Calabasas, state of California. 
"Civil engineer" means a professional engineer registered as a civil engineer by the state of California. 
"Compaction" means the densification of a fill by mechanical means. 
Cut. See "Excavation." 
D. Definitions, D. The following definitions are in alphabetical order: 
"Department" means the Public Works Department. 
"Depth of fill" means the vertical dimension from the exposed fill surface to the original ground surface at the fill's deepest point, generally at the hinge point. Where the construction slope is steeper than 3:1, the depth shall be measured from the toe of the slope. 
"Director" means the Public Works Director. 
"Down drain" means a device for collecting water from a swale or ditch located on or above a slope, and safely delivering it to an approved drainage facility. 
"Drainage facility" means a conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, and manmade channels, designed or used for collecting and conveying stormwater. 
Definitions, E. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Earth material" means any rock, natural soil or fill or any combination thereof. 
"Embankment" means a fill consisting of a deposit of soil, rock or other materials mechanically placed, including the conditions resulting therefrom. 
"Engineering geologist" means a person holding a valid certificate of registration as a geologist in the specialty of engineering geology issued by the state of California under the applicable provisions of the Geologist and Geophysicist Act of the Business and Professions Code. 
"Engineering geology" means the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works. 
"Erosion" means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water or ice. 
"Excavation" means the removal of earth material by artificial means, also referred to as a cut. 
Existing Grade. See "Grade." 
F. Definitions, F. The following definitions are in alphabetical order: 
"Fill" means deposition of earth materials by artificial means. 
Finish or Final Grade or Grading. See "Grade." 
"Field engineer" means a professional engineer registered as a civil engineer by the state of California, responsible for performing the field functions as set forth in the grading ordinance. 
G. Definitions, G. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
Geologist. See "Engineering geologist". 
"Geotechnical engineer" means a professional engineer registered as a civil engineer by the state of California with experience and knowledgeable in the field of geotechnical and soil mechanics. 
"Geotechnical hazard" means an adverse condition due to landslide, settlement, and/or slippage. These hazards include but are not limited to loose debris, slopewash, and mud flows from natural or graded slopes. 
"Grade" means the vertical location of the ground surface. 
1.  "Existing or natural grade" means the contour of the existing topography excluding any cut and/or fill. 
2.  "Finish grade" means the final grade of the site that conforms to an approved grading plan and grading permit. 
3.  "Rough grade" means the stage of grading operations at which the grade of the site approximately conforms to the approved grading plan and grading permit. 
"Grading" means any excavating or filling or combination thereof. 
"Grading ordinance" means Chapters 15.10, 15.11 and 15.12 of the Municipal Code. 
H. Definitions, H. No definitions of terms beginning with the letter "H" are used at this time. 
I. Definitions, I. The following definitions are in alphabetical order: 
"In place density" means the weight of the soil placed "in place" and tested to have a certain compaction. 
J. Definitions, J. No definitions of terms beginning with the letter "J" are used at this time. 
K. Definitions, K. The following definitions are in alphabetical order: 
"Key" means a compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material generally constructed at the toe of a slope 
L. Definitions, L. The following definitions are in alphabetical order: 
"Landform grading" means a contour grading method which creates artificial slopes with curves and varying slope ratios in the horizontal and vertical planes designed to simulate the appearance of surrounding natural terrain. 
"Landscape architect" means a person who holds a certificate to practice landscape architecture in the state of California under the applicable landscape architecture provisions of Division 3, Chapter 3.5 of the Business and Professions Code. 
"Local Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan/Wet Weather Erosion Control Plan (SWPPP/WWECP)" means a site drawing with details, notes, and related documents that identify the measures proposed to 1) control erosion and prevent sediment and construction-related pollutants from being carried offsite by stormwater, and (2) prevent non-stormwater discharges from entering the storm drain facility (See Chapter 8.28.Code). 
M. Definitions, M. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Municipal Code" means the city of Calabasas Municipal Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 
N. Definitions, N. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)" means a permit that authorizes discharges to waters of the United States and which is issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the California Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as it may be amended from time to time (33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq.). 
NPDES. See "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)." 
O. Definitions, O. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"On-site sewage disposal system" means a septic tank with effluent discharging into a subsurface disposal field, into one or more seepage pits or into a combination of subsurface disposal field and seepage pit or of such other facilities as may be permitted in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 15.04.610 of this code. 
"Over excavation" means soil removed in an effort to investigate or mediate. 
P. Definitions, P. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Planning Commission" means the Planning Commission of the city of Calabasas, appointed by the Calabasas City Council as provided by Government Code Section 65101. 
"Permittee" means a person to whom a permit has been issued. 
"Precise grading." See Finished Grade. 
"Project consultants" means the professional consultants required by this code which may consist of the design engineer, field engineer, soils engineer, engineering geologist, and landscape architect as applicable to this chapter. 
"Property line" means any recorded boundary of a lot. 
"Property owner" means the legal owner(s) of a lot. 
Q. Definitions, Q. No definitions of terms beginning with the letter "Q" are used at this time. 
R. Definitions, R. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Review Authority" means an individual or official city body identified by this grading ordinance as having the responsibility or authority to review, approve or disapprove the grading applications, permits and appeals (the city engineer, unless the project was approved by the Planning Commission or City Council, in which case the review authority would be the Planning Commission or City Council.) 
"Rough Grade" or "Rough Grading." See "Grade." 
S. Definitions, S. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Segmental gravity retaining wall" means a fill slope reinforced with multiple layers of geosynthetic fabric embedded in the soil backfill and mechanically tied to facing units. 
"Site" means a lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted. 
"Slope" means an inclined ground surface the inclination of which is expressed as a percentage or as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. 
"Soil" means naturally occurring superficial deposits overlying parent bedrock. 
Soils engineer. See "Geotechnical engineer". 
"Soils engineering (geotechnical engineering)" means the application of the principles of soils mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection or testing of the construction thereof. 
"Special inspection" means the inspection required by this code to be performed by the project consultants. Such inspections shall be sufficient to form an opinion relating to the conduct of the work. 
"Storm water mitigation plan" See Chapter 8.28 of the Municipal Code. 
"Surface drainage" means flows over the ground surface. 
T. Definitions, T. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Terrace" means a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes. 
U. Definitions, U. No definitions of terms beginning with the letter "U" are used at this time. 
V. Definitions, V. No definitions of terms beginning with the letter "V" are used at this time. 
W. Definitions, W. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Wet Weather Erosion Control Plan." See "Local Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan". 
X. Definitions, X. No definitions of terms beginning with the letter "X" are used at this time. 
Y. Definitions, Y. No definitions of terms beginning with the letter "Y" are used at this time. 
Z. Definitions, Z. No definitions of terms beginning with the letter "Z" are used at this time. 
(Ord. No. 2010-268, § 1, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 15.16 - FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION 
Sections: 
 
15.16.010 - Findings. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 1.2, 1991)  
15.16.020 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
A.  To protect human life and health; 
B.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects; 
C.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood-blight areas; 
G.  To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.  To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 1.3, 1991)  
15.16.030 - Methods and provisions. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
A.  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
D.  Controlling fill, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 1.4, 1991)  
15.16.040 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 3.5, 1991)  
15.16.050 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
"Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
"Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high-velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
"Apex" means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
"Area of special flood hazard." See "special flood hazard area." 
"Backfill" means the placement of fill material within a specified depression, hole or excavation pit below the surrounding adjacent ground level as a means of improving floodwater conveyance or to restore the land to the natural contours existing prior to excavation. 
"Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood"). 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
"Building." See "structure." 
"Critical feature" means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
"Curvilinear line" means the border on either a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map that delineates the special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazard areas and consists of a curved or contour line that follows the topography. 
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Fill" means the placement of fill material at a specified location to bring the ground surface up to a desired elevation. 
"Fill material" means and includes natural sand, dirt, soil or rock. For the purposes of floodplain management, fill material may include concrete, cement, soil cement, brick or similar material as approved on a case-by-case basis. 
"Flood elevation determination" means a determination by the administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. 
"Flood elevation study" means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
"Flood, flooding or floodwater" means: 
A.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters, (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, and/or (3) mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection (A)(2) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current; and 
B.  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (A)(1) of this definition. 
"Flood hazard boundary map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
"Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Floodplain" or "flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding"). 
"Floodplain administrator" means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means zoning chapters, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose chapters (such as floodplain management regulations). 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
"Flood protection system" means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed to conform with sound engineering standards. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
"Floodway encroachment lines" means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps. 
"Floodway fringe" means the areas of a floodplain on either side of the designated floodway where encroachment may be permitted. 
"Fraud and victimization," as related to Sections 15.16.170 through 15.16.190 of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the variance board will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
"Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Hardship," as related to Sections 15.16.170 through 15.16.190 of this chapter, means the hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The variance board requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as exceptional hardships. All of these problems can be resolved through other means, without granting a variance. This is so even if the alternative means are more expensive or complicated than building with a variance, or if they require the property owner to put the parcel to a different use than originally intended, or to build elsewhere. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
A.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
B.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district-registered historic district; 
C.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
D.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs. 
"Landfill" means a permitted location for the disposal, placement or dumping of garbage, trash, debris, junk or waste material. 
"Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
"Levee system" means a flood-protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"Map" means the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Flood Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
"Market value" shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement shall be based on the square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimate guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
"Minimum necessary," as related to Sections 15.16.170 through 15.16.190 of this chapter, means the minimum necessary to afford relief to the applicant of a variance with a minimum deviation from the requirements of this chapter. In the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the variance board need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, for example, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only that level that the board believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local chapter. 
"New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
"Obstruction" means and includes but is not limited to any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
"One-hundred-year flood" means a flood which has a one percent annual probability of being equaled or exceeded. It is identical to the "base flood," which will be the term used throughout this chapter. 
"Principal structure" means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use. 
"Public safety and nuisances," as related to Sections 15.16.170 through 15.16.190 of this chapter, means the granting of a variance must not result in additional threats to public safety or create nuisances. This chapter is intended to help protect the health, safety, well-being, and property of the local citizens. This is a long-range community effort made up of a combination of approaches such as adequate drainage systems, warning and evacuation plans, and keeping new property above the flood levels. These long-term goals can only be met if exceptions to the requirements of this chapter are kept to a bare minimum. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis; (2) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
"Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
"Sheet flow area." See "area of shallow flooding." 
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area having special flood condition shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, A1-A30, AE, A99. 
"Start of construction" means and includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred; or flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This is known as "repetitive loss." 
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 2.0, 1991) 
(Ord. No. 2018-362 , § 1, 6-27-2018)  
15.16.060 - Applicable lands. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 3.1, 1991)  
15.16.070 - Establishment of areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) through the risk mapping, assessment, and planning (Risk MAP) program for Los Angeles County, with its accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This Risk MAP is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study and FIRMs are on file at city hall, 100 Civic Center Way, Calabasas, CA 91302; FEMA maps can be found online through the FEMA Flood Map Service Center. 
(Ord. 2006-227 § 1, 2006: Ord. 91-23 § 3.2, 1991) 
(Ord. No. 2018-362 , § 1, 6-27-2018);oh5;  
15.16.080 - Floodplain administrator. 
The city engineer is appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 4.2, 1991)  
15.16.090 - Floodplain administrator—Duties and responsibilities. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Permit Review. 
1.  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage to existing structures; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  All sites are reasonably safe from flooding; and 
4.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point. 
5.  All letters of map revisions (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow for construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
B.  Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.16.070 of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Sections 15.16.110 through 15.16.160 of this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption. 
1.  If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or state agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one (1) of two (2) methods from the FEMA publication "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations", dated July 1995: 
a.  Simplified Method. 100-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. geological survey publication, or the discharge-drainage area method; or base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA; or 
b.  Detailed Method. 100-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-HMS computer program; or base flood elevation shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-RAS computer program. 
C.  Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated: 
1.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
2.  Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
D.  Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations: 
1.  Within six (6) months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
2.  All LOMRs for flood control projects shall be approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow for construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
E.  Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed: 
1.  The certification required by subsection (C)(1) of Section 15.16.110 of this chapter (floor elevations); 
2.  The certification required by subsection (C)(2)(c) of Section 15.16.110 of this chapter (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
3.  The certification required by subsection (C)(3)(a) or (b) of Section 15.16.110 of this chapter (wet floodproofing standard); 
4.  The certification of elevation required by subsection (B) of Section 15.16.130 of this chapter (subdivision standards); 
5.  The certification required by subsection (A) of Section 15.16.160 of this chapter (floodway encroachments). 
F.  Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Sections 15.16.170 through 15.16.190 of this chapter. 
G.  Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.16.220 of this chapter. 
H.  The floodplain administrator shall determine which applicants for new construction and/or substantial improvements have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are five (5) feet or higher. Ensure a "NON-CONVERSION AGREEMENT FOR CONSTRUCTION WITHIN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS" or equivalent is recorded as a deed restriction; the non-conversion agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the floodplain administrator and city council. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to inspect any area of structure less than two (2) feet above base flood elevation to ensure compliance upon prior notice of at least seventy-two (72) hours. 
1.  These areas shall be used solely for parking vehicles, limited storage, or access to the building and shall not be finished for habitation without first becoming fully compliant with the flood management ordinance in effect at the time. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 4.3, 1991) 
(Ord. No. 2018-362 , § 1, 6-27-2018)  
15.16.100 - Development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard, established in Section 15.16.070 of this chapter. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and shall include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
A.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
B.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed; 
C.  All appropriate certifications listed in subsection (E) of Section 15.16.090 of this chapter; and 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 4.1, 1991) 
(Ord. No. 2018-362 , § 1, 6-27-2018)  
15.16.110 - Standards—Construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
2.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.16.140 of this chapter. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
3.  All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
4.  All new construction and substantial improvement within zones AH or AO shall be provided adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
1.  New construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least 2 (two) feet above the base flood elevation. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subdivision (C)(3) of this section. Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated to conform with subdivision (C)(1) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
a.  Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level, as determined with subdivision (C)(1), the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  Require, for all new construction and substantial improvement that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer/architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Either a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided, the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade (openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater); or 
b.  Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
4.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.16.140 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 5.1, 1991) 
(Ord. No. 2018-362 , § 1, 6-27-2018)  
15.16.120 - Standards—Utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
C.  Other utilities are addressed in Sections 15.16.110(B) and 15.16.130(D). 
(Ord. 91-23 § 5.2, 1991)  
15.16.130 - Standards—Subdivisions. 
A.  All preliminary subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
B.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final first floor, pad elevations and lowest adjacent grade shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator as part of a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F). 
C.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
E.  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 5.3, 1991) 
(Ord. No. 2018-362 , § 1, 6-27-2018)  
15.16.140 - Standards—Manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map on sites (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood: 
Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
B.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (A) of this section will be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
C.  Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including the basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector. Certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 5.4, 1991) 
(Ord. No. 2018-362 , § 1, 6-27-2018)  
15.16.150 - Standards—Recreational vehicles. 
A.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map will either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.); or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements of Sections 15.16.090 and 15.16.100 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (A) of Section 15.16.140 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 5.5, 1991)  
15.16.160 - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.16.070 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge; 
B.  If subsection (A) of this section is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 15.16.110 through 15.16.150 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 5.6, 1991) 
(Ord. No. 2018-362 , § 1, 6-27-2018)  
15.16.170 - Variances. 
A.  The variance criteria set forth in this on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. Though these standards vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, in general, a properly issued variance is granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants or the property owners. 
B.  It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling, and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious, that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter are quite rare. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 6.1, 1991)  
15.16.180 - Variances—Appeals. 
A.  The city council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
C.  In passing upon such applications, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
1.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
11.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
D.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain board in the office of the Los Angeles County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
E.  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 6.2, 1991)  
15.16.190 - Variances—Conditions. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 15.16.080 through 15.16.160 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures (as defined in Section 15.16.050 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary (as defined in Section 15.16.050 of this chapter), considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
E.  Variances shall only be issued upon (1) a showing of good and sufficient cause; (2) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship (as defined in Section 15.16.050 of this chapter) to the applicant; and (3) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances (as defined in Section 15.16.050 of this chapter), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 15.16.050 of this chapter) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
F.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Section 15.16.180 are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
G.  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection C of Section 15.16.180 and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 6.3, 1991)  
15.16.200 - Disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards, or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of city council, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 3.6, 1991)  
15.16.210 - Conflicting provisions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 3.4, 1991)  
15.16.220 - Violation—Remedy. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 91-23 § 3.3, 1991)  
Title 17 - LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, adopted Jan. 27, 2010, amended Title 17 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Title 17 was previously amended in its entirety by Ord. No. 98-132. 
 
User's Guide 
A.  Introduction. This User's Guide provides a basic orientation in the organization and use of the Calabasas Land Use and development code ("development code") contained within Title 17 of the Calabasas Municipal Code. The User's Guide is a reference document, and, as such, it is designed to assist in the location of the city's zoning and subdivision regulations. The User's Guide is not a part of the development code, and it does not supersede or replace it. In the event of conflict between the User's Guide and the development code, the development code shall govern. 
If, after consulting this User's Guide, you cannot locate the information you desire regarding the development code or the city's land use and development requirements, you should contact the city's community development department. 
B.  Organization of the Development Code. The development code contains the city's zoning, subdivision and other land use regulations. Additional building construction requirements and other aspects of development and land use can be found in other titles of the Calabasas Municipal Code. 
The development code regulations which cover related topics have been grouped together into articles. There are seven articles and each is summarized below. 
1.  Purpose and Effect of Development Code. Article I contains basic information on the legal framework of the development code. Article I describes the land uses and development-related activities that are regulated by the development code, and provides information on how to use the code. 
2.  Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses. Article II contains chapters on the different types of zoning districts (residential, commercial, etc.) that are applicable to public and private property within the city. These chapters list the specific types of land uses allowed in each zoning district (e.g., day care facilities, home occupations, multifamily housing, service stations, etc.), and the type of land use/development permit that must be obtained prior to initiating each use. This article also contains basic development standards for each zoning district (e.g., maximum height limits and setback/yard requirements for new structures) and regulations for each land use. 
3.  Site Planning and Project Design Standards. Article III provides development standards that apply across zoning districts, including requirements for landscaping, off-street parking and loading, and signage. These chapters also contain regulations for specific land uses and development types that may be allowed in a variety of zoning districts (e.g., day care facilities, home occupations, multifamily housing, service stations, etc.). Within the zoning district chapters of Article II, there are references to the requirements in Article III. Article III's regulations generally supplement those in Article II. 
4.  Subdivisions. Article IV comprises the city's subdivision ordinance. This article provides both site planning/design regulations for new subdivisions, and the procedural requirements for subdivision approval, consistent with the mandates of the California Subdivision Map Act. 
5.  Land Use and Development Permits. Article V describes each type of land use and development permit required by this development code and the city's requirements for the preparation, filing, processing and approval of each permit application. This article also sets time limits for exercising a permit, and time extension procedures. Some land use/development approvals may be granted by the director (e.g., zoning clearance, administrative plan review, sign permit, etc.), while others require review and approval by the commission and/or council (e.g., conditional use permit, development plan, oak tree permit, etc.). 
6.  Development Code Administration. Article VI provides information on the development code's administrative framework and procedures including administration, amendments, enforcement, public hearings and appeals. This article also contains provisions governing nonconforming structures, uses, and lots. 
7.  Development Code Definitions. Article VII contains definitions of the specialized and technical terms and phrases used in the development code. 
C.  Format of the Development Code. 
1.  Outline. The format of the development code follows the layout of the Calabasas Municipal Code. The chapter and section numbers use an expandable decimal numbering system. Major divisions within the development code are called articles. Major divisions within articles are called chapters. Chapters divide into sections and subsections. The format of the divisions in the development code is shown below. 
Title 17 - Land Use and Development Code 
Article XX - Name of Article 
Chapter 17.xx - Name of Chapter 
17. xx.xxx - Section 
A. Subsection 
1. Subsection 
a. Subsection 
i. Subsection 
(A) Subsection 
2.  References and Citations. The development code often includes cross-references to other Municipal Code sections, city documents, or state and federal statutes. Cross-references and citations of other documents are handled as follows. 
a.  Outside of the Same Section. When a cross-reference is to text outside of the same section being referenced, the cross-reference starts with a title number (i.e., "17") followed by the chapter number (i.e. ("0.1"), the section number (i.e. "0.50"), and, if applicable, subsections (i.e. "(B)") which are further subdivided by paragraphs (i.e., "2"). For example, "Section 17.01.050(B)" refers to paragraph 2 of subsection B of Section 17.01.050, of Chapter 17.01, of Title 17. Cross-references will include the applicable title, chapter or section number. 
b.  Within the Same Section. When a cross-reference is to text within the same section, the cross-reference identifies the subsection with the applicable letter (i.e., "(D)") followed by a paragraph number (i.e. "2"). For example "See subsection (D) 2, of this section," refers to paragraph 2, of subsection D, of the same section. 
c.  External Documents. The development code references state statues by the name of the applicable state code, and specific section numbers (e.g., "Government Code Section 65091," "Map Act Section 66749," etc.). The reference will include the abbreviation "et seq." (the Latin "et sequitur," which means "and following") when the development code also references other sections within the same article or chapter of the relevant state code when those sections relate to the same subject matter. for example, "Government Code Section 65090 et seq." refers to Section 65090 of the California Government Code, and all sections within Chapter 2.7 of the Government Code entitled "public hearings". 
d.  Availability of Cited Documents. Any external document referenced or cited in the development code are available at the Calabasas community development department. These documents include the Calabasas General Plan, Old Town Specific Plan, California Government Code, and the Subdivision Map Act. 
3.  Terms. The development code has been written so that it can be easily understood by the general public. Most terms and phrases shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage, except as specifically defined in the development code. Article VII (Definitions), defines words that have a specific meaning in the development code. Chapter 17.03 (Interpretation of Code Provisions) contains other information on how terms are used in the development code. 
D.  Using the Development Code. 
1.  Determining the Zoning Regulations for a Specific Site. To determine the zoning regulations applicable to a specific property, you must first find the site on the Calabasas zoning map. The zoning map will show the zoning applied to the site, and whether the site is subject to any overlay zoning districts or limitations on maximum residential density. After determining the site's zoning, you use the development code to find regulations applicable to the development of the site. 
a.  Allowed Uses and Zone-Based Development Standards. Refer to Table 2-2 - Land Use Table in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) to determine which land uses are possible on the site. Where the development code provides unique standards and requirements for a particular land use (e.g., day care centers, home occupations, service stations, etc.), Table 2-2 also list the code section where the specific standards can be found. 
Chapter 17.12 provides standards applicable to specific land uses and activities, such as the keeping of animals within the city, day care facilities, home occupations, service stations, and others. 
Chapters 17.13, 17.14 and 17.15 include additional tables describing the basic standards for development in each zoning district: the minimum size for lots proposed in new subdivisions; the maximum allowed residential density; maximum floor area ratio; maximum site coverage; minimum setback/yard requirements; and maximum height for proposed structures. 
b.  Additional Development Standards. Refer to Article III to find the remaining development standards and regulations applicable to any proposed development or land uses (in addition to those established for each zoning district in Article II). To assist with the foregoing, each chapter in Article III should be reviewed in the following order: 
i.  Chapter 17.20 - General Property Development and Use Standards. This chapter contains sections that each cover one topic and that apply to most land use types. Each section should be reviewed to determine whether it applies to a particular use. 
ii.  Chapter 17.22 - Affordable Housing. This chapter applies to residential development projects proposing five or more housing units. 
iii.  Chapter 17.24 - Art in Public Places. This chapter applies to commercial development projects. 
iv.  Chapter 17.26 - Landscaping. This chapter applies to all land uses and development. 
v.  Chapter 17.28 - Parking and Loading. This chapter applies to all land uses an development. 
vi.  Chapter 17.30 - Signs. This chapter contains the city's sign ordinance, and applies to all land uses and development proposing signs. 
vii.  Chapter 17.32 - Oak Tree Regulations. This chapter contains the city's oak tree ordinance and applies to all properties that contain oak trees. 
viii.  Chapter 17.34 - Green Development Standards. This chapter applies to commercial development projects with an area over five hundred (500) square feet. 
ix.  Chapter 17.36 - Historic Preservation Ordinance. This chapter contains the city's historic preservation ordinance, and applies to all historical resources within the city. 
x.  Chapter 17.38 - Reasonable Accommodation. This chapter provides a process for disabled persons to request reasonable accommodations from existing standards in the development code. 
2.  Determining Where a Specific Use May Locate. 
a.  The Allowable Use Table. To determine in what zones a specific use may be located, review Table 2-2 - Land Use Table in Article II 1.010 (Permitted, conditional, temporary and accessory land uses - all zoning districts). 
The left column of the Table 2-2 lists the land uses allowed in each zoning district, organized by broad land use types: agriculture and open space uses; recreation, education and public assembly uses; residential uses; retail trade uses; service uses; and transportation and communications uses. Under each land use type is a list of the individual land uses that may be allowed in each zoning district. The names of the individual land uses are intended to generally describe each use so that the lists do not need to exhaustively itemize every possible land use that may be allowed within the city. Each land use is then defined in detail in Article VII (Development Code Definitions), with examples of the specific land uses that are included under the general heading. 
Each of the middle columns in Table 2-2 covers one zoning district, and the rows in the table corresponding to each land use show whether a particular use may be allowed in the zoning district, and what permit is required to obtain permission for the use. 
The right column of the table shows whether any unique development code standards apply to the particular land use. 
b.  Using the Land Use Table. As mentioned above, review Table 2-2 to find the general type of land use applicable to your proposed land use. Next scroll down the list of specific uses to find your use. If your use cannot readily be found, try to find a use that looks similar, or appears to generally describe your use, and then speak with a community development staff member about the process of determination of similar use. If your use is not listed in the table for a particular zoning district, it is prohibited in that zoning district. 
c.  Checking Overlay Zone Requirements. In some cases, a site in a particular zoning district may also have an overlay zone applied to it in addition to the "base" zoning. For example, a site in the CR (commercial, retail) zoning district could also be located within a scenic corridor and be subject to the scenic corridor design guidelines. In this case, the zoning map would show the site within the "CR-SC" designation. 
d.  Checking Specific Use Standards. In some cases, the standards for specific land uses in Chapter 17.12 of Article II and a site's characteristic (e.g. lot size) may have the effect of prohibiting a particular land use. For example, "Secondary Housing Units" as shown in Table 2-2 are conditionally allowed in the RS, RR and HM zoning districts. However, the specific requirements for secondary housing units in Section 17.12.170 allow these units only on parcels with a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. The right column of Table 2-2 will show a section number if the development code provides unique standards for a particular use. The listed section should be carefully reviewed to determine whether a particular site and proposed project can qualify for approval.  
Article I. - Purpose and Effect of Development Code  
Chapter 17.01 - Enactment and Applicability 
 
17.01.010 - Title. 
This title is and may be cited as the land use and development code of the City of Calabasas, Title 17 of the Calabasas Municipal Code, hereafter referred to as "this development code." 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.01.020 - Purpose. 
This development code implements the policies of the Calabasas General Plan by classifying and regulating the development and uses of land and structures within the city. This development code is adopted to protect and to promote the health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of residents, and businesses. More specifically, the purposes of this development code are to: 
A.  Provide standards for the orderly growth and development of the city that will assist in maintaining a high quality of life without causing unduly high development costs or unduly restricting private enterprise, initiative or innovation in design; 
B.  Implement the Calabasas General Plan by encouraging the uses of land designated by the General Plan and avoiding conflicts between land uses; 
C.  Conserve and protect the natural resources of the city; 
D.  Create a comprehensive and stable pattern of development and land uses upon which to plan transportation, water supply, sewerage and other public facilities and utilities; 
E.  To provide regulations for the subdivision of land in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act, Title 7, Section 4, Division 2 of the California Government Code §§ 66410-66499.58; and 
F.  To provide regulations consistent with state planning and zoning laws. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.01.030 - Authority—Relationship to General Plan. 
A.  This development code is enacted based on the authority vested in the city by the state of California, including the State Constitution; California Government Code Sections 65800 et. seq.; the California Environmental Quality Act, Housing Act, Subdivision Map Act, and the Health and Safety Code. 
B.  This development code is the primary tool used by the city to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Calabasas General Plan. The Calabasas council intends that this development code be consistent with the Calabasas General Plan, and that any land use, subdivision or development approved in compliance with this development code will also be consistent with the Calabasas General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.01.040 - Applicability of the development code. 
This development code applies to all land uses, subdivisions and development within the city as follows. 
A.  New Land Uses or Structures—Changes to Existing Land Uses or Structures. It is unlawful, and a violation of this development code, for any person to establish, construct, reconstruct, alter, maintain, or replace any use of land or structure, except in compliance with the requirements of this Code. 
B.  Building or Grading Permits. Building or grading permits may be issued by the city only when (i) the proposed land use and/or structure does not violate the prohibition in subsection A of this section, (ii) when the director determines that the site was subdivided in compliance with all applicable requirements of Article IV, and (iii) when proposed grading is in compliance with all applicable requirements of Title 15 of this Code. 
No construction authorized by a building or grading permit shall be granted a final inspection approval or a certificate of occupancy, unless the construction and grading complies with the approved land use permit, and all applicable conditions of approval, as well as with all applicable regulations in Title 15 of this Code. 
C.  Subdivision of Land. Any subdivision of land proposed within the city after the effective date of this development code shall be consistent with the minimum lot size requirements of Article II, the subdivision requirements of Article IV, and all other applicable requirements of this development code. 
D.  Continuation of an Existing Land Use. An existing land use is, subject to the operation of Chapter 17.72, lawful and not in violation of subsequently adopted amendments to this development code only when established in compliance with the development code then in effect, and it continues to be conducted, operated and maintained in compliance with those regulations. 
E.  Effect of Development Code Changes on Projects in Progress. The enactment of this development code or any subsequent amendments may impose different standards on new land uses than those that applied to existing development (e.g., this development code or an amendment could require more off-street parking spaces for a particular land use than the former development code provisions). The following provisions determine how the requirements of this development code apply to projects in progress at the time requirements are changed: 
1.  Approved Projects not yet Under Construction. Any approved development project for which construction has not begun as of the effective date of this development code or amendment, may still be constructed as approved, as long as (i) required building permits have been obtained and remain active and construction work or (ii) activities at the site have begun before the expiration of any applicable land use permit (Section 17.64.050) or, (iii) where applicable, before the expiration of any approved time extension granted under Section 17.64.050. 
2.  Approved Projects not Requiring Construction. Any approved land use not requiring construction that has not been exercised as of the effective date of this development code or any subsequent amendment, may still be exercised in compliance with its approved permit, as long as the permittee exercised the permit or entitlement prior to the expiration of (i) the time limits set forth in subsection (A) of Section 17.64.050; or any approved time extension granted pursuant to subsection (A) of Section 17.64.050. As used herein, "exercised" refers to an approved use that is substantially commenced or undertaken at a specific location prior to the date of expiration of the permit, or any extension thereof. 
3.  Approved Subdivisions not yet Recorded. Any approved subdivision for which a parcel or final map has not been recorded as of the effective date of this development code or amendment, may still have a parcel or final map recorded in compliance with the approved tentative map, as long as recordation occurs before (i) the expiration date of the tentative map as set forth in Sections 17.41.300 et seq.) or (ii) any approved time extension granted under Section 17.41.320. 
4.  Projects under Construction. If a permittee is constructing a structure on the effective date of this development code or any subsequent amendment, the permittee may continue to construct the structure as approved unless the applicable building permits expire or become invalid by operation of law. 
F.  Other Requirements may Still Apply. Nothing in this development code eliminates the need for obtaining any other permits, licenses, approvals, or entitlements required by the city, this Code, or any county, regional, state or federal agency. 
G.  Conflicting Permits and Licenses to be Void. All permits or licenses shall be issued by the city in compliance with the provisions of this development code. Any approval, permit or license issued in conflict with this development code shall be void. 
H.  Application Requirements. Except for a property owner(s) or an agent of a property owner, no person may file an application for a permit, license, approval, or other entitlement under this title. The director may require any applicant to submit proof of his or her interest in the real property for which he or she is seeking a permit, license, approval or other entitlement. The director may also require an agent to submit evidence of his or her authority to act on the behalf of the property owner. In instances where an application must be filed in connection with the abatement of a violation of this development code, or any other portion of the Calabasas Municipal Code, the director may require all owners of record for the property on which the violation is located to sign the application. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.01.050 - Responsibility for administration. 
This development code shall be administered by the Calabasas council, commission, director, development review committee, and the department, as provided in Chapter 17.70. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.01.060 - Partial invalidation of development code. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this development code is for any reason held to be invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable, these decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this development code. The council declares that this development code and each article, chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase and portion thereof would have been adopted irrespective of the fact that one or more portions of this development code may be declared invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.02 - LAND USE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
 
17.02.010 - Requirements for development and new land uses. 
No form of development shall occur or be maintained and no new land use shall be established, allowed, or maintained unless both comply with the following requirements. 
A.  Allowable Use. Table 2-2 - Land Use Table in Chapter17.11 identifies land uses authorized in each zoning district within the city. 
B.  Permit Requirements. Absent an applicable exemption under Section 17.02.020, any land use permit required by this development code and any permits required by Title 15 of this Code shall be obtained before the proposed development or land use is constructed, established or put into operation. The land use permit requirements of this development code are established by Chapter 17.62. 
C.  Development Standards. Every development and/or use(s) shall comply with all other applicable requirements of this development code, including Article II, and the provisions of Article III. 
D.  Conditions of Approval. Development and/or use(s) shall comply with any applicable conditions imposed by any previously granted land use permit, unless those conditions are thereafter revoked or modified in accordance with the provisions in this development code. New development and/or uses shall, at all times, comply with all conditions of approval for a new land use permit that are imposed pursuant to this development code. 
E.  Development Agreements. The use and/or structures shall comply with any applicable development agreement approved by the city in compliance with Chapter 17.68 or by Los Angeles County prior to city incorporation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.02.020 - Exemptions from land use permit requirements. 
The land use permit requirements of this development code do not apply to the activities, land uses and structures identified by this section, which are allowed in all zoning districts subject to compliance with this section. 
A.  General Requirements for Exemption. The activities, land uses and structures identified by subsection (B) of this section are exempt from the land use permit requirements of this development code only when: 
1.  The activity, use or structure is established and operated and maintained in compliance with all applicable development standards of this title.; and 
2.  Any permit or approval required by regulations other than this development code is first obtained in compliance with Section 17.02.040 of this chapter. 
B.  Exempt Activities, Uses and Structures. The following activities, land uses and structures are exempt from the land use permit requirements of this development code when in compliance with subsection (A) of this section: 
1.  Decks, Paths and Driveways. Unenclosed decks, platforms, on-site paths, and driveways are exempt provided they (i) do not require a building permit or a grading permit under Title 15 of this Code, (ii) are not over eighteen (18) inches above natural grade, and (iii) are not over any basement or story below. 
2.  Fences—Residential, Single-Family (RS) Zoning Districts. Except for those properties within the SC overlay zone, fences in the RS zoning district are exempt as set forth in Section 17.20.100 of this title. 
3.  Governmental Activities. Activities of the city are exempt. Activities of the state or the federal government on land owned or leased by a governmental agency are exempt to the extent required by state and federal law. 
4.  Interior Remodeling. Interior alterations that do not increase the number of rooms or the gross floor area within a structure, or do not change the permitted use of the structure. 
5.  Portable Spas, Hot Tubs and Fish Ponds. Portable spas, hot tubs and fish ponds and other similar structures, are exempt provided that do not (i) exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet in total area, including related equipment; (ii) contain more than two thousand (2,000) gallons of water; or (iii) exceed three feet in depth. 
6.  Repairs and Maintenance of Existing Lawful Structures. Repair and maintenance of existing lawful structures is exempt; provided it does not change, intensification or expansion of an approved land use of a site or structure, or does not add to, enlarge or expand a structure. Exterior maintenance and repair work shall, for structure exteriors, use the same materials and design as the original structure. 
7.  Small Residential Accessory Structures. Storage sheds and other small structures in residential zoning districts shall be exempt provided they (i) comply with the building permit requirements of Title 15 of this Code, (ii) comply with the setback requirements of Section 17.20.180F.(6) of this title, and (iii) are less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in gross floor area. Small residential accessory structures located within the scenic corridor shall also comply with the scenic corridor guidelines. Children's playground structures shall not be allowed in front yard setbacks in any residential zoning district. 
8.  Utilities. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of underground or overhead utilities by a public utility or public agency (e.g., water, gas, electric, telecommunication, supply or disposal systems, including wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire-alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar facilities.), shall be exempted from the requirements of this development code to the extent required by state and federal law. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the route of any electrical transmission line(s) having the potential of fifty thousand (50,000) volts or more shall be subject to council review and approval prior to acquisition of rights-of-way. Satellite and cellular telephone antennas are subject to Section 17.12.050 of this title. Any construction activity within a public right-of-way shall first be reviewed by the city engineer and shall require the approval of a city encroachment permit. 
9.  Walls and Retaining Walls. Concrete and masonry walls less than forty-two (42) inches in height located in residential zoning districts shall be exempt. Retaining walls retaining earth shall be exempt provided, the grade changes are thirty-six (36) inches or less and Title 15 of this Code do not require a grading permit. The foregoing exempt walls shall comply with all applicable provisions of Section 17.20.100 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-297, § 1(Att. A), 5-23-2012)  
17.02.030 - Temporary uses. 
Requirements for establishing a temporary use (e.g., construction yards, seasonal sales lots, special events, temporary office trailers, etc.) are in Section 17.62.030. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.02.040 - Additional permits or approvals may be required. 
An allowed structure or land use that is exempt from a land use permit, or that has been granted a land use permit, may still be required to obtain other permits before construction or installation work for the structure is started, or the use or activity is established or put into operation. Nothing in this chapter shall eliminate the need to obtain any permits or approvals required by: 
A.  Other provisions of this Code, including: building, grading or other construction permits required by Title 15; a business licenses if required by Title 5; or subdivision approvals if required by Article IV; 
B.  Los Angeles County, any special district, or any regional, state or federal agency. All permits and approvals required by law from such agencies or districts having concurrent jurisdiction shall be obtained prior to the commencement of work on any allowed structures or establishing new uses. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.03 - INTERPRETATION OF CODE PROVISIONS 
 
17.03.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter provides rules for resolving questions about the meaning or applicability of any part of this development code. The provisions of this chapter are intended to ensure the consistent interpretation and application of the provisions of this development code and the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010) 
A.  Authority. The director is assigned the responsibility and authority to interpret the requirements of this development code. 
B.  Language. 
1.  Terminology. When used in this development code, the words "shall," "must," "will," "is to" and "are to" are always mandatory. "Should" is not mandatory but is strongly recommended; and "may" is permissive. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future tense includes the present. The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise. The words "includes" and "including" shall mean "including but not limited to..." 
2.  Number of Days. Whenever a number of days is specified in this development code, or in any permit, condition of approval or notice issued or given as provided in this development code, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days. Time limits will extend to the following working day where the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend or holiday. 
3.  Minimum Requirements. When interpreting and applying the regulations of this development code, all provisions shall be considered to be minimum requirements, unless stated otherwise (e.g., height limits and site coverage requirements for structures, and the numbers and size of signs allowed are maximums, not minimums). 
C.  Zoning Map Boundaries. If there is uncertainty about the location of any zoning district boundary shown on the official zoning map, the following rules are to be used in resolving the uncertainty: 
1.  Where district boundaries approximately follow lot, alley or street lines, the lot lines and street and alley centerlines shall be construed as the district boundaries; 
2.  If a district boundary divides a parcel and the boundary line location is not specified by distances printed on the zoning map, the location of the boundary will be determined by using the scale appearing on the zoning map; and 
3.  Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the property that was formerly in the street or alley will be included within the zoning district of the adjoining property on either side of the centerline of the vacated or abandoned street or alley. 
D.  Allowable Uses of Land. If a proposed use of land is not specifically listed in Table 2-2 - Land Use Table of Chapter 17.11, the use is prohibited except as allowed by Section 17.11.020. 
E.  Conflicting Requirements. 
1.  Development Code and Municipal Code Provisions. If conflicts occur between requirements of this development code, or between this development code and other regulations of the city, the most restrictive shall apply. 
2.  Development Agreements or Specific Plans. If conflicts occur between the requirements of this development code and standards adopted as part of any development agreement or specific plan, the requirements of the development agreement or specific plan shall apply. 
3.  Private Agreements. This development code applies to all land uses and development regardless of whether it imposes a greater or lesser restriction on the development, maintenance, or use of structures or land than a private agreement or restriction, without affecting the applicability of any agreement or restriction. The city shall not enforce any private covenant or agreement unless it is an express party and signatory to the covenant or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.03.030 - Procedures for interpretations. 
Whenever the director determines that the meaning or applicability of any of the requirements of this development code are subject to interpretation generally or as applied to a specific case, the director may issue an official interpretation. Interpretations may also be requested, by any interested party, in compliance with this section. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter, a determination by the director or department staff, pursuant to Section 17.80.020 or another section, that a person is violating this development code is not subject to a request for interpretation, nor is that determination appealable to the commission or to the council, or subject to a call for review. 
A.  Request for Interpretation. A request shall be written and filed within ten (10) days of any action by the department involving the provision which is the subject of the request. The written request shall specifically state the provision(s) in question, and may provide any additional information to assist in the review of the request. 
B.  Record of Interpretations. If the director determines that a provision of this development code requires refinement or revision, an amendment to this development code should be made as soon as is practical. Until amendments can occur, the director will maintain a complete record of all official interpretations, which shall be available for public review, and indexed by the section number. Official interpretations shall be: 
1.  In writing, and shall quote the provisions of this development code being interpreted, and explain their meaning or applicability in the particular or general circumstances that caused the need for interpretation; and 
2.  Distributed to the council, commission, city attorney, city clerk and department staff. 
C.  Appeals and Referral. Any interpretations of this development code by the director may be appealed to the commission as provided by Chapter 17.74. The director may also refer any interpretation to the commission for a determination. Any interpretation by the director may be called up for review by the commission or council in accordance with Chapter 17.74. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Article II. - Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses  
Chapter 17.10 - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICT AND ALLOWABLE LAND USES 
 
17.10.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes the zoning districts to be applied to property throughout the city, adopts the city's zoning map, and determines how the regulations of each zoning district apply to property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.10.020 - Zoning districts established. 
Calabasas shall be divided into zoning districts which consistently implement the General Plan. The following zoning districts are established, and shall be shown on the official zoning map (Section 17.10.030). 
Table 2-1 
Zoning Districts 
Table 2-1 
Zoning District 	Zoning Map 
Symbol 		General Plan Land Use District 
Implemented by Zoning District 
Residential Zones 		
Residential, Single-Family 	RS 	R-SF 	Residential - Single-Family 
Residential, Multifamily 	RM 	R-MF 	Residential - Multiple-Family 
Residential, Mobilehome 	RMH 	R-MH 	Residential - Mobilehome 
Residential, Rural 	RR 	RR 	Rural Residential 
Rural Community 	RC 	RC 	Rural Community 
Commercial Zones 		
Commercial, Limited 	CL 	B-LI 	Business - Limited Intensity Commercial 
Commercial, Retail 	CR 	B-R 	Business - Retail 
Commercial, Office 	CO 	B-PO 	Business - Professional Office 
Commercial, Mixed Use 	CMU 	MU 	Mixed Use 
Commercial, Business Park 	CB 	B-BP 	Business Park 
Commercial, Old Town 	CT 	B-OT 	Business - Old Town 
Special Purpose Zones 		
Planned Development 	PD 	PD 	Planned Development 
Hillside/Mountainous 	HM 	HM 	Hillside - Mountainous 
Open Space 	OS 	OS-RP 	Open Space - Resource Protection 
Open Space-Development Restricted 	OS-DR 	OS-RP 	Open Space - Resource Protection 
Public Facility 	PF 	PF-I 	Public Facilities - Institutional 
Recreation 	REC 	OS-R 	Open Space - Recreational 
		PF-R 	Public Facilities - Recreational 
Overlay Zones 		
Development Plan 	-DP 		
			Multiple districts 
Scenic Corridor 	-SC 		Multiple districts 
Old Topanga 	-OT 	RC 	Rural Community 
		HM 	Hillside/Mountainous 
		OS-R 	Open Space-Resource Protection 
Calabasas Highlands 	-CH 	RC 	Rural Community 
		OS-R 	Open Space-Resource Protection 
 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.10.030 - Zoning map adopted. 
A.  Inclusion by Reference. The zoning map, together with all legends, symbols, notations, references, zoning district boundaries, map symbols, and other information on the map has been adopted by the council in compliance with Government Code sections 65800 et seq., and is incorporated into this development code by reference as though it were fully set forth herein. 
B.  Zoning District Boundaries. The boundaries of the zoning districts established by Section 17.10.020 shall be shown upon the map designated as the "City of Calabasas zoning map" (hereafter referred to as the "zoning map"), on file with the city clerk, and available at the department. 
C.  Relationship to General Plan. The zoning map shall implement the General Plan, including the Land Use Plan. 
D.  Zoning Map Amendments. Amendments to the zoning map shall follow the process established in Chapter 17.76. 
E.  Interpretation of Zoning Map. The zoning map shall be interpreted in compliance with Section 17.03.020(C). 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.10.040 - Zoning district regulations. 
A.  Purpose. Chapter 17.11 determines which land uses are allowed in each zoning district established by Section 17.10.020 and Chapter 17.62 specifies what land use permit is required to establish each use. Chapters 17.13 through 17.17 provide the basic development standards that apply to allowed land uses in each zoning district. 
B.  Determination of Allowable Land Uses. Any questions about whether a proposed land use is allowed in a particular zoning district by Section 17.11.010 shall be resolved by the director in compliance with Section 17.11.020. 
C.  Development Standards—Conflicts Between Provisions. 
1.  In the event of any conflict between the zoning district regulations of this article and the provisions of Article III, the provisions of Article III shall control; 
2.  In the event of any conflict between the zoning district regulations of this article and the provisions of any applicable development agreement, specific plan, or master plan, the provisions of the development agreement, specific plan or master plan shall control. 
D.  Single Parcel in Two Zoning Districts. In the event two or more parcels are consolidated through the approval of a lot line adjustment, parcel or tentative map in compliance with Article IV such that a single parcel is covered by two or more zoning districts, the consolidated parcel shall be rezoned to a single zoning district. 
In the event that an existing parcel is covered by two or more zoning districts, the location of the main structure shall determine which zoning district standards shall apply to the project. In cases where the proposed main structure would straddle a zone district boundary line, the most restrictive zoning district standards shall apply. 
E.  Partial Coverage of Parcel by Overlay Zone. In the event the boundaries of two or more parcels are affected through the approval of a lot line adjustment, parcel map or tentative map in compliance with Article IV (Subdivisions) such that a parcel resulting from such approval is not entirely within an existing overlay zone, the resulting parcel shall be rezoned pursuant to Chapter 17.76 so that the entire resulting parcel is within the overlay zone. In the case where portions of the resulting parcel are within more than one overlay zone, the director shall determine which overlay zone shall apply to the entire resulting parcel and the resulting parcel shall be rezoned accordingly pursuant to Chapter 17.76. The property owner may apply for a tentative map, parcel map, or conditional use permit (if applicable) to have the overlay zone designation removed from the resulting parcel, the approval of which may be subject to conditions consistent with Chapter 17.18 and Chapter 17.76. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.11 - ALLOWABLE LAND USES 
 
17.11.010 - Permitted, conditional and ancillary land uses—All zoning districts. 
A.  Land Use Permit Requirements. The uses of land allowed by this development code in all of the zoning districts are identified in the following table as being: 
1.  A permitted use (identified with a "P" in the table), means that the use is permitted in the particular zoning district as long as all other zoning district and special criteria are met. 
2.  An accessory use (identified with an "A" in the table) means that the use is allowed as long as it is ancillary to another permitted use and as long as all other zoning district and special criteria are met. 
3.  A conditional use (identified with a "C" in the tables), means that a use is allowed subject to approval of a conditional use permit (Section 17.62.060). 
4.  A temporary use (identified with a "TUP" in the tables), means that a use is allowed subject to prior approval and issuance of a temporary use permit (Section 17.62.030). 
B.  Uses Not Listed. Land uses that are not listed on the table or when a space in the table is blank in a particular zoning district, the land use is prohibited, except where provided by Section 17.11.020. 
C.  Additional Permit/Approval Requirements. A use of land allowed in compliance with subsection (A) of this section, as well as any proposed development related thereto, shall also comply with the following where applicable: 
1.  A site plan review (Section 17.62.020), administrative plan review (Section 17.62.090), or development plan review (Section 17.62.070) is required for all new development and a scenic corridor permit (Section 17.62.050) is required for new development in a scenic corridor. Where no other authorization is required, a request for zoning clearance (Section 17.62.110) shall be required. 
2.  Design review (Chapter 2.40 of the Municipal Code) where required by the General Plan, or any specific plan, master plan, or design guidelines; and 
3.  A building or grading permit if required by Title 15, or any other permit or approval required by the Municipal Code. 
The review or clearance discussed in Subsection C.1 and 2. Above shall be completed and approved by the review authority before the proposed use of land is commenced or established and before site work on any proposed development is started. Proposed uses shall also comply with all other applicable provisions of this development code. 
D.  Standards for Specific Uses. Where the last column in the following table ("See Section") includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of this development code may apply as well. 
E.  All processes and activities related to a permitted or conditional use are to be conducted within a completely enclosed building or structure with the following exceptions: temporary uses (Section 17.62.030), outdoor storage of materials and finished product (where permitted), and outdoor dining areas. 
F.  Land Use Table. Land uses listed in the following table shall be defined using the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) unless otherwise defined in Article VII. Specific land uses within the table are grouped under the following major headings: 
AGRICULTURE 
RESIDENTIAL 
INSTITUTIONAL 
Educational 
Medical 
Public 
Religious 
Non-profit/Service Organizations—501(c)(3) 
Utilities 
COMMERCIAL 
Alcohol 
Automobile Related Services 
Automobile Repair 
Communications 
Day Care Facilities 
Eating/Drinking Places and Food Services 
Entertainment and Recreation 
Lodging 
Offices 
Retail 
Services 
Transportation 
INDUSTRIAL 
Light Industrial 
Manufacturing 
Warehousing/Storage 
Wholesale 
TEMPORARY AND INTERIM USES 
TABLE 2-2 - LAND USE TABLE 
KEY: P=Permitted Use (See Chapter 17.62 for required permit), C=Conditionally Permitted (CUP required), 
A=Allowed as an Accessory Use, TUP=Temporary Use (TUP required) 
LAND USE 	ZONE 
	RS 	RM 	RMH 	RR 	RC 	PD 	HM 	OS 	OS- 
DR 	PF 	REC 	CL 	CR 	CO 	CMU 	CB 	CT 	See standards in section 
AGRICULTURE 
 Agricultural uses for fuel modification 				A 			A 	A 										17.12.030 D.& E. 
 Equestrian Facilities 				C 	C 		C 	C 			A 							
 Farm Animals 				A 			A/C 	A/C 										17.12.040 
 Hobby Farms 				A/C 			A/C 	A/C 										17.12.110 
 Kennels and animal boarding 												C 	C 			C 		17.12.1205 
 Plant Nurseries 												C 	C 			C 		
RESIDENTIAL 
 Accessory dwelling unit 	P 			P 	P 		P 	P 										17.12.170 
 Apartments, Condominiums, Duplexes and other Multi-Family Dwellings 		P 				p 									C 		C 	17.12.145 
 Community center, neighborhood 	C 	C 	C 		C 	C 					P 				C 			
 Emergency Shelters 												P 						17.12.090 
 Home Occupations 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 							A 		A 	17.12.115 
 Mobilehome parks 			C 															17.12.135 
 Mobilehomes/manufactured housing (on a single lot) 	P 	P 		P 	P 		P 											17.12.140 
 Planned Development - Residential 						C 												
 Residential accessory uses and structures 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 							A 			17.12.165 
 Residential care homes, six or fewer clients 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 										
 Residential care homes, seven or more clients 		C 													C 		C(1) 	
 Rooming and boarding houses 		C 																
 Senior residential projects 		P 				P 									C 		C(1) 	17.12.180 
 Single-family housing 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 							
 Transitional/Supportive housing 	P(2) 	P(2) 																
INSTITUTIONAL 
  Educational 	
   Schools K-12: 	
   - Private 	C 	C 		C 						C 			C 					
   - Public 	C 	C 		C 	C 					C 			C 					
   Schools, Universities/Colleges: 																		
   - Private 	C 	C 		C 						C 			C 	C 	C 	C 		
   - Public 										C 			C 	C 	C 	C 		
  Schools, Vocational/Trade 										C 			C 	C 	C 	C 		
  Medical Services 	
  Veterinarian Clinic and animal hospital 												C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		17.12.230 
  Assisted Living/Congregate Care Facility 		C 										C 	C 	C 	C 		C 	
  Convalescent Care Facility (with continuous skilled nursing care) 												C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
  Hospital 													C 					
  Medical Office/Clinic/Lab 						P 						C 	P 	P 	P 			
  Pharmacies and Drug Stores 						C 							C 	C 	C 	C 		
  Pharmacies as accessory use 						A 						A 	A 	A 	A 	A 		
Public 	
  Cultural Facilities 	
  Cultural Facility 						C 				C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
  Museum 		C 				C 				C 	C 	C 	C 		C 	C 		
  Public Facilities 	
  Government Offices 										P 				P 		P 		
  Other Government Facilities 										P 								
  Library 		C 				P 				P 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Police/Fire Station 	C 	C 		C 		C 				C 		C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
  Police Storefront/Substation 	C 	C 		C 		P 				P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P(1) 	
  Recreation Facilities 	
  Community center, regional 										P 	P 		C 		C 			
  Outdoor Recreation 										P 	P 		C 	C 		C 		
  Senior Citizen Activity Center 						C 					P 	C 	C 		C 			
  Religious 	
  Church/place of worship 	C 	C 		C 	C 	C 				P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
  Non-profit/Service Organizations -501(c)(3) 	
  Campaign Offices 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P(1) 	
  Charitable Distribution Services (i.e. food banks, etc.) 													C 	C 		C 		
  Charitable, Philanthropic, Service, and other Non-profit Organization Offices 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P(1) 	
  Utilities 
  Public Utility/Service Structure 	C 	C 		C 		P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		17.02.020 (B)10 
  Public Utility Office 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P(1) 	
COMMERCIAL 
  Alcohol 	
  Alcoholic Beverage Sales 						C(3) 						C(3) 	C(3) 	C(3) 	C(3) 	C(3) 	C(1) 
3) 	17.12.035 
  Wine/Beer Specialty Shop 						C 							C 		C 		C(1) 	17.12.035 
  Automobile Related Services 
  Automotive Parts and Accessories Stores 												P(5) 	P(5)/C 			P(5)/C 		17.18.035 
  Automobile Repair 	
  Automotive Services - (i.e.: Tune-up, emission tests, batteries, etc.) (no use of impact wrenches or other equipment that could create noise impacts) 												P(5) 	P(5)/C 			P 		17.18.035 (If within CAR overlay zone) 
  Minor Repair (i.e.: Brakes, tires, radiators, electrical, etc.) 												P(5) 	P(5)/C 			P 		17.18.035 (If within CAR overlay zone) 
  Major Repair (i.e.: Engine and transmission repair/rebuild, etc.) 												P(5) 	P(5)/C 			P(5)/C 		17.18.035 
  Motorcycle Engine Customization 	
  Car Wash - Full Service 												P(5) 	P(5)/C 			P(5)/C 		17.18.035 
  Service Station 													C 			C 		17.12.190 
  Motor Vehicle Sales 	
  New and Used 												P(5) 	P(5)/C 			P(5)/C 		17.18.035 
  Motor Vehicle Storage 	
  Indoor 												P(5)/C 	P(5)/C 		C 	P(5)/C 		17.18.035 
Off-Site Dealership and Sales Inventory Lots 												P(5) 	P(5) 			p(5) 		17.18.035 
  Parking: Commercial Lot/Garage 						C 						C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C(1) 	
  Communications 	
  Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 						C 				C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C(1) 	17.12.050 
  Satellite Antennas 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 				A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	17.12.050 
  Recording and Sound Studios 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
  Day Care Facilities 	
  Child Day Care Center - 	C 	C 		C 	C 	C 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		17.12.070 
  Large Family Day Care Home (9 to 14 children) 	C 	C 		C 	C 	C 												17.12.070 
  Small Family Day Care Home (8 or fewer children) 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 												17.12.070 
  Eating/Drinking Places & Food Services 	
  Bar/Cocktail Lounge 						C 							C 		C 	C 	C(1) 	
  Night Club 													C 		C 	C 		
  Banquet Hall 													C 		C 	C 		
  Catering Establishment 													C 		C 	C 		
  Restaurants (counter service) 						P 						C 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C(1) 	
  Restaurants (table service) 						P 						C 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C(1) 	
  Entertainment and Recreation 	
  Adult-entertainment Business 													C 					17.12.025 
  Athletic Fields 											P 							
  Arcade 													C 					
  Auditoriums & Other Public Assembly Facilities 										C 	C 							
  Bowling Alley 													C 					
  Dance Hall 													C 					
  Health and Fitness Club 						C 				C 	C 		C 	C 	C 	C 		
  Golf Course 										C 	C 							
  Golf Driving Range 	C 	C 		C 						C 	C 	C 						
  Live Entertainment 						C 					C 	C 	C 		C 	C 	C 	
  Motion Picture Theater 													C 		C 			
  Outdoor Commercial Recreation 											C 		C 			C 		
  Pool and billiard rooms 													C 					
  Skate Park 										C 	C 							
  Tennis/Swim Club 										C 	C 							
  Theaters 											C 		C 		C 	C 	C(1) 	
  Lodging 	
  Bed and Breakfast Inn 				C 	C 		C 											
  Hotels/Motels 													C 	C 	C 	C 		
  Offices 	
  Business 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Professional 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Professional Medical Offices 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	
  Property management 		P 	P 			P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Retail stores 	
  Antique Stores 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Art Galleries and Art Supply Store 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Beauty Supply Store 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Book Stores 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Building Materials 													C 			C 	C(1) 	
  Garden Supply/Nursery 												C 	P 			C 		
  Hardware Store 													P 		C 	C 	C(1) 	
  Camera and Photographic Supply Store 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Cigar and other Tobacco Products Store 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	17.12.225 
  Clothing & Accessory Stores 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Computer and Home Electronic Stores 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Florist 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Food and Beverage Stores 	
  Bakery (Retail) 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Convenience Store 						C 						C 	C 		C 			
  Delicatessen 						P 						C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Grocery Store/Supermarket 												C 	P 		P 			
  Specialty Food Stores 						P 						C 	P 		P 		C(1) 	
 Furniture and Home Furnishing Stores 													P 			C 		
 Boutique Home Furnishing Stores 													P 		C 	C 	C(1) 	
  General Merchandise Stores 	
  Department 													C 		C 			
  Discount/Variety Store (new products at a discounted price) 													P 		P 	P 		
  Warehouse Retail Stores 													C 			C 		17.12.240 
 Guns and Ammunition Store 													C 					
 Hobby, Toy and Game Store 						P 						C 	P 					
 Home Appliance Store 						P 							P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
 Jewelry Store 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
 Luggage and Leather Goods 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
 Music and Video Stores 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
 Office Supply, Stationery & Gift Stores 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
 Pet and Pet Supply Store 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
 Second Hand Stores 												C 	P 			P 		
 Shoe Store 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
 Shopping Center 						C 							C 		C 			17.12.195 
 Sporting Goods Stores 						P 						C 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
 Studios for dance, art, music, photography, etc. 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Business Services 	
  Advertising Agency 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Data Processing Services 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Equipment Sales and rental 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Photocopying & Duplicating Services 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Photography Studio 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Financial Services 	
  Automated Teller Machine (ATM) 						A/P 						A/P 	A/P 	A/P 	A/P 	A/P 	C(1) 	
  Banks, Credit Unions and other Depository Institutions 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
  Check Cashing and Loan Services 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
  Other Financial Services 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Personal Services 	
  Barber Shop & Beauty /Nail Salon 						P 						P 	P 		P 	P 		
  Cemeteries and Mausoleums 												C 	C 					17.12.060 
  Day Spa 						P 						P 	P 		P 	P 		17.12.155 
  Dry Cleaner 						P 						P 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Fortunetelling 													P 					17.12.095 
  Laundry - Commercial 												P 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Massage Therapy 						P 						P 	P 		P 	P 		17.12.155 
  Pet Grooming - Commercial 						P 						P 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Public Self Storage 													C 					
  Tailor 						P 						P 	P 		P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Travel Agency 						P 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C(1) 	
  Repair Services 	
  Computer, Home Electronics, and Small Home Appliances (toaster, iron, etc.) 						P 						P 	P 		P 	P 		
  Furniture Re-upholstery 													P 		P 	P 		
  Jewelry and Watches/Clocks 						P 						P 	P 		P 	P 		
  Lawnmower and Garden Equipment 												P 	P 		P 	P 		
  Locksmith/Key Shop 						P 						P 	P 		P 	P 		
  Shoe Repair 						P 						P 	P 		P 	P 		
  Transportation 
  Heliport as accessory use to emergency services facility 													A/C 					17.02.020 (B)(10) 
INDUSTRIAL 
  Light Industrial 	
  Recycling Collection Facilities 																		
  - Small (to 500 Sq. Ft.) 													C 		C 	C 		17.12.160 
  - Large (500+ Sq. Ft.) 																C 		17.12.160 
  - Reverse vending machine 												A 	A 		A 	A 		17.12.160 
 Research & Development Services/Laboratories 														A/C(4) 		P 		
  Manufacturing 	
  Apparel Manufacturing 																C 		
  Chemical Manufacturing 																C 		
  Computer and Home Electronic Manufacturing 																C 		
  Electrical Equipment Manufacturing 																C 		
  Food Manufacturing 																C 		
  Metal fabrication, machine and welding shops 																C 		
  Furniture and Related Products Manufacturing 																C 		
  Lumber and Wood Product Manufacturing 																C 		
  Machinery Manufacturing 	
  Construction Machinery Manufacturing 																C 		
  Industrial Machinery Manufacturing 																C 		
  Ventilation, Heating, Air-conditioning and Commercial Refrigeration Equipment Manufacturing 																C 		
 Miscellaneous Manufacturing (jewelry, office supplies, sporting goods, toys, etc.) 																C 		
 Paper Product Manufacturing 																C 		
 Printing and Related Activities 																C 		
  Warehousing/Storage 																		
  Warehousing, accessory 																C 		
 Wholesaling and Distribution 																C 		
TEMPORARY AND INTERIM USES 
 Construction Yards 												T 	T 					17.62.030 
 Location Filming 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	Chapter 5.04 & 17.62.030 
 Parking Lot Sales 												T 	T 		T 	T 	T 	17.62.030 
 Seasonal Sale (Christmas Tree, Pumpkin, and similar Lots) 												T 	T 		T 	T 		17.62.030 
 Special Events (Street/Craft fair and Farmers Markets ) 													T 		T 	T 	T 	17.62.030 
 Storage - Temporary Portable Containers 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 				T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	17.62.030 
 Temporary Structures (i.e. subdivision sales office, etc.) 	T 		T 	T 	T 	T 		T 										17.62.030 
 
Notes: 
(1)  Use allowed only where in compliance with the Old Town Calabasas Master Plan and Design Guidelines. 
(2)  Use falls under Residential Care Homes and is subject to applicable standards and conditions. 
(3)  Allowable only in conjunction with a primary allowable use (e.g., convenience store, grocery store, restaurant, etc.). 
(4)  Research and Development Services/Laboratories are allowed in the CO zone only as accessory to an office use, as follows: 
(a)  The use shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total building(s) floor area; and 
(b)  The use shall be limited to properties having a building(s) with a minimum floor area of 100,000 square feet. 
(5)  Allowed as a "Permitted" use only within the Commercial Auto Retailer (CAR) Overlay Zone and subject to the requirements in Section 17.18.035. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2010-272, § 4, 4-28-2010; Ord. No. 2012-296, § 1(Exh. A), 4-25-2012; Ord. No. 2012-303, § 1(Exh. A), 11-28-2012; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-14; Ord. No. 2014-311, § 3(Exh. A) , 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2015-330, § 2(Exh. A) , 1-13-2016; Ord. No. 2016-343 , § 3, 1-11-2017; Ord. No. 2017-351 , § 3(Att. 1), 3-22-2017; Ord. No. 2018-364 , § 4, 4-25-2018; Ord. No. 2018-366 , § 1, 6-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-369 , § 3, 1-23-2019; Ord. No. 2019-373 , § 2, 2-27-2019)  
17.11.020 - Determination of similar use. 
A.  Allowable Uses of Land. When a use is not specifically listed in this development code, the use is prohibited except as follows: 
1.  It is recognized that every conceivable use cannot be identified by this development code, and new uses will develop over time. This section authorizes the director to fit an unidentified use within a use or uses identified in this development code; provided, the unidentified use has similar impacts, functions and characteristics. The director may make a "determination of similar use" decision, which is a determination that the proposed use is similar to one or more other permitted and listed uses. In making a determination of similar use the director shall identify the similar use or uses and shall consider the following: 
a.  Volume and type of sales (retail or wholesale), the size and type of items sold and nature of inventory on the premises; 
b.  Processing, assembly, manufacturing, warehousing, shipping and distribution done on the premises; and dangerous, hazardous, toxic or explosive materials used in processing; 
c.  Nature and location of storage and display of merchandise (enclosed, open, inside or outside the principal building), and the predominant types of items stored (business vehicles, work-in-progress, inventory and merchandise, construction materials, scrap and junk); 
d.  Type, size and nature of buildings and structures supporting the use; 
e.  Number and density of employees and customers, business hours and employment shifts; 
f.  Transportation requirements by volume, type and characteristics of traffic generation to and from the site and trip purposes; 
g.  Parking characteristics, turnover and generation, and the ratio of the number of spaces required per unit area or activity; and 
h.  Amount and nature of potential nuisances generated on the premises (smoke, noise, odor, glare, vibration, radiation, fumes, etc.). 
2.  In making a determination of similar use, the director may attach reasonable conditions and restrictions to the use, in addition to those required by this development code, which will ensure that the use: 
a.  Will not endanger the public health, safety or general welfare; 
b.  Will not injure the value of adjoining or abutting property; 
c.  Will not result in any significant environmental impacts; 
d.  Will be in harmony with the area in which it is located; and 
e.  Will be in conformity with the General Plan and/or applicable specific plan(s). 
B.  Application. An application for a determination of similar use shall be submitted on forms provided by the department. The application shall include a description of use for which a determination is requested, together with the reasons why the applicant believes the determination is justified. 
C.  Findings. In making a determination of similar use, the director shall clearly establish the following findings of fact: 
1.  The proposed use meets the intent of, and is consistent with, the goals, objectives and policies of the adopted General Plan; 
2.  The proposed use meets the stated purpose and general intent of the zoning district in which the use is proposed to be located; 
3.  The proposed use will not adversely impact the public health, safety or general welfare of the city's residents; and 
4.  The proposed use shares characteristics common with, and is not of a greater intensity, density or generate more environmental impact than, those listed in the zoning district in which it is to be located. 
D.  Applicable Standards and Permit Requirements. When the director determines that a proposed, but unlisted, use is similar to a permitted use, the proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the permitted use in determining where it is allowed, what permits are required and what other standards and requirements of this development code apply. Each determination of similar use shall be site specific and shall not apply district wide. 
No person shall allow, conduct, establish or maintain an unlisted use in any district in the city, or start site work on a related proposed development prior to obtaining a written determination of similar use from the director and complying with all other requirements in this development code. 
No person shall allow, conduct, establish or maintain a use in violation of conditions that accompany a determination of similar use. No person shall expand or intensity a use that has been approved pursuant to a determination of similar use without prior written approval from the director. 
E.  Commission Review or Determination. The director shall report determinations of similar land uses in compliance with this subsection to the commission at the next regularly scheduled commission meeting, either orally or as part of the commission's consent calendar. The director may forward questions about equivalent uses directly to the commission for a determination at a public meeting. 
F.  Appeals. The decision of the director is appealable to the commission and decisions by the commission are appealable to the council pursuant to Chapter 17.74. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.12 - STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES 
 
17.12.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
A.  Purpose. This chapter provides site planning and development standards for land uses that are allowed by Article II of this development code in multiple zoning districts (e.g., in residential and commercial districts) and set forth herein. 
B.  Applicability. Land uses covered by this chapter shall conform with the provisions applicable to the specific use, in addition to other applicable provisions of this development code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.020 - Accessory retail uses. 
Retail sales and services, including restaurants, pharmacies, and the sale of retail merchandise, are allowed accessory to a primary use where authorized by Article II, and as follows: 
A.  General Standard. Accessory retail uses are permitted, provided there will be no external evidence of any commercial activity other than the primary use of the site (e.g., no signs, or windows with merchandise visible from adjoining streets), nor access to any space used for the accessory retail use other than from within the structure. 
B.  Commercial Zoning Districts. Restaurants and retail sales as an accessory use are permitted in the commercial zoning districts ancillary and accessory to offices, hospitals and other medical facilities; pharmacies are permitted accessory to hospitals and other medical facilities. 
C.  Residential and Special Purpose Zoning Districts. Social or recreational establishments may engage in retail sales for members or guests members only. 
D.  Director Review and Approval Required. All accessory retail uses shall be subject to review and approval by the director as provided in Section 17.620.090. In order to approve an accessory retail use, the director shall first find that there will be no harm to adjacent existing or potential residential development due to excessive traffic, noise or other adverse effects generated by the accessory use. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.025 - Adult entertainment businesses. 
Where allowed by Chapter 17.11 in the CR zoning district, any bookstore, hotel or motel, motion picture arcade or theater, cabaret, model studio, video rental store, or other business or establishment that is operated as an adult business as defined by Article VII of this development code shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable regulations to prevent the adverse effects of the concentration or clustering of adult entertainment establishments. These uses have serious objectionable characteristics when several are located in close proximity to each other, and tend to create a skid row atmosphere, resulting in a detrimental effect upon the adjacent area. Regulation of the locations of these uses is necessary to ensure that their adverse effects will not contribute to the blight or downgrading of neighborhoods or deter or interfere with the development and operation of other businesses that are needed and desirable in the city. 
B.  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to uses operated as adult entertainment establishments in addition to all other applicable requirements of this development code. 
C.  Permit. A conditional use permit shall be required for adult entertainment businesses. The applicant shall be required to obtain an adult entertainment license from Los Angeles County as a condition of approval. 
D.  Location Requirements. Adult entertainment establishments shall be located no closer than: 
1.  Five hundred (500) feet to any property in a residential zoning district, CMU zoning district where a commercial project incorporates residential uses, child day care facility, school attended by minor children, park, playground, public building or other public facility likely to be used by minors; or 
2.  One thousand (1,000) feet to any other adult entertainment establishment. 
Distance between properties shall be measured from the property line of one property to that of another utilizing a straight line method. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.030 - Agricultural uses. 
A.  The purpose of this section is to establish development standards for agricultural uses. This section is to be carried out by allowing only such development that can be achieved without adverse effects to the environment and which will be subordinate to the resources of the particular site and area. 
B.  An agricultural management plan shall be required for the proposed establishment of new or enlarged existing agricultural uses and any proposed development that relates thereto. The agricultural management plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
1.  Location map; 
a.  Scale site plan showing the entire parcel with topography, and proposed and existing structures (including accessory and agricultural structures and residences), roads, fences, contours, wells, water lines, septic tanks and leach lines; 
b.  Scale plan showing the entire parcel, and existing land uses, areas presently under and proposed for cultivation, areas of vegetation type, location of any perennial or intermittent streams, areas to be cleared, and areas to be graded for the development; 
c.  Soils analysis, discussing soils conditions (including erosion potential and erosion control) and their relationship to appropriate agricultural management on the parcel; 
d.  Water availability and demand, and the relationship to appropriate agricultural management on the parcel; 
e.  Description and analysis of existing and proposed agricultural activities on the parcel, including types of crops and acres under cultivation, geographic distribution of crops over the parcel, rotation of crops, and related agricultural activities, including agricultural goods and equipment storage, packing and processing; 
f.  Erosion control plan; 
g.  Hydrologic report; 
h.  Pesticide usage and storage report; and 
i.  Description of recommended agricultural management techniques for the parcel and proposed development or development alternatives to (1) reduce erosion, (2) conserve water, (3) protect water quality, and (4) minimize impacts to plant and animal habitats. The use of biodiversity to control pests and diseases and enhance wildlife habitat is strongly encouraged. 
C.  The director may require that the plan be revised to include additional information or assessment as deemed necessary. A third party review by a biologist or similar expert may also be required at the applicant's expense. 
D.  No clearing of land for agricultural uses shall take place within one hundred (100) feet from the outer edge of the riparian vegetation canopy of perennial or intermittent streams. Where riparian vegetation is not present, the one hundred-foot buffer shall be measured from the outer edge of the bank of the subject stream. As used herein, "clearing of land" means the removal of existing vegetation. No clearing of land or other activities shall occur within the protected zone of an oak tree, nor shall any oak tree be cut, trimmed, altered or removed, except with prior and complete compliance with all oak tree regulations in this development code. 
E.  To minimize the risks associated with project development in areas characterized by steep slopes, high erosion potential, unstable soils, combustible vegetation and other sensitive environmental resource areas, no construction improvement, grading, earthmoving activity or vegetation removal associated with the development or use of land shall take place on slopes of thirty (30) percent or greater. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.035 - Alcohol sales. 
A.  Standards for All Sales Operations. Proposed alcoholic beverage sales operations (both for on premises and off premise consumption) shall be allowed pursuant to Table 2-2 - Land Use Table of Chapter 17.11 and shall be designed, constructed and operated to: 
1.  Avoid contributing to an overconcentration of businesses that sell alcoholic beverages in an area where additional ones would be undesirable, with enhanced consideration given to the area's function and character, problems of crime and loitering, and traffic problems and capacity; 
2.  Avoid any adverse impact on religious facilities, schools, parks, or playgrounds located within six hundred (600) feet as measured to the nearest property line; and 
3.  Avoid disruption of residents' sleep between ten p.m. and eight a.m. through design, operational conditions, and limitations on operating hours when the use is proposed in close proximity to residential uses. 
B.  Alcohol Sales in Conjunction with a Restaurant Use. Where allowed by Section 17.11.010 (F), alcoholic beverages may be sold for on-premises consumption at an establishment where the primary use is a restaurant, provided that a conditional use permit is obtained for the establishment and sales are conducted in compliance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the State of California. 
C.  Bar and Cocktail Lounge. Where allowed by Section 17.11.010 (F), alcoholic beverages may be sold for on-premises consumption at a bar/cocktail lounge provided that a conditional use permit is obtained for the establishment and sales are conducted in compliance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the State of California. 
D.  Drug Stores, Grocery Stores, and Convenience Markets. Less than fifty (50) percent of the sales floor shall be devoted to the display of alcoholic beverages in drug stores, grocery stores, and convenience markets. The alcoholic beverage display in convenience markets that are part of a service station, where gasoline and other motor vehicle related products are sold, is limited to twenty-five (25) percent of the sales floor. 
E.  Retail Sale of Wine or Beer Only. Pursuant to Section 17.11.010 (F), a specialty store, where the predominant product sold is wine or beer (up to one hundred (100) percent of the sales floor), may be permitted through approval of a conditional use permit for the establishment and must be conducted in compliance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the State of California. 
F.  Wine Tasting. The sampling or tasting of wine offered for retail sale may be allowed if approved as an element of the conditional use permit for the establishment and conducted in compliance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the State of California. Sampling shall be under the supervision of the license holder or duly authorized agent and be conducted in a manner which will confine the consumption on the premises solely for the purpose of providing samples in connection with anticipated sales. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.040 - Animal raising and keeping. 
The keeping of animals in the residential, HM and OS zoning districts is allowed as follows: 
A.  Farm Animals. In compliance with the following requirements, small farm animals are allowed as an accessory use with a zoning clearance (Section 17.62.090) and large farm animals are allowed as an accessory use with a minor use permit (Section 17.62.060). Both small and large farm animals are allowed only on parcels of one acre or larger. Additional animals may be allowed with conditional use permit approval (Section 17.62.060). 
1.  Large Animals. The keeping of large animals including cows, goats, horses, pigs, and sheep, for grazing, breeding, or boarding, shall be limited to a density of one animal for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of site area. The keeping of large animals as defined in this section shall be classified as a hobby farm. Hobby farms (17.12.110) shall be allowed as an accessory use with minor use permit approval (Section 17.62.040) and a primary use with conditional use permit approval (Section 17.62.060). 
2.  Small Animals. Up to three small animals (including birds, chickens, ducks, and rabbits) are permitted accessory to each dwelling. Accessory dwelling units shall not be considered separate dwelling units for the purpose of this section. Up to four small animals are permitted on lots of at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and one additional small animal is permitted for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. Small animals are allowed on a lot provided that: 
a.  The animals are solely for the domestic use of the residents of the site and are not kept for commercial purposes; and 
b.  The keeping of the animals is not injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the neighborhood and does not create offensive noise or odor as determined by the director. 
3.  Animal Enclosures. No animal enclosure (e.g., barn, coop, corral, paddock, stable, etc.) shall be located on any site less than one acre in area. No animal enclosure shall be located closer than: 
a.  Fifty (50) feet from any habitable structure on a site under different ownership from the site of the animal enclosure; 
b.  Thirty (30) feet from any street right-of-way; 
c.  Twenty (20) feet from side or rear property lines; and 
d.  One hundred (100) feet from the outer edge of the riparian vegetation canopy of a perennial or intermittent stream. Where riparian vegetation is not present, the one hundred-foot buffer shall be measured from the outer edge of the bank of the subject stream. 
B.  Household Pets. The keeping of dogs and cats in zoning districts where residences are allowed shall be limited to three adult dogs and three adult cats and one litter of each species on any single parcel. Other smaller household pets are not limited by this development code. 
C.  Exotic Animals. The keeping of non-domesticated animals that are carnivorous, poisonous, otherwise dangerous to humans and household pets, or not native to North America, and/or commonly displayed or found in zoos are not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.050 - Antennas/personal wireless telecommunication facilities. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to regulate the installation, operation and maintenance of personal wireless telecommunication facilities in the city. The city recognizes that the unrestricted installation of redundant personal wireless telecommunication facilities is contrary to the city's efforts to stabilize economic and social aspects of neighborhood environments, and to promote safety and aesthetic considerations, family environments and a basic residential character within the city. 
In enacting this section, the city intends to: 
1.  Promote and protect the health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of residents and business in accord with Section 17.01.020 of this title; 
2.  Protect the benefits derived by the city, its residents and the general public from access to personal wireless services while minimizing, to the greatest extent feasible, the redundancy of personal wireless telecommunication facilities in the city; 
3.  Balance these goals, by permitting the installation and operation of personal wireless telecommunication facilities where they are needed, while reducing, to the greatest extent feasible, adverse economic, safety and/or aesthetic impacts on nearby properties and the community as a whole; and 
4.  Comply with applicable law, including the 1996 Telecommunications Act. 
5.  In enacting this section, it is the intent of the city council that no additional rights or entitlements be conferred to construct or maintain personal wireless telecommunication facilities, other than those rights or entitlements existing under applicable state or federal law. 
6.  This section is intended to regulate all uses of wireless communications in the city, including uses by public utilities, to the extent of the city's power to regulate the use of land under federal and state law, but not to exceed the scope of the city's authority. 
B.  Applicability. This section applies to all proposed antennas and modifications and related personal wireless telecommunication facilities, as follows: 
1.  All applications for approval of the installation of new personal wireless telecommunication facilities in the city. 
2.  All facilities for which applications were received by the department but not approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codifying this section, shall comply with the regulations and guidelines of this section. 
3.  All facilities for which applications were approved by the city on or prior to the effective date of the ordinance codifying this section shall be exempt from this section, except for the requirements of subsection (C)(6)(c). 
4.  All facilities for which applications have been previously approved, but are now or hereafter modified. 
C.  Standards For All Personal Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. All personal wireless telecommunication facilities, including a small wireless facility, shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Permit Requirements. No new personal wireless telecommunication facility shall be installed until the applicant or operator has obtained: (i) a wireless facility permit or small wireless facility permit (as specified in Section 17.12.050(G)), (ii) an encroachment permit from the public works department (if applicable), and (iii) any other permit required by applicable provisions of this Code including a building permit, an electrical permit, or an oak tree permit. All modifications to an existing personal wireless telecommunications facility that do not meet the findings of approval required for a wireless facility minor modification permit as specified in Section 17.12.050(F) or a small wireless facility permit as specified in Section 17.12.050(G), shall be subject to the approval of (i) a wireless facility permit, in addition to (ii) an encroachment permit from the public works department (if applicable), and (iii) any other permit required by applicable provisions of this Code including a building permit, an electrical permit, or an oak tree permit. Applications for wireless facility permits shall be first reviewed by the development review committee. All applications for wireless facility permits will be scheduled for a public hearing before the commission in accordance with Section 17.12.050(L) and Chapter 17.78 of this Code. The commission shall determine if a proposed project for which a wireless facility permit is required is the least intrusive means to close a significant gap in the applicant's service coverage. All modifications to an existing personal wireless facility that meet the conditions of approval required for a wireless facility minor modification permit as specified in Section 17.12.050(F) shall be subject to the approval of (i) a wireless facility minor modification permit, in addition to (ii) an encroachment permit from the public works department (if applicable), and (iii) any other permit required by applicable provisions of this Code including a building permit, an electrical permit, or an oak tree permit. 
2.  Wireless Facility Permit Application Content. Applications for the approval of wireless facility permits for personal wireless telecommunication facilities shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, an application fee and the following information, in addition to all other information required by the city for a wireless facility permit application pursuant to Chapter 17.60 of this title: 
a.  Written documentation demonstrating a good faith effort to locate the proposed facility in the least intrusive location in accordance with the location requirements of Section 17.12.050(C)(3); 
b.  Scaled visual simulations showing the proposed facility superimposed on photographs of the site and surroundings, to assist the commission in assessing the visual impacts of the proposed facility and its compliance with the provisions of this section; 
c.  For new facilities, the plans shall include (in plan view and elevations) a scaled depiction of the maximum permitted increase as authorized by Section 6409(a) of the 2012 Middle Class Tax Relief Act, using the proposed project as a baseline; 
d.  A master plan which identifies the location of the proposed facility in relation to all existing and potential facilities maintained by the operator intended to serve the city. The master plan shall reflect all potential locations that are reasonably anticipated for construction within two (2) years of submittal of the application. Applicants may not file, and the city shall not accept, applications that are not consistent with the master plan for a period of two (2) years from approval of a wireless facility permit unless: (i) the applicant demonstrates materially changed conditions which could not have been reasonably anticipated to justify the need for a personal wireless telecommunication facility site not shown on a master plan submitted to the city within the prior two (2) years or (ii) the applicant establishes before the commission that a new personal wireless telecommunication facility is necessary to close a significant gap in the applicant's personal communication service, and the proposed new installation is the least intrusive means to do so; 
e.  A siting analysis which identifies a minimum of five (5) other feasible locations within or without the city which could serve the area intended to be served by the facility, unless the applicant provides compelling technical reasons for providing fewer than the minimum. The alternative site analysis shall include at least one (1) collocation site; 
f.  An affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that the proposed installation will be FCC compliant, in that it will not cause members of the general public to be exposed to RF levels that exceed the MPE levels deemed safe by the FCC. A copy of the fully completed FCC form "A Local Government Official's Guide to Transmitting Antenna RF Emission Safety: Rules, Procedures, and Practical Guidance: Appendix A" titled "Optional Checklist for Determination Of Whether a Facility is Categorically Excluded" for each frequency band of RF emissions to be transmitted from the proposed facility upon the approval of the application. All planned radio frequency emissions on all frequency bands must be shown on the Appendix A form(s) attached to the application. All planned radio frequency emissions are to be entered on each Appendix A form only in wattage units of "effective radiated power"; 
g.  A statement signed by a person with legal authority to bind the applicant attesting under penalty of perjury to the accuracy of the information provided in the application; 
h.  A noise study, prepared by a qualified engineer, for the proposed personal wireless telecommunication facility including, but not limited to, equipment, such as air conditioning units and back-up generators; 
i.  A written statement of the applicant's willingness to allow other carriers to collocate on the proposed personal wireless telecommunication facility wherever technically and economically feasible and aesthetically desirable; and 
j.  Such other information as the director shall establish from time to time pursuant to the Permit Streamlining Act, Government Code Section 65940, or to respond to changes in law or technology. 
k.  An application for a personal wireless telecommunication facility in a public right-of-way for which the applicant claims entitlement under California Public Utilities Code Section 7901 shall be accompanied by evidence satisfactory to the director that the applicant is a telephone corporation or has written authorization to act as an agent for a telephone corporation. 
3.  New Wireless Facility Preferred Zones and Locations. When doing so would not conflict with one (1) of the standards set forth in this subsection (C) or with federal law, personal wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the approval of a wireless facility permit or small wireless facility permit shall be located in the most appropriate location as described in this subsection (3), which range from the most appropriate to the least appropriate. Nothing in this section shall detract from the requirements of Section 17.12.050(C)(4)(a) below. 
i.  Collocation on an existing facility in a commercial zone; 
ii.  Collocation on an existing structure or utility pole in a commercial zone; 
iii.  Location on a new structure in a commercial zone; 
iv.  Collocation on an existing facility in a public facility or recreation zone; 
v.  Location on an existing structure or utility pole in a public facility or recreation zone; 
vi.  Location on a new structure in a public facility or recreation zone. 
No new facility may be placed in a less appropriate area unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the commission or director that no more appropriate location can feasibly serve the area the facility is intended to serve provided, however, that the commission or director may authorize a facility to be established in a less appropriate location if doing so is necessary to prevent substantial aesthetic impacts. 
4.  Design and Development Standards. Personal wireless telecommunication facilities, including small wireless facilities, shall be designed and maintained as follows: 
a.  All new personal wireless telecommunication facilities that do not meet the findings of approval for a small wireless facility permit as specified in Section 17.12.050(G), shall be set back at least one thousand (1,000) feet from schools, dwelling units and parks, as measured from the closest point of the personal wireless telecommunication facility (including accessory equipment) to the applicable property line, unless an applicant establishes that a lesser setback is necessary to close a significant gap in the applicant's personal communication service, and the proposed personal wireless telecommunication facility is the least intrusive means to do so. An applicant who seeks to increase the height of an existing personal wireless telecommunication facility, or of its antennas, located less than one thousand (1,000) feet from a school, dwelling unit or park and who is subject to the approval of a wireless facility permit for the proposed height increase must establish that such increase is necessary to close a significant gap in the applicant's personal communication service, and the proposed increase is the least intrusive means to do so. 
b.  Facilities shall have subdued colors and non-reflective materials which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and structures. 
c.  Unless otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, all equipment not located on a roof shall be underground; any equipment that is not undergrounded shall be screened from adjacent uses to the maximum extent feasible. 
d.  The facilities shall not bear any signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning or other signage required by law or expressly permitted by the city. 
e.  At no time shall equipment noise (including air conditioning units) from any facility exceed the applicable noise limit established in Section 17.20.160 of this title at the facility's property line; provided, however, that for any such facility located within five hundred (500) feet of any property zoned open space or residential, or improved with a residential use, such equipment noise shall at no time be audible at the property line of any open space or residentially zoned, or residentially improved property. 
f.  If the majority of radio frequency coverage from the proposed facility is outside the city limits, the applicant must, in addition to the other requirements of this section, prove that the applicant is unable to locate the proposed new facility within the locale or locales that will receive the majority of the coverage from the proposed personal wireless telecommunications facility, and that no other feasible location for the facility exists outside of the city limits. That an applicant for a wireless facility permit in the city has been denied a wireless facility, antenna, or wireless coverage in another jurisdiction shall not be considered evidence or proof that the applicant is unable to locate in another jurisdiction. 
5.  Independent Expert Review. The city shall retain one (1) or more independent, qualified consultants to review any application for a wireless facility permit for a personal wireless telecommunication facility, for a wireless facility minor modification permit, or for a small wireless facility permit. The review is intended to be a review of technical aspects of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility or modification of an existing wireless telecommunication facility and shall address any or all of the following, as applicable: 
a.  For wireless facility permits, whether the proposed wireless telecommunication facility is necessary to close a significant gap in coverage and is the least intrusive means of doing so; 
b.  The accuracy and completeness of submissions; 
c.  For wireless facility permits, technical demonstration of the unavailability of alternative sites or configurations and/or coverage analysis; 
d.  The applicability of analysis techniques and methodologies; 
e.  For wireless facility permits, the viability of alternative sites and alternative designs; and 
f.  For wireless facility permits, an analysis of the potential expansion that would be considered an eligible facility request under Section 6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012; and 
g.  Any other specific technical issues designated by the city. 
The cost of the review shall be paid by the applicant through a deposit estimated to cover the cost of the independent review, as established by the director or city council. 
6.  Conditions of Approval. All facilities subject to a wireless facility permit approved under this section shall be subject to the following conditions, as applicable: 
a.  Facilities shall not bear any signs or advertising devices other than legally required certification, warning, or other required seals or signage, or as expressly authorized by the city. 
b.  Abandonment: 
1)  Personal wireless telecommunication facilities that are no longer operating shall be removed at the expense of the applicant, operator, or owner no later than ninety (90) days after the discontinuation of use. Disuse for ninety (90) days or more shall also constitute a voluntary termination by the applicant of any land use entitlement under this Code or any predecessor to this Code. 
2)  The director shall send a written notice of the determination of non-operation to the owner and operator of the personal wireless telecommunication facility, who shall be entitled to a hearing on that determination before the city manager or a hearing officer appointed by the city manager, provided that written request for such a hearing is received by the city clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the notice. Any such hearing shall be conducted pursuant to Chapter 17.74 of this title, although no further appeal from the decision of the city manager may be had other than pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. Upon a final decision of the city manager or the running of the time for a request for a hearing without such a request, the operator shall have ninety (90) days to remove the facility. 
3)  The operator of a facility shall notify the city in writing of its intent to abandon a permitted site. Removal shall comply with applicable health and safety regulations. Upon completion of abandonment, the site shall be restored to its original condition at the expense of the applicant, operator, or owner. 
4)  All facilities not removed within the required ninety-day period shall be in violation of this Code. In the event the city removes a disused facility upon the failure of the applicant, operator, or owner to timely do so, the applicant, operator, and owner shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of all costs and expenses the city incurs for the removal of the facilities, including legal fees and costs. 
c.  The applicant, operator of a facility and property owner (when applicable) shall defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elective and appointed boards, commissions, officers, agents, consultants and employees harmless from and against all demands, liabilities, costs (including attorneys' fees), or damages arising from the city's review and/or approval of the design, construction, operation, location, inspection or maintenance of the facility. 
d.  Removal of Unsafe Facilities. If, at any time after ten (10) years of the issuance of a building permit or encroachment permit, or any shorter period permitted by Government Code Section 65964(b), any personal wireless telecommunication facility becomes incompatible with public health, safety or welfare, the applicant or operator of the facility shall, upon notice from the city and at the applicant's or operator's own expense, remove that facility. Written notice of a determination pursuant to this paragraph shall be sent to the owner and operator of the personal wireless telecommunication facility, who shall be entitled to a hearing on that determination before the city manager or a hearing officer appointed by the city manager, provided that written request for such a hearing is received by the city clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the notice. Any such hearing shall be conducted pursuant to Chapter 17.74 of this title, although no further appeal from the decision of the city manager may be had other than pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. Upon a final decision of the city manager or the running of the time for a request for a hearing without such a request, the operator shall have ninety (90) days to remove the facility. 
e.  The owner or operator of any personal wireless telecommunication facility approved by a wireless facility permit under this subsection (C) of this Section 17.12.050 shall cooperate with the director to: (1) verify that the facility design conforms with relevant building and safety requirements; and (2) verify that the facility complies with the requirements of Section 17.12.050 of the Calabasas Municipal Code. 
f.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit or encroachment permit, the applicant or owner/operator of the facility shall pay for and provide a performance bond, which shall be in effect until all facilities are fully and completely removed and the site reasonably returned to its original condition. The purpose of this bond is to cover the applicant's or owner/operator of the facility's obligation under the conditions of approval and the City of Calabasas Municipal Code. The bond coverage shall include, but not be limited to, removal of the facility, maintenance obligations and landscaping obligations. (The amount of the performance bond shall be set by the director on a case-specific basis and in an amount reasonably related to the obligations required under this Code and all conditions of approval, and shall be specified in the conditions of approval.) 
g.  An applicant shall not transfer a permit to any person or entity prior to completion of construction of a personal wireless telecommunication facility. 
h.  The applicant shall submit as-built photographs of the facility within ninety (90) days of installation of the facility, detailing the installed equipment. 
i.  A personal wireless telecommunication facility approved by a wireless facility permit may operate only until the tenth anniversary of the date it is first placed into service, unless that sunset date is extended by additional term(s) not to exceed ten (10) years pursuant to a wireless facility permit issued under this Section 17.12.050. There is no limit to the number of times the sunset date for a facility may be extended. 
7.  Wireless Facility Permit Findings. In addition to the findings required in Section 17.62.060 of this Code, no wireless facility permit for a proposed personal wireless telecommunication facility may be approved unless the commission or council finds as follows: 
a.  The applicant has demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that the facility is necessary to close a significant gap in the operator's service coverage. Such evidence shall include in-kind call testing of existing facilities within the area the applicant contends is a significant gap in coverage to be served by the facility. 
b.  The applicant has demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that no feasible alternate site exists that would close a significant gap in the operator's service coverage which alternative site is a more appropriate location for the facility under the standards of Section 17.12.050 of the Calabasas Municipal Code. 
c.  The facility satisfies the location requirements of Section 17.12.050(C)(3) of the Calabasas Municipal Code. 
8.  Violations. The city may revoke a wireless facility permit for any personal wireless telecommunication facility in violation of this section in accordance with Section 17.80.070 of this Code. The remedies specified in this section shall be cumulative and the city may resort to any other remedy available at law or in equity and resort to any one (1) remedy shall not cause an election precluding the use of any other remedy with respect to a violation. 
D.  Standards for Personal Wireless Telecommunication Facilities Not Located Within a Public Right-of-Way. In addition to the requirements in section (C) above, all personal wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the approval of a wireless facility permit or small wireless facility permit, and not located within a public right-of-way, shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Location Requirements. To minimize aesthetic and visual impacts on the community, personal wireless telecommunication facilities shall be located according to the following standards: 
a.  General Requirements. 
i.  A freestanding telecommunications tower or monopole shall be set back a distance of at least one hundred fifty (150) percent of the height of the tower from the nearest property line of any residentially zoned or occupied lot. 
b.  Restricted Locations. Personal wireless telecommunication facilities located in any of the following locations must be designed as a stealth facility: 
i.  Within any nonresidential zone on a site that contains a legally established residential use; 
ii.  Within the Old Town overlay zone; 
iii.  On any property that is designated historic by the city council; 
iv.  Within the area subject to the Calabasas Park Centre Master Plan; 
v.  Within a scenic corridor designated by the city; and 
vi.  Within a historic district designated by the city. 
c.  Prohibited Locations. No personal wireless telecommunication facility shall be established on any ridgeline or within any residential or open space zoning district described in subparagraphs (i), (ii) and (iii) herein. 
i.  Ridgelines. No personal wireless telecommunication facility shall be placed on or near a ridgeline. 
ii.  Residential Zones. No facility shall be located within a residential zone, including areas set aside for open space, parks or playgrounds. 
iii.  Open Space. No facility shall be located within an open space zone or park. 
Any wireless telecommunication facility proposed for a site within any open space zone shall not be deemed a "public utility" as that term is otherwise defined and understood in the Calabasas Municipal Code regarding development in such open space zones. 
d.  Guidelines for Placement on Structures. Antennas shall be mounted on structures utilizing the methods described below. If an antenna cannot be mounted as set forth in subsection (i), it may be mounted in accordance with subsection (ii). If an antenna cannot be mounted as set forth in either subsection (i) or (ii), it may be mounted in accordance with subsection (iii): 
i.  A stealth facility mounted on an existing structure or collocated on an existing tower; 
ii.  A stealth facility mounted on an existing steel or concrete pole, including a light standard; or 
iii.  A stealth facility mounted on a new steel, wood or concrete pole. 
2.  Design and Development Standards. Personal wireless telecommunication facilities shall be designed and maintained as follows: 
a.  Building-mounted facilities shall be designed and constructed to be fully screened in a manner that is compatible in color, texture and type of material with the architecture of the building on which the facility is mounted. 
b.  All accessory equipment associated with the operation of a personal wireless telecommunication facility shall be located within a building enclosure or underground vault that complies with the development standards of the zoning district in which the accessory equipment is located. 
3.  City Council Approval Required. Notwithstanding Section 17.12.050(D)(1)(c), personal wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the approval of a wireless facility permit may be permitted in a prohibited location only if the applicant obtains a wireless facility permit from the city council following a public hearing and recommendation from the communication and technology commission, and provides technically sufficient and conclusive proof that the proposed location is necessary for provision of wireless services to substantial areas of the city, that it is necessary to close a significant gap in the operator's coverage and that there are no less intrusive alternative means to close that significant gap. 
E.  Standards for Personal Wireless Telecommunication Facilities Located Within Public Rights-of-Way. In addition to the requirements in section (C) above, all personal wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the approval of a wireless facility permit or small wireless facility permit, and located within public rights-of-way, shall comply with the following requirements to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law: 
1.  Construction. These standards are intended to exert the maximum authority available to the city in the regulation of personal wireless telecommunication facilities under applicable state and federal law but not to exceed that authority. Accordingly, this section shall be construed and applied in light of any such limits on the city's authority. The purpose of this subsection (E) is to regulate personal wireless telecommunications facilities proposed for sites within public rights-of-way consistently with the rights conferred on telephone corporations by Public Utilities Code §§ 7901 and 7901.1 and to address the aesthetic and safety concerns unique to such proposals due to their highly visible location in rights-of-way that must be safely shared with pedestrians, motorists and other utility infrastructure. 
2.  Application Content. Applications for the approval of personal wireless telecommunication facilities within the public right-of-way shall include the following information, in addition to all other information required by subsection (C)(2) above: 
a.  The applicant shall provide certification that the facility is for the use of a telephone corporation or state the basis for its claimed right to enter the right-of-way. If the applicant has a certificate of public convenience and necessity (CPCN) issued by the California Public Utilities Commission, it shall provide a copy of its CPCN. 
3.  Guidelines. All personal wireless telecommunication facilities, including small wireless facilities as specified in Section 17.12.050(G), located within a public right-of-way shall be designed as follows: 
a.  Ground-mounted equipment shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping, walls, or other decorative feature, as approved by the commission. 
b.  Facilities located within a designated scenic corridor or historic districts shall be stealth facilities, with all equipment, excluding required electrical meter cabinets, located underground or pole-mounted. Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened as approved by the commission. 
c.  Personal wireless telecommunication facilities not located within a scenic corridor or historic district designated by the city shall be designed to place all equipment underground, excluding required electrical meters. However, if such facilities cannot be placed underground, ground-mounted equipment may be installed up to a height of five (5) feet and to a footprint of fifteen (15) square feet. 
d.  Pole-mounted equipment shall not exceed six (6) cubic feet. 
e.  Pole-mounted antennas shall adhere to the following guidelines: 
i.  If an antenna cannot be mounted as set forth in subsection (a), it may be mounted in accordance with subsection (b). If an antenna cannot be mounted as set forth in either subsection (a) or (b), it may be mounted in accordance with subsection (c): 
(a)  A stealth facility mounted on an existing, collocated monopole or tower; 
(b)  A stealth facility mounted on an existing steel or concrete pole, including a light standard; or 
(c)  A stealth facility mounted on a new steel, wood or concrete pole but only if an operator shows that it cannot otherwise close a significant gap in its service coverage, and that the proposal is the least intrusive means of doing so. 
ii.  All installations shall be engineered to withstand high wind loads. An evaluation of high wind load capacity shall include the impact of an additional antenna installation on a pole with existing antennae. 
iii.  The maximum height of any antenna shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches above the height of a pole or tower other than a streetlight pole, nor six (6) feet above the height of a streetlight pole, nor shall any portion of the antenna or equipment mounted on a pole be less than sixteen (16) feet above any drivable road surface. All installations on utility poles shall fully comply with California Public Utilities Commission General Order 95 as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
iv.  A freestanding telecommunications tower or monopole shall be set back a distance of at least one hundred fifty (150) percent of the height of the tower to the nearest structure designed for occupancy. 
v.  No antenna associated with a small wireless facility as specified in Section 17.12.050(G) shall exceed three (3) cubic feet in volume including all physically-integrated mounting apparatus attached thereto, including without limitation connectors, mounting brackets, antenna element aiming equipment, and other antenna equipment. 
f.  Equipment shall be located so as not to cause: (i) any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, (ii) inconvenience to the public's use of a public right-of-way, or (iii) safety hazards to pedestrians and motorists. In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or landscaping be less than eighteen (18) inches from the front of the curb. 
g.  Facilities shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of another wireless facility on the same side of a street. 
h.  No facility shall be built so as to cause the right-of-way in which the facility is located to fail to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
4.  Findings. In addition to the findings required in subsection (C)(7) above, no proposed personal wireless telecommunication facility subject to the approval of a wireless facility permit or small wireless facility permit within a public right-of-way may be approved unless the following findings are made: 
a.  The proposed facility has been designed to blend with the surrounding environment, with minimal visual impact on the public right-of-way. 
b.  The proposed facility will not have an adverse impact on the use of the public right-of-way, including but not limited to, the safe movement and visibility of vehicles and pedestrians. 
5.  Conditions of Approval. In addition to compliance with the guidelines outlined in paragraph (3) of this subsection and the conditions of approval listed in subsection (C)(6) above, all facilities approved under this subsection (E) shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Any approved wireless communication facility within a public right-of-way shall be subject to such conditions, changes or limitations as are from time to time deemed necessary by the public works director to: (i) protect the public health, safety, and welfare; (ii) prevent interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic; or (iii) prevent damage to a public right-of-way or any property adjacent to it. Before the director of public works imposes conditions, changes, or limitations pursuant to this paragraph, he or she shall notify the applicant or operator, in writing, by mail to the address set forth in the application or such other address as may be on file with the city. Such change, new limitation or condition shall be effective twenty-four (24) hours after deposit of the notice in the United States mail. 
b.  The applicant or operator of the personal wireless telecommunication facility shall not move, alter, temporarily relocate, change, or interfere with any existing public facility, structure or improvement without the prior written consent of the city, and the owner in the circumstance where the owner is not the city. No structure, improvement or facility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate a personal wireless telecommunication facility unless: (i) the city determines, in its sole and absolute discretion, that such movement will not adversely affect the city or surrounding residents or businesses, and (ii) the applicant or operator pays all costs and expenses related to the relocation of the city's facilities. Every applicant or operator of any personal wireless telecommunication facility shall assume full liability for damage or injury caused to any property or person by his, her, or its facility. Before commencement of any work pursuant to an encroachment permit issued for any personal wireless telecommunication facility within a public right-of-way, an applicant shall provide the city with documentation establishing to the city's satisfaction that the applicant has the legal right to use or interfere with any other facilities within the public right-of-way to be affected by applicant's facilities. 
c.  Should any utility company offer electrical service to a wireless facility which service does not require the use of a meter cabinet, the applicant or operator of the facility shall at its cost remove the meter cabinet and any foundation thereof and restore the area to its prior condition. 
F.  Requirements for Personal Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Subject to a Wireless Facility Minor Modification Permit. This subsection governs applications for certain modifications to existing personal wireless telecommunications facilities, as specified. 
1.  Purpose. Subsection (F) is intended to comply with the city's obligations under federal law, which provides that the city "may not deny, and shall approve any eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing wireless tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station." (47 U.S.C. § 1455, subd. (a)(1), adopted as Section 6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub.L No. 112-96, 126 Stat. 156.) This subsection creates a process for the city to review an application for a wireless facility minor modification permit submitted by an applicant who asserts that a proposed collocation or modification to an existing personal wireless telecommunications facility is covered by this federal law and to determine whether the city must approve the proposed collocation or modification. The city's review of these applications is structured to comply with the requirements of Title 47, United States Code, section 1455 and the Federal Communications Commission's regulations implementing this federal law, adopted on December 17, 2014 and codified at 47 C.F.R. §§ 1.40001, et seq. Consistent with section 17.12.050(A)(6), this subsection is intended to promote the public's health, safety, and welfare, and shall be interpreted consistent with the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Pub.L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56), Title 47, United States Code, section 1455, and applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations and court decisions considering these laws and regulations. 
2.  Applicability. An applicant seeking approval of a collocation or modification to an existing personal wireless telecommunication facility which the applicant contends is within the protection of Title 47, United States Code, section 1455 shall apply for the following at the same time: (i) a wireless facility minor modification permit, in addition to (ii) an encroachment permit from the public works department (if the required by applicable provisions of this Code), and (iii) any other permit required by applicable provisions of this Code including a building permit, an electrical permit, or an oak tree permit. No collocation or modification to an existing personal wireless telecommunication facility shall be installed unless the applicant or operator has obtained either a wireless facility minor modification permit or a wireless facility permit. 
3.  Application Content. All applications for a wireless facility minor modification permit must include the following items. 
a.  Application Form. The city's standard application form, available on the city's website or from the community development department, as may be amended. 
b.  Application Fee. An application fee as established by the council by resolution under the authority of Section 17.60.040. 
c.  Independent Consultant Deposit. An independent consultant fee deposit, if required by the council by resolution under the authority of Section 17.60.040, to reimburse the city for its costs to retain an independent consultant to review the technical aspects of the application. 
d.  Site and Construction Plans. Complete and accurate plans, drawn to scale, signed, and sealed by a California-licensed engineer, land surveyor, and/or architect, which include the following items. 
(1)  A site plan and elevation drawings for the facility as existing and as proposed with all height and width measurements explicitly stated. 
(2)  A depiction, with height and width measurements explicitly stated, of all existing and proposed transmission equipment. 
(3)  A depiction of all existing and proposed utility runs and points of contact. 
(4)  A depiction of the leased or licensed area of the site with all rights-of-way and easements for access and utilities labeled in plan view. 
(5)  For proposed collocations or modifications to wireless towers, the plans must include scaled plan views and all four (4) elevations that depict the physical dimensions of the wireless tower as it existed on February 22, 2012, or as approved if constructed after February 22, 2012. For proposed collocations or modifications to base stations, the plans must include scaled plan views and all four (4) elevations that depict the physical dimensions of the base station as it existed on February 22, 2012, or as approved if constructed after February 22, 2012. 
(6)  A demolition plan. 
e.  Visual Simulations. A visual analysis that includes (i) scaled visual simulations that show unobstructed before-and-after construction daytime and clear-weather views from at least four (4) angles, together with a map that shows the location of each view angle; (ii) a color and finished material palate for proposed screening materials; and (iii) a photograph of a completed facility of the same design and in roughly the same setting as the proposed wireless communication facility. 
f.  Statement Asserting that Section 6409 Applies. A written statement asserting that the proposed collocation or modification is an "eligible facilities request" and does not result in a substantial change in the physical dimensions of the facility's wireless tower or base station, as defined by Section 6409, Title 47, United States Code, section 1455, and justifying that assertion. The written statement shall identify and discuss each required finding for approval of a wireless facility minor modification permit under Section 17.12.050(F)(5) and explain the facts that justify the request for the director to make each finding. 
g.  Prior Permits. True and correct copies of all previously issued permits, including all required conditions of approval and a certification by the applicant that the proposal will not violate any previous permit or conditions of approval or why any violated permit or conditions does not prevent approval under Title 47, United States Code, section 1455 and the Federal Communications Commission's regulations implementing this federal law. 
h.  Affirmation of Radio Frequency Standards Compliance. An affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that the proposed installation will be FCC compliant, because it will not cause members of the general public to be exposed to RF levels that exceed the MPE levels deemed safe by the FCC. A copy of the fully completed FCC form "A Local Government Official's Guide to Transmitting Antenna RF Emission Safety: Rules, Procedures, and Practical Guidance: Appendix A" titled "Optional Checklist for Determination Of Whether a Facility is Categorically Excluded" for each frequency band of RF emissions to be transmitted from the proposed facility upon the approval of the application. All planned radio frequency emissions on all frequency bands must be shown on the Appendix A form(s) attached to the application. All planned radio frequency emissions are to be entered on each Appendix A form only in wattage units of "effective radiated power". 
i.  Structural Analysis. A structural analysis, prepared, signed, and sealed by a California-licensed engineer that assesses whether the proposed wireless telecommunications facility complies with all applicable building codes. 
j.  Noise Study. A noise study, prepared, signed, and sealed by a California-licensed engineer, for the proposed personal wireless telecommunication facility including, but not limited to, equipment, such as air conditioning units and back-up generators; or a written statement signed and sealed by a California-licensed engineer indicating that the proposed modification(s) will not alter the existing noise levels or operational equipment which creates noise. 
k.  Other Permits. An application for a wireless facility minor modification permit shall include all permit applications with all required application materials for each and every separate permit required by the city for the proposed collocation or modification to an existing personal wireless telecommunications facility, including a building permit, an encroachment permit (if applicable), and an electrical permit (if applicable). 
l.  Other Information. Such other information as the city may require, as specified in publically available materials, including information required as stated on the city's website. 
4.  Application Review, Notice, and Hearing. Each application for a wireless facility minor modification permit shall be reviewed by the director at a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accord with Chapter 17.78, except that written notice shall be mailed to the record owner of each property within three hundred (300) feet of the site of the proposed modification. Under federal law, the city must approve or deny an application for a wireless facility minor modification permit, together with any other city permits required for a proposed wireless facility modification, within sixty (60) days after the applicant submits the application for a wireless facility minor modification permit, unless tolled due to issuance of any notice of incomplete filing or by mutual agreement between the city and the applicant. Under federal law, failure to act on a wireless facility minor modification permit application within the sixty-day review period, excluding tolling period, will result in the permit being deemed granted by operation of law. 
5.  Findings Required for Approval by Director at Public Hearing. 
a.  The director must approve an application for a wireless facility minor modification permit for a collocation or modification to an existing wireless tower on private property only if each of the following findings can be made: 
(1)  The applicant proposes a collocation or modification to a structure constructed and maintained with all necessary permits in good standing for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any Federal Communications Commission licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities; 
(2)  The proposed collocation or modification does not increase the height of the existing personal wireless telecommunication facility above its lowest height on February 22, 2012, or as approved if constructed after February 22, 2012, by more than ten (10) percent or by the height of one (1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater; 
(3)  The proposed collocation or modification does not increase the width of the facility by more than twenty (20) feet or the width of the tower at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; 
(4)  The proposed collocation or modification does not involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four (4); 
(5)  The proposed collocation or modification does not involve any excavation outside the lease or license area of the facility, including any access or utility easements; 
(6)  The proposed collocation or modification does not defeat any existing concealment elements of the support structure; and 
(7)  The proposed collocation or modification does not violate any prior conditions of approval, except as may be preempted by Section 6409, Title 47, United States Code, section 1455, subdivision (a). 
b.  The director must approve an application for a wireless facility minor modification permit for a collocation or modification to an existing base station on private property only if each of the following findings can be made: 
(1)  The applicant proposes a collocation or modification to a structure constructed and maintained with all necessary permits in good standing, whether built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any Federal Communications Commission licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities or not, that currently supports existing wireless transmission equipment; 
(2)  The proposed collocation or modification does not increase the height of the existing personal wireless telecommunication facility above its lowest height on February 22, 2012, or as approved if constructed after February 22, 2012, by more than ten (10) percent or ten (10) feet, whichever is greater; 
(3)  The proposed collocation or modification does not increase the width of the facility by more than six (6) feet; 
(4)  The proposed collocation or modification does not involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four (4); 
(5)  The proposed collocation or modification does not involve any excavation outside the lease or license area of the facility, including any access and utility easements; 
(6)  The proposed collocation or modification does not defeat any existing concealment elements of the support structure; and 
(7)  The proposed collocation or modification does not violate any prior conditions of approval, except as may be preempted by Section 6409, Title 47, United States Code, section 1455, subdivision (a). 
c.  The director must approve an application for a wireless facility minor modification permit for a collocation or modification to an existing wireless tower or base station in the public right-of-way only if each of the following findings can be made: 
(1)  The applicant proposes a collocation or modification to either (i) a structure constructed and maintained with all necessary permits in good standing for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any Federal Communications Commission licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities or (ii) a structure constructed and maintained with all necessary permits in good standing, whether built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any Federal Communications Commission licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities or not, that currently supports existing wireless transmission equipment; 
(2)  The proposed collocation or modification does not increase the height of the existing personal wireless telecommunication facility above its lowest height on February 22, 2012, or as approved if constructed after February 22, 2012, by more than ten (10) percent or ten (10) feet, whichever is greater; 
(3)  The proposed collocation or modification does not increase the width of the facility by more than six (6) feet; 
(4)  The proposed collocation or modification does not involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four (4); 
(5)  The proposed collocation or modification does not involve either (i) the installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground, if none already exist, or (ii) the installation of ground equipment cabinets that are more than ten (10) percent larger in height or overall volume than any existing ground cabinets; 
(6)  The proposed collocation or modification does not involve any excavation outside the area in proximity to the existing ground-mounted equipment in the public right-of-way; 
(7)  The proposed collocation or modification does not defeat any existing concealment elements of the existing structure; and 
(8)  The proposed collocation or modification does not violate any prior conditions of approval, except as may be preempted by Section 6409, Title 47, United States Code, section 1455, subdivision (a). 
6.  Conditions of Approval for Wireless Facility Minor Modification Permits. In addition to any other conditions of approval permitted under federal and state law and this Code that the director deems appropriate or required under this Code, all wireless facility minor modification permits under this subsection, whether approved by the director or deemed granted by the operation of law, shall include the following conditions of approval: 
a.  No Automatic Renewal. The grant or approval of a wireless facility minor modification permit shall not renew or extend the underlying permit term. 
b.  Compliance with Previous Approvals. The grant or approval of a wireless facility minor modification permit shall be subject to the conditions of approval of the underlying permit, except as may be preempted by Section 6409, subdivision (a). 
c.  As-Built Plans. The applicant shall submit to the director an as-built set of plans and photographs depicting the entire personal wireless telecommunications facility as modified, including all transmission equipment and all utilities, within ninety (90) days after the completion of construction. 
d.  Indemnification. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the applicant and any successors and assigns, shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless city, its employees, agents and officials, from and against any liability, claims, suits, actions, arbitration proceedings, regulatory proceedings, losses, expenses or costs of any kind, whether actual, alleged or threatened, including, but not limited to, actual attorney fees, litigation expenses and court costs of any kind without restriction or limitation, incurred in relation to, as a consequence of, arising out of or in any way attributable to, actually, allegedly or impliedly, in whole or in part, related to the wireless facility minor modification permit and the issuance of any permit or entitlement in connection therewith. The applicant shall pay such obligations as they are incurred by city, its employees, agents and officials, and in the event of any claim or lawsuit, shall submit a deposit in such amount as the city reasonably determines necessary to protect the city from exposure to fees, costs or liability with respect to such claim or lawsuit. 
e.  Compliance with Applicable Laws. The applicant shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Code, any permit issued under this Code, and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws. Any failure by the city to enforce compliance with any applicable laws shall not relieve any applicant of its obligations under this Code, any permit issued under this Code, or all other applicable laws and regulations. 
f.  Compliance with Approved Plans. The proposed project shall be built in compliance with the approved plans on file with the planning division. 
g.  Violations. The facility shall be developed, maintained, and operated in full compliance with the conditions of the wireless facility minor modification permit, any other applicable permit, and any law, statute, ordinance or other regulation applicable to any development or activity on the site. Failure of the applicant to cease any development or activity not in full compliance shall be a violation of these conditions. Any violation of this Code, the conditions of approval for the wireless facility minor modification permit, or any other law, statute, ordinance or other regulation applicable to any development or activity on the site may result in the revocation of this permit. The remedies specified in this section shall be cumulative and the city may resort to any other remedy available at law or in equity and resort to any one (1) remedy shall not cause an election precluding the use of any other remedy with respect to a violation. 
h.  In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction invalidates or limits, in part or in whole, Title 47, United States Code, section 1455, such that such statute would not mandate approval for the collocation or modification granted or deemed granted under a wireless facility minor modification permit, such permit shall automatically expire twelve (12) months from the date of that opinion. 
i.  The grant, deemed-grant or acceptance of wireless facility minor modification permit shall not waive and shall not be construed or deemed to waive the city's standing in a court of competent jurisdiction to challenge Title 47, United States Code, section 1455 or any wireless facility minor modification permit issued pursuant to Title 47, United States Code, section 1455 or this Code. 
7.  Wireless Facility Minor Modification Permit Denial Without Prejudice. 
a.  Grounds for denial without prejudice. The director may deny without prejudice an application for a wireless facility minor modification permit in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The director cannot make all findings required for approval of a wireless facility minor modification permit; 
(2)  The proposed collocation or modification would cause the violation of an objective, generally applicable law protecting public health or safety; 
(3)  The proposed collocation or modification involves the removal and replacement of the facility's entire supporting structure; or 
(4)  The proposed collocation modification does not qualify for mandatory approval under Title 47, United States Code, section 1455, as may be amended or superseded, and as may be interpreted by any order of the Federal Communications Commission or any court of competent jurisdiction. 
b.  Procedures For Denial Without Prejudice. All wireless facility minor modification permit application denials shall be in writing and shall include (i) the decision date; (ii) a statement that the city denies the permit without prejudice; (iii) a short and plain statement of the basis for the denial; and (iv) that the applicant may submit the same or substantially the same permit application in the future. 
c.  Submittal After Denial Without Prejudice. After the director denies a wireless facility minor modification permit application, and subject to the generally applicable permit application submittal provisions in this chapter, an applicant shall be allowed to: 
(1)  Submit a new wireless facility minor modification permit application for the same or substantially the same proposed collocation or modification; 
(2)  Submit a new wireless facility permit application for the same or substantially the same proposed collocation or modification; or 
(3)  Submit an appeal of the director's decision. 
d.  Costs to Review a Denied Permit. The city shall be entitled to recover the reasonable costs for its review of any wireless facility minor modification permit application. In the event that the director denies a wireless facility minor modification permit application, the city shall return any unused deposit fees within sixty (60) days after a written request from the applicant. An applicant shall not be allowed to submit a wireless facility permit application or submit a wireless facility minor modification permit application for the same or substantially the same proposed modification unless all costs for the previously denied permit application are paid in full. 
G.  Requirements for Small Wireless Facility Permits. This subsection governs applications for small wireless facilities permits. 
1.  Purpose. Subsection (G) is intended to comply with the city's obligations under 47 C.F.R. section 1.6001 et seq., which implements 47 U.S.C. sections 332(c)(7) and 1455. This subsection creates a process for the city to review an application for a small wireless facility permit submitted by an applicant who asserts that a proposed collocation of a small wireless facility using an existing structure or the deployment of a small wireless facility using a new structure, and the modifications of such small wireless facilities, is covered by federal law and to determine whether the city must approve the proposed collocation or deployment. 
2.  Applicability. An applicant seeking approval of a collocation to an existing structure or a deployment to a new structure which the applicant contends is within the protection of Title 47, United States Code, section 1455 shall apply for the following at the same time: (i) a small wireless facility permit, (ii) an encroachment permit from the public works department (if required by applicable provisions of this Code), and (iii) any other permit required by applicable provisions of this Code including a building permit, an electrical permit, or an oak tree permit. 
3.  Application Content. All applications for a small wireless facility permit must include the following items: 
a.  Application Forms. The city's standard application form, available on the city's website or from the community development department, as may be amended by the community development director. 
b.  Application Fee. An application fee as established by the council by resolution under the authority of Section 17.60.040. 
c.  Independent Consultant Deposit. An independent consultant fee deposit, if required by the council by resolution under the authority of Section 17.60.040, to reimburse the city for its costs to retain an independent consultant to review the technical aspects of the application. 
d.  Site and Construction Plans. Complete and accurate plans, drawn to scale, signed, and sealed by a California-licensed engineer, land surveyor, and/or architect, which include the following items. 
i.  A site plan and elevation drawings for the facility as existing and as proposed with all height, depth, and width measurements explicitly stated. 
ii.  A depiction, with height, depth, and width measurements explicitly stated, of all existing and proposed transmission equipment. 
iii.  A depiction of all existing and proposed utility runs and points of contact. 
iv.  A depiction of the leased or licensed area of the site with all rights-of-way and easements for access and utilities labeled in plan view. 
v.  All four (4) elevations that depict the physical dimensions of the wireless tower or support structure and all transmission equipment, antennas and attachments. 
vi.  A demolition plan. 
e.  Visual Simulations. A visual analysis that includes (i) scaled visual simulations that show unobstructed before-and-after construction daytime and clear-weather views from at least four (4) angles, together with a map that shows the location of each view angle; (ii) a color and finished material palate for proposed screening materials; and (iii) a photograph of a completed facility of the same design and in roughly the same setting as the proposed wireless communication facility. 
f.  Statement Asserting That 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6001 Et Seq. Applies. A written statement asserting that the proposed collocation or deployment qualifies as a "small wireless facility" as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. section 1.6002. 
g.  Prior Permits. True and correct copies of all previously issued permits, including all required conditions of approval and a certification by the applicant that the proposal will not violate any previous permit or conditions of approval or why any violated permit or conditions does not prevent approval under Title 47, United States Code, section 1455 and the Federal Communications Commission's regulation implementing this federal law. 
h.  Affirmation of Radio Frequency Standards Compliance. An affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that the proposed installation will be FCC compliant, because it will not cause members of the general public to be exposed to RF levels that exceed the MPE levels deemed safe by the FCC. A copy of the fully completed FCC form "A Local Government Official's Guide to Transmitting Antenna RF Emission Safety: Rules, Procedures, and Practical Guidance: Appendix A" titled "Optional Checklist for Determination of Whether a Facility is Categorically Excluded" for each frequency band of RF emissions to be transmitted from the proposed facility upon the approval of the application. All planned radio frequency emissions on all frequency bands must be shown on the Appendix A form(s) attached to the application. All planned radio frequency emissions are to be entered on each Appendix A form only in wattage units of "effective radiated power". 
i.  Structural Analysis. A structural analysis, prepared, signed, and sealed by a California-licensed engineer that assesses whether the proposed small wireless facility complies with all applicable building codes. 
j.  Noise Study. A noise study or written statement, prepared by a qualified engineer, for the proposed personal wireless telecommunication facility including, but not limited to, equipment, such as air conditioning units and back-up generators. The noise study shall assess compliance with Section 17.12.050(C)(4)(e). 
k.  Site Survey. For any small wireless facility proposed to be located within the public right-of-way, the applicant shall submit a survey prepared, signed and stamped by a California licensed or registered engineer or surveyor. The survey shall identify and depict all existing boundaries, encroachments and other structures with two hundred fifty (250) feet from the proposed project site, which includes without limitation all: (i) traffic lanes; (ii) all private properties and property lines; (iii) above and below grade utilities and related structures and encroachments; (iv) fire hydrants, roadside call boxes and other public safety infrastructure; (v) streetlights, decorative poles, traffic signals and permanent signage; (vi) sidewalks, driveways, parkways, curbs, gutters and storm drains; (vii) benches, trash cans, mailboxes, kiosks, and other street furniture; and (viii) existing trees, oak trees, planters and other landscaping features. 
l.  Other Permits. An application for a small wireless facility permit shall include all permit applications with all required application materials for each and every separate permit required by the city for the proposed collocation or deployment, including a building permit, an encroachment permit (if applicable) and an electrical permit (if applicable). 
4.  Application Review. Each application for a new or modified small wireless facility permit shall be reviewed by the director. The city must approve or deny an application for a small wireless facility permit, together with any other city permits required for a proposed small wireless facility, within sixty (60) days after the applicant submits an application to collocate a small wireless facility using an existing structure, and within ninety (90) days after the applicant submits an application to deploy a small wireless facility using a new structure. At the time an application is deemed complete, the director shall provide written notice to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the site of a proposed small wireless facility. 
Applicants may submit up to five (5) individual applications for a small wireless facility permit in a batch; provided, however, that small wireless facilities in a batch must be proposed with substantially the same equipment in the same configuration on the same support structure type. Each application in a batch must meet all the requirements for a complete application, which includes without limitation the application fee for each application in the batch. If any application in a batch is incomplete, the entire batch shall be deemed incomplete. If any application is withdrawn or deemed withdrawn from a batch, the entire batch shall be deemed withdrawn. If any application in a batch fails to meet the required findings for approval, the entire batch shall be denied. 
5.  Tolling Period. Unless a written agreement between the applicant and the city provides otherwise, the application is tolled when the city notifies the applicant within ten (10) days of the applicant's submission of the application that the application is materially incomplete and identifies the missing documents or information. The shot clock may again be tolled if the city provides notice within ten (10) days of the application's resubmittal that it is materially incomplete and identifies the missing documents or information. For an application to deploy small wireless facilities, if the city notifies the applicant on or before the tenth day after submission that the application is materially incomplete, and identifies the missing documents or information and the rule or regulation creating the obligation to submit such documents or information, the shot clock date calculation will restart at zero on the date the applicant submits a completed application. 
6.  Standards Governing Approval by Director. 
a.  The director shall approve or deny an application to collocate a small wireless facility using an existing structure by evaluating the following standards: 
i.  The existing structure was constructed and maintained with all necessary permits in good standing. 
ii.  The existing structure is fifty (50) feet or less in height, including any antennas, or the existing structure is no more than ten (10) percent taller than other adjacent structures. 
iii.  Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment, is no more than three (3) cubic feet in volume. 
iv.  All other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-existing associated equipment serving the facility, is no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume. 
v.  The small wireless facilities do not extend the existing structure on which they are located to a height of more than fifty (50) feet or by more than ten (10) percent, whichever is greater. 
vi.  The small wireless facility does not require an antenna structure registration under part 47 C.F.R. section 17.1 et seq. 
vii.  The small wireless facility is not located on Tribal lands, as defined under 36 C.F.R. section 800.16(x). 
viii.  The proposed collocation is consistent with the wireless facility permit preferred zones and locations requirement of section 17.12.050(C)(3). 
ix.  The proposed collocation is consistent with the design and development standards of subsection 17.12.050(C)(4), except that subsections 17.12.050(C)(4)(a) and (f) do not apply. 
x.  The proposed collocation is consistent with the independent expert review provisions of subsection 17.12.050(C)(5). 
xi.  The proposed collocation is consistent with the conditions of approval provisions of subsection 17.12.050(C)(6). 
xii.  For collocations not located within the public right-of-way, the proposed collocation shall be consistent with the standards of subsection 17.12.050(D). 
xiii.  For collocation located within the public right-of-way, the proposed collocation shall be consistent with subsection 17.12.050(E), except that subsections 17.12.050(E)(3)(e)(i.)(c) and 17.12.050(E)(3)(g) do not apply. 
xiv.  The proposed collocation would be in the most preferred location and configuration within two hundred fifty (250) feet from the proposed site in any direction or the applicant has demonstrated with clear and convincing evidence in the written record that any more-preferred location or configuration within two hundred fifty (250) feet would be technically infeasible, applying the preference standards of this section. 
xv.  The proposed collocation is designed as a stealth facility, to the maximum feasible extent. 
b.  The director may approve an application for a small wireless facility permit only if each of the following findings can be made: 
i.  The proposed project meets the definition for a "small wireless facility" as defined by the FCC; 
ii.  The proposed project would be in the most preferred location as identified in Section 17.12.050(C)(3), within two hundred fifty (250) feet from the proposed site in any direction, or the applicant has demonstrated with clear and convincing evidence that any more preferred location(s) within two hundred fifty (250) feet would be technically infeasible; 
iii.  The proposed project complies with the standards for a small wireless facility as specified in Section 17.12.050(G)(6). 
iv.  For proposed project not located within the public right-of-way, the proposed project complies with subsection 17.12.050(D). 
v.  For proposed projects located within the public right-of-way, the proposed project complies with subsection 17.12.050(E), except that subsections 17.12.050(E)(3)(e)(i.)(c) and 17.12.050(E)(3)(g), do not apply. 
vi.  The proposed collocation is designed as a stealth facility, to the maximum feasible extent. 
7.  Conditions of Approval for Small Wireless Facility Permits. In addition to any other conditions of approval permitted under federal and state law and this Code that the director deems appropriate or required under this Code, all small wireless facility permits under this subsection shall include the following conditions of approval: 
a.  No Automatic Renewal. The grant or approval of a small wireless facility permit shall not renew or extend the underlying permit term. 
b.  Compliance with Previous Approvals. The grant or approval of a small wireless facility permit shall be subject to the conditions of approval of the underlying permit. 
c.  As-Built Plans. The applicant shall submit to the director an as-built set of plans and photographs depicting the entire small wireless facility as modified, including all transmission equipment and all utilities, within ninety (90) days after the completion of construction. 
d.  Indemnification. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the applicant and any successors and assigns, shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless [the] city, its employees, agents and officials, from and against any liability, claims, suits, actions, arbitration proceedings, regulatory proceedings, losses, expenses or costs of any kind, whether actual, alleged or threatened, including, but not limited to, actual attorney fees, litigation expenses and court costs of any kind without restriction or limitation, incurred in relation to, as a consequence of, arising out of or in any way attributable to, actually, allegedly or impliedly, in whole or in part, related to the small wireless facility permit and the issuance of any permit or entitlement in connection therewith. The applicant shall pay such obligations as they are incurred by [the] city, its employees, agents and officials, and in the event of any claim or lawsuit, shall submit a deposit in such amount as the city reasonably determines necessary to protect the city from exposure to fees, costs or liability with respect to such claim or lawsuit. 
e.  Compliance with applicable laws. The applicant shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Code, any permit issued under this Code, and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws. Any failure by the city to enforce compliance with any applicable laws shall not relieve any applicant of its obligations under this Code, any permit issued under this Code, or all other applicable laws and regulations. 
f.  Compliance with approved plans. The proposed project shall be built in compliance with the approved plans on file with the planning division. 
g.  Violations. The small wireless facility shall be developed, maintained, and operated in full compliance with the conditions of the small wireless facility permit, any other applicable permit, and any law, statute, ordinance or other regulation applicable to any development or activity on the site. Failure of the applicant to cease any development or activity not in full compliance shall be a violation of these conditions. Any violation of this Code, the conditions of approval for the small wireless facility permit, or any other law, statute, ordinance or other regulation applicable to any development or activity on the site may result in the revocation of this permit. The remedies specified in this section shall be cumulative and the city may resort to any other remedy available at law or in equity and resort to any one (1) remedy shall not cause an election precluding the use of any other remedy with respect to a violation. 
h.  In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction invalidates or limits, in part or in whole, Title 47, United States Code, section 1455, such that such statute would not mandate approval for the collocation or deployment granted or deemed granted under a small wireless facility permit, such permit shall automatically expire twelve (12) months from the date of that opinion. 
i.  The grant, deemed-grant or acceptance of a small wireless facility permit shall not waive and shall not be construed or deemed to waive the city's standing in a court of competent jurisdiction to challenge Title 47, United States Code, section 1455 or any small wireless facility permit issued pursuant to Title 47, United States Code, section 1455 or this Code. 
8.  Small Wireless Facility Permit Denial Without Prejudice. 
a.  Grounds for denial without prejudice. The director may deny without prejudice an application for a small wireless facility permit in any of the following circumstances: 
i.  The director cannot make all findings required for approval of a small wireless facility permit; 
ii.  The proposed collocation or deployment would cause the violation of an objective, generally applicable law protecting public health or safety; 
iii.  The proposed collocation or deployment involves the removal and replacement of an existing facility's entire supporting structure; or 
iv.  The proposed collocation or deployment does not qualify for mandatory approval under Title 47, United States Code, section 1455, as may be amended or superseded, and as may be interpreted by any order of the Federal Communications Commission or any court of competent jurisdiction. 
b.  Procedures for denial without prejudice. All small wireless facility permit application denials shall be in writing and shall include (i) the decision date; (ii) a statement that the city denies the permit without prejudice; (iii) a short and plain statement of the basis for the denial; and (iv) that the applicant may submit the same or substantially the same permit application in the future. 
c.  Submittal after denial without prejudice. After the director denies a small wireless facility permit application, and subject to the generally applicable permit application submittal provisions in this chapter, an applicant shall be allowed to: 
i.  Submit a new small wireless facility permit application for the same or substantially the same proposed collocation or deployment; 
ii.  Submit a new small wireless facility permit application for the same or substantially the same proposed collocation or deployment; or 
iii.  Submit an appeal of the director's decision. 
d.  Costs to review a denied permit. The city shall be entitled to recover the reasonable costs for its review of any small wireless facility permit application. In the event that the director denies a small wireless facility permit application, the city shall return any unused deposit fees within sixty (60) days after a written request from the applicant. An applicant shall not be allowed to submit a small wireless facility permit application for the same or substantially the same proposed modification unless all costs for the previously denied permit application are paid in full. 
H.  Standards for Satellite Antennas. Satellite antennas, including portable units and dish antennas, shall be designed, installed and maintained in compliance with the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. Satellite antennas with diameters larger than one (1) meter in residential zones and two (2) meters in nonresidential zones shall also comply with the following requirements provided these provisions do not conflict with applicable state and federal regulations. 
1.  Permit Requirement. Zoning clearance shall be required for satellite antennas with diameters of one (1) meter or less; administrative plan review approval shall be required for antennas larger than one meter. A conditional use permit shall be required for antennas larger than one meter located within a designated scenic corridor. 
2.  Application—Plans. Plans for satellite antennas shall be submitted with applications for a building permit, and shall include a site plan and elevation drawings indicating the height, diameter, color, setbacks, foundation details, landscaping, and method of screening. The plans shall be subject to approval of the director. 
3.  Location. No satellite antenna shall be located within any required front-yard or street-side-yard setbacks in any zone. In addition, no portion of a satellite antenna shall extend beyond a property line. 
4.  Color. A satellite antenna and its supporting structure shall be painted a single, neutral, non-glossy color; such as an earth tone, gray, or black; and, to the extent possible, be compatible with the appearance and character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
5.  Wiring. All wiring shall be placed underground whenever possible. 
6.  Residential Zones. In any residential zone, satellite antennas shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.  Only ground-mounted satellite antennas shall be permitted. Ground-mounted antennas shall be located in the rear yard of any property to the extent technically possible; 
b.  Satellite antennas shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height; 
c.  Only one (1) satellite antenna may be permitted on any single-family residential site; 
d.  Only one (1) antenna shall be permitted per dwelling unit on any multiple family residential site; 
e.  A satellite antenna shall be separated from adjacent properties by at least a six- foot-high solid wall or fence or by trees or other plants of equal minimum height; 
f.  Any satellite antenna that is taller than an adjacent property-line fence shall be located away from the side or rear property line a distance equal to or greater than the height of the antenna; 
g.  The diameter of a satellite antenna shall not exceed two (2) meters. This provision may be modified by the director if the applicant provides a sufficient technical study prepared by a qualified engineer demonstrating to the director's satisfaction that strict compliance would result in no satellite reception; and 
h.  A satellite antenna shall be used for private, noncommercial purposes only. 
7.  Nonresidential Zones. In any nonresidential zone, satellite antennas may be roof- or ground-mounted and shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.  If roof-mounted, satellite antennas shall be screened from ground view by a parapet or other screening approved by the city. The minimum height and design of a parapet, wall, or other screening shall be subject to the approval of the director; 
b.  If ground-mounted, satellite antennas shall not be located between a structure and an adjacent street and shall be screened from public view and neighboring properties; 
c.  The location and height of satellite antennas shall comply with all requirements of the underlying zone; and 
d.  If the subject site abuts a residential zone, all antennas shall be set back a minimum distance from the property line equal to the height of the antenna, unless screened from view. 
I.  Standards for Amateur Radio Antennas. All amateur radio antennas shall be designed, constructed and maintained as follows: 
1.  The maximum height shall not exceed forty (40) feet, measured from finished grade; 
2.  Any boom or other active element or accessory structure shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in length; 
3.  Antennas may be roof- or ground-mounted; and 
4.  Antennas may not be located in any front-yard or side-yard setbacks; 
5.  These standards in this subsection (H) are subject to modification or waiver by the director on a case-by-case basis where required for the city to comply with FCC PRB-1 and California Government Code Section 65850.3 and where such modification or waiver is based on sufficient technical information provided in writing by the applicant at the request of the city. 
J.  Effects of Development on Antenna Reception. The city shall not be liable if development within the city after installation of an antenna impairs antenna reception, transmission, utility, or function to any degree. 
K.  Communications and Technology Commission as Planning Commission for Specified Purposes. For purposes of approvals required by this Section 17.12.050 and any other entitlement under this Code required only because the application seeks to construct or operate a personal wireless telecommunication facility (including, but not limited to, a scenic corridor permit, a variance, or an oak tree permit), "commission" means the communications and technology commission created pursuant to Chapter 2.38 of this Code, which is hereby constituted as a planning commission of the city for that purpose pursuant to Government Code Section 65100. As to any application that seeks approvals for both (i) new structures, or uses of existing structures or of land other than construction and operation of a personal wireless telecommunication facility and (ii) for the construction and operation of a personal wireless telecommunication facility, the communications and technology commission shall be the "commission" for purposes of approvals required only because the application seeks to construct and operate a personal wireless telecommunication facility. The planning commission created pursuant to Chapter 2.28 of this Code shall be the "commission" for all other entitlements sought by the application. In addition, the communications and technology commission shall be the "commission" for purposes of review of proposed amendments to this Section 17.12.050. 
L.  Private Enforcement. In addition to any other remedy available to the city under this Code, at law or in equity, violations of this Section 17.12.050 may be remedied as follows: 
1.  The city attorney or city prosecutor may bring a civil action to enforce this section and to obtain the remedies specified below or otherwise available in equity or at law. 
2.  Any person acting for the interests of himself, herself, or itself, or of its members, or of the general public (hereinafter "a private enforcer") may bring a civil action to enforce this section with the remedies specified below, if both the following requirements are met: 
a.  The action is commenced more than sixty (60) days after the private enforcer gives written notice of an alleged violation of this section to the city attorney and to the alleged violator. 
b.  No person acting on behalf of the city has commenced or is prosecuting an action regarding the violation(s) which was or were the subject of the notice on the date the private action is filed. 
3.  A private enforcer shall provide a copy of his, her, or its action to the city attorney within seven days of filing it. 
4.  Upon settlement of or entry of judgment in an action brought pursuant to paragraph (7) of this subsection (I), the private enforcer shall give the city attorney a notice of that settlement or judgment. No private enforcer may settle such an action unless the city attorney or the court determines the settlement to be reasonable in light of the purposes of this section. Any settlement in violation of this requirement shall be set aside upon motion of the city attorney or city prosecutor to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
5.  Upon proof of a violation of this section, the court shall award the following: 
a.  Appropriate injunctive relief and damages in the amount of either: 
i.  Upon proof, actual damages; 
ii.  With insufficient or no proof of damages, a minimum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation of this section (hereinafter "statutory damages"). Unless otherwise specified in this section, each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no private enforcer suing on behalf of the general public shall recover statutory damages based upon a violation of this section if a previous claim brought on behalf of the general public for statutory damages and based upon the same violation has been adjudicated, whether or not the private enforcer was a party to that earlier adjudication. 
b.  Restitution to the appropriate party or parties of gains obtained due to a violation of this section. 
c.  Exemplary damages, where it is proven by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant is guilty of oppression, fraud, malice, or a conscious disregard for public health and safety. 
d.  Attorney's fees and costs reasonably incurred by a successful party in prosecuting or defending an action. 
Any damages awarded in an action brought by the city attorney or city prosecutor shall be paid into the city's general fund, unless the court determines that they should be paid to a damaged third party. 
6.  Upon proof of at least one violation of this section, a private enforcer, the city prosecutor, city attorney, any peace officer or code enforcement official may obtain an injunction against further violations of this section or, as to small claims court actions, a judgment payable on condition that a further violation of this section occur within a time specified by the court. 
7.  Notwithstanding any legal or equitable bar, a private enforcer may bring an action to enforce this section solely on behalf of the general public. When a private enforcer does so, nothing about such an action shall act to preclude or bar the private enforcer from bringing a subsequent action on his, her, or its own behalf based upon the same facts. 
8.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a private enforcer from bringing an action to enforce this section in small claims court, provided the relief sought is within the jurisdiction of that court. 
M.  Additional Notice to Neighbors. After an application to allow the installation of a wireless facility subject to the approval of a wireless facility permit pursuant to subsections (C), (D) and (E) of this section is complete, the city shall endeavor to provide property owners at least thirty (30) days' prior notice of the initial public hearing on the matter as follows: 
1.  Written notice shall be mailed to the record owner of each property within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the proposed site. 
2.  Telephone notice via the city's reverse 911 service shall be given to owners or occupants of properties within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the proposed site. 
A public hearing may be set on less than thirty (30) days' notice if necessary to comply with applicable law, including but not limited the Federal Communications Commission Declaratory Ruling 09-99, WT docket number 08-165, released November 18, 2009, (the "Shot Clock" ruling) and Title 47, United States Code, section 1455 and the Federal Communications Commission's regulations implementing this section, adopted on December 17, 2014, and codified at 47 C.F.R. §§ 1.40001, et seq., as they now exist or may hereafter be amended. 
Failure of the city to provide notice pursuant to this subsection (L) shall not be grounds to challenge a determination provided that the notice otherwise required by law has been provided. 
N.  Definitions. In addition to the definitions provided in Chapter 17.90 of this title and in Chapter 1.08 of Title 1 of this Code, this Section 17.12.050 shall be construed in light of the following definitions: 
"Accessory equipment" means any equipment installed, mounted, operated or maintained in close proximity to a personal wireless telecommunication facility to provide power to the personal wireless telecommunication facility or to receive, transmit or store signals or information received by or sent from a personal wireless telecommunication facility. 
"Antenna structure" means any antenna, any structure designed specifically to support an antenna and/or any appurtenances mounted on such a structure or antenna. 
"Applicable law" means all applicable federal, state and local law, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and orders, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Applicant" includes any person or entity submitting an application to install a personal wireless telecommunication facility under this section and the persons within the scope of the term "applicant" as defined by Section 17.90.020 of this Code. 
"Base station" means the equipment and non-tower supporting structure at a fixed location that enables Federal Communications Commission licensed or authorized wireless telecommunications between user equipment and a communications network. 
"City" means the City of Calabasas and is further defined in Section 1.08.020 of this Code. 
"Collocation" means the mounting or installation of additional wireless transmission equipment at an existing wireless facility. 
"Commission" has the meaning set forth in paragraph (I) of this section. 
"dBA" is defined in Chapter 17.90 of this title. 
"Director" means the City of Calabasas Community Development Director or his or her designee. 
"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor to that agency. 
"In-kind call testing" means testing designed to measure the gap in coverage asserted by an applicant. If a claimed gap is for in-building coverage, then in-building call testing must be performed to establish the existence or absence of such a gap unless the applicant provides a sworn affidavit demonstrating good faith but unsuccessful attempts to secure access to buildings to conduct such testing and the circumstances that prevented the applicant from conducting such testing. Claimed gaps in service for "in-vehicle" or "open-air" service may be demonstrated by call testing performed in vehicles or in the open. 
"Least intrusive means" means that the location or design of a personal wireless telecommunication facility addresses a significant gap in an applicant's personal communication service while doing the least disservice to the policy objectives of this chapter as stated in Section 17.12.050(A). Analysis of whether a proposal constitutes the least intrusive means shall include consideration of means to close an asserted significant gap by co-locating a new personal wireless telecommunication facility on the site, pole, tower, or other structure of an existing personal wireless telecommunication facility. 
"Monopole" means a structure composed of a single spire, pole, or tower used to support antennas or related equipment. A monopole also includes a monopine, monopalm, and similar monopoles camouflaged to resemble faux objects attached on a monopole. 
"MPE" means maximum permissible exposure. 
"Non-tower supporting structure" means any structure, whether built for wireless communications purposes or not, that supports wireless transmission equipment under a valid permit at the time an applicant submits an application for a permit under this Code and which is not a wireless tower. 
"OET" or "FCC OET" means the Office of Engineering and Technology of the Federal Communications Commission. 
"Open space" includes (1) land which is zoned OS, OS-DR, or REC, (2) land in residential zones upon which structures may not be developed by virtue of a restriction on title, (3) all common areas, private parks, slope easements, and (4) any other area owned by a homeowners association or similar entity. 
"Park" and "playground" shall have their ordinary, dictionary meanings. 
"Personal communication service" means commercial mobile services provided under a license issued by the FCC. 
"Personal wireless telecommunication facility," "wireless telecommunication facility," or "wireless facility" means a structure, antenna, pole, tower, equipment, accessory equipment and related improvements used, or designed to be used, to provide wireless transmission of voice, data, images or other information, including but not limited to cellular phone service, personal communication service and paging service. 
"Private enforcer" has the meaning provided in subsection (K)(2) of this Section 17.12.050. 
"Residential zone" means a zone created by Chapter 17.13 of this title. 
"RF" means radio frequency. 
"Significant gap" as applied to an applicant's personal communication service or the coverage of its personal wireless telecommunication facilities is intended to be defined in this chapter consistently with the use of that term in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and case law construing that statute. Provided that neither the Act nor case law construing it requires otherwise, the following guidelines shall be used to identify such a significant gap: 
1.  A significant gap may be demonstrated by in-kind call testing. 
2.  The commission shall accept evidence of call testing by the applicant and any other interested person and shall not give greater weight to such evidence based on the identity of the person who provides it but shall consider (i) the number of calls conducted in the call test, (ii) whether the calls were taken on multiple days, at various times, and under differing weather and vehicular traffic conditions, and (iii) whether calls could be successfully initiated, received and maintained in the area within which a significant gap is claimed. 
3.  A significant gap may be measured by: 
a.  The number of people affected by the asserted gap in service; 
b.  Whether a wireless communication facility is needed to merely improve weak signals or to fill a complete void in coverage; 
c.  Whether the asserted gap affects Highway 101, a state highway, or an arterial street which carries significant amounts of traffic. 
"Small wireless facility" means a personal wireless telecommunication facility that also meets the definition of a small wireless facility by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6002, as may be amended or superseded. 
"Stealth facility" means any personal wireless telecommunication facility which is designed to substantially blend into the surrounding environment by, among other things, architecturally integrating into a structure or otherwise using design elements to conceal antennas, antenna supports, poles, equipment, cabinets, equipment housing and enclosure; and related above-ground accessory equipment. 
"Transmission equipment" or "wireless transmission equipment" means any equipment that facilitates transmission for any Federal Communications Commission licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas and other equipment associated with and necessary to their operation, including coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supplies. 
"Wireless" means any Federal Communications Commission licensed or authorized wireless telecommunications service. 
"Wireless facility minor modification permit" means a permit issued under this chapter authorizing the modification of an existing personal wireless telecommunications facility. The procedures for the application for, approval of, and revocation of such a permit shall be those required by this title, including but not limited to Section 17.12.050(F). 
"Wireless facility permit" means a permit issued under this chapter authorizing the installation, operation and maintenance of a personal wireless telecommunications facility. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the procedures for the application for, approval of, and revocation of such a permit shall be those required by this title (including, but not limited to, those of Section 17.62.060) for a conditional use permit. 
"Wireless tower" or "telecommunications tower" mean any structure, including a freestanding mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice tower, free standing tower or other structure, designed and constructed for the primary purpose of supporting any Federal Communications Commission licensed or authorized wireless telecommunications facility antennas and their associated facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2011-289, § 1, 11-9-2011; Ord. No. 2012-295, § 2(Exh. A), 6-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-302, § 1, 8-22-2012; Ord. No. 2014-314, §§ 3—5 , 4-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-322-U, §§ 3—37 , 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 2015-323, §§ 3—37 , 4-8-2015; Ord. No. 2019-375 , §§ 3—13, 3-13-2019)  
17.12.060 - Cemeteries, columbarium's and mortuaries. 
Any cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum, crematorium and/or mortuary shall be planned and designed as follows: 
A.  Access. An entrance to the facility shall be provided on a major street or secondary thoroughfare with ingress and egress designed to minimize traffic congestion. 
B.  Screening Required. When located within or adjacent to any residential zoning district, these facilities should be screened on the side and rear property lines by: a wall or fence six feet in height; a six-foot high, three-foot thick evergreen hedge; or a twenty-foot wide, permanently maintained planting strip. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.070 - Day care facilities. 
This section establishes standards for the city review of day-care facilities, in conformance with state law, including the limitations on the city's authority to regulate these facilities. These standards apply in addition to all other applicable provisions of this development code and any requirements imposed by the California Department of Social Services through its facility licensing procedures. No day care facility shall be allowed or operated within the city unless it acquires a license by the Department of Social Services. 
A.  Application Requirements. Land use permit applications for day care facilities shall include a copy of its license issued by the California Department of Social Services, in addition to all other information and materials required by the department. 
B.  Small Family Day Care Homes. Small family day care homes are allowed within any single-family residence pursuant to Table 2-2 in Chapter 17.11. 
C.  Large Family Day Care Homes. This use is allowed within any single-family residence pursuant to Table 2-2 in Chapter 17.11 and, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Permit Requirement-Public Notice. A large family day care home shall require the approval of a non-discretionary administrative plan review by the director. Notwithstanding the public noticing requirement of Chapter 17.78, notice of the filing of an application for a large family day care home shall be provided to all property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed facility at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the director's decision on the application. No public hearing shall be held unless requested in writing by the applicant or other affected person. 
2.  Criteria for Approval. Administrative plan review approval shall be granted if the director determines that the proposed large family day care home will comply with the standards in subsection (E) of this section. 
D.  Child Day Care Centers. Child day care centers are allowed in commercial zoning districts pursuant to Table 2-2 and subject to the standards in following subsection (E). 
E.  Standards for Day Care Facilities. Approvals of large family day care homes and child day care centers are subject to the following: 
1.  Spacing/Concentration. A large day care home or child day care center is prohibited when it causes a residential property to be bordered on more than one side by a day care facility. 
2.  Traffic Control. A drop-off and pickup area shall be established to ensure that people are not placed at risk and street traffic is not unduly interrupted. The driveway of a large family day care home may serve as its drop-off area. 
F.  Employer Child Day Care Facilities. Child day care offered by an employer to his/her employees shall be allowed as an accessory use within places of employment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.080 - Drive-in and drive-through facilities. 
The establishment of new drive-in or drive-through sales or service facilities is prohibited within the city because these facilities create problems or detrimental impacts of noise, air pollution, excessive pavement, traffic congestion, litter, unsightliness, and the inefficient use of energy resources. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in order to facilitate senior access to medications and other vital health services, pharmacies with accessory drive-through facilities may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.090 - Emergency shelters. 
Emergency shelters may be located where allowed by Article II of this development code, subject to the following standards: 
A.  The maximum number of occupants to be served shall not exceed twenty (20). 
B.  A minimum distance of one thousand (1,000) feet shall be maintained from any other emergency shelter. 
C.  The shelter shall have not less than one parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area. 
D.  Maximum stay at the facility shall not exceed one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days. 
E.  Clients shall only be on-site and admitted to the facility between five p.m. and eight a.m. 
F.  An interior waiting and intake area shall be provided which contains a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet. No exterior waiting area shall be allowed either on-site or off-site. 
G.  Security personnel shall be provided during the hours the emergency shelter is in operation. 
H.  Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire outdoor area of the site consistent with the provisions of Chapter 17.27. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.095 - Fortunetelling. 
When permitted in the zoning district applicable to a site, pursuant to Section 17.11.010 of this development code, and consistent with the definition of fortunetelling in this development code, all fortunetelling uses are subject to the following provisions. 
A.  General Requirements. The following shall apply to all new fortunetelling uses. 
1.  All persons, whether as agents, assistants, employees or independent contractors, who provide fortunetelling services to another person in a facility or establishment shall, at all times, maintain on the premises all applicable county and state licenses. certificates and permits. 
2.  Any establishment that provides fortunetelling services shall notify the city in writing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the effective date of a plan to rename, change management, or convey the business to another person. 
B.  Background Investigation. Prior to the filing of a zoning clearance application for any new establishment that provides fortunetelling services, the applicant shall furnish the city with a copy of a California and Federal criminal records background investigation report of the permittee and any person with financial interest in the business; and, consistent with subparagraph A.2. above, a copy of such background check documentation shall also be submitted for any new owner/operator coincidental with the submittal of the required business transfer notification paperwork. 
C.  Posting of Fees. The following posting requirements shall apply to all new fortunetelling uses. 
1.  Each person required to obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter shall post on his or her business premises a sign containing the following information: 
a.  The true name of the fortunetelling practitioner; 
b.  Each service provided by the fortunetelling practitioner; 
c.  The fees charged for each service provided by the fortunetelling practitioner; and 
d.  The statement, "by law, this business is prohibited from charging or soliciting any fee, payment or remuneration beyond these established rates." 
2.  The sign required by this section shall be prominently posted in the interior of the business premises at a point near the entry and shall be conspicuously visible to every person seeking the services of the fortuneteller. The sign lettering shall be of uniform size with each letter at least one-half (½) inch in height. 
3.  Fortunetelling service may be provided on a temporary basis, at a location other than the fortuneteller's place of business within the Commercial Retail zoning district, if the fortuneteller provides the information required by this section on eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (8½" by 11") paper, in legible print or type. The paper shall also include the name and permanent address of the person(s) providing fortunetelling services. No other information or printed matter shall appear on the paper. A true, correct and complete copy of such paper shall be given to each client prior to providing any fortunetelling services. 
4.  No person shall charge or collect any fee, payment, remuneration, or item of value for fortunetelling services in excess of the fees set forth on a sign or paper required by this section. 
D.  Permit Denial or Revocation. The community development director or his or her designee, shall at all times have the power to deny or revoke a permit granted hereunder should the community development director or his or her designee determine: 
1.  That the permittee has violated any provision of this chapter; or 
2.  That any information contained in the permit application is false; or 
3.  That the issuance of the permit was based on fraud, mistake, or any misleading or untrue statements; or 
4.  That the applicant, permittee, or anyone employed by the permittee has, within seven years preceding an application, been convicted of a violation of Penal Code section 332 or any law involving theft or attempted theft by means of fraud, deceit, use of force, or threats. 
( Ord. No. 2014-311, § 4(Exh. A) , 2-26-2014)  
17.12.100 - Heliports. 
Heliports may be located where allowed by Article II of this development code, for emergency purposes only, subject to the following standards: 
A.  State Permit Required. A land use permit or exemption shall be obtained from the California Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics, and evidence of the permit or exemption shall be presented to the department, before establishing any heliport. 
B.  Location Criteria. A proposed heliport may be located on the site of an emergency services facility, subject to the following standards: 
1.  Minimum Site Area: five acres. 
2.  Proximity to Residential Uses. The heliport shall be located so that aircraft taking-off and landing do not pass directly over dwellings at an altitude of less than five hundred (500) feet. 
C.  Nuisance Mitigation. A proposed heliport shall be located so that neither air nor related surface traffic constitutes a nuisance to neighboring uses. The applicant shall demonstrate to the city that adequate controls or measures will be taken to mitigate offensive noise, vibration, dust or bright lights. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.110 - Hobby farms. 
Hobby farms may be allowed subject to the following standards: 
A.  Hobby farms for agricultural uses shall be allowed as an accessory use with a conditional use permit subject to the following standards. 
1.  On-site sales of agricultural produce shall be prohibited. 
2.  Hobby farms for agricultural uses are limited to twenty thousand square (20,000) feet in agricultural use area on parcels two and one-half (2½) acres or less in size or forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet (one (1) acre) on parcels over two and one-half (2½) acres. 
3.  Hobby farms for agricultural uses cannot be located on slopes greater than approximately three to one nor may hobby farms involve activities which require the issuance of a commercial license by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) or the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF). 
4.  Minor deviations from these general standards may be granted by the planning commission through an approval of a conditional use permit. 
5.  Hobby farms for agricultural uses shall be subject to the standards in Section 17.12.030. 
6.  Hobby farms for agricultural uses shall utilize organic farming methods to the extent feasible. 
B.  Agricultural uses that do not meet the size limitations for a hobby farm may be allowed with a conditional use permit subject to the standards in Section 17.12.030. 
C.  Hobby farms for farm animals (shall be a subject to the permits and standards in Section 17.12.040. In addition, all uses shall be designed to avoid significant adverse effects to surrounding area resources including increases in erosion, slope failure or sedimentation on adjacent or downstream watershed properties. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-2014)  
17.12.115 - Home occupations. 
A.  Applicability. The provisions of this section allow for business activities within a dwelling unit that are subordinate to the primary residential use of the site, and compatible with surrounding residential uses. This section does not address day care facilities, which are instead subject to Section 17.12.070. 
B.  Limitations on Use. 
1.  Allowed Home Occupations. An allowed home occupation is a business activity within a dwelling unit that is subordinate to the primary residential use of the site; provided, there is compliance with this section, including the acquisition of a home occupation permit, and the activity is any of the following. 
a.  Art work (ceramics, painting, photography, sculpture and such other similar use; 
b.  Dress making, millinery, sewing, and similar activities; 
c.  Small handcraft; and 
d.  An office for an architect, attorney, consultant, insurance agent, tutor, or writer. 
The director may also issue a home occupation permit for other business activities as home occupations, where the director first determines that the business activity is substantially similar to the above uses in its operational characteristics, and will result in no greater impacts on the site or surrounding properties than the above uses. 
2.  Prohibited Home Occupation Uses. Business activities that are not compatible with or incidental to surrounding residential uses are prohibited as home occupations. The following may not be issued a home occupation permit as they are examples of incompatible or non-incidental business activities: 
a.  Adult entertainment businesses; 
b.  Commercial photo/film processing labs; 
c.  Night clubs; 
d.  Gun or ammunition sales; 
e.  Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories (not including counselors/psychotherapists); 
f.  Mini storage; 
g.  RV storage except for a personally owned vehicle registered to an occupant of the premises; 
h.  Storage of equipment, materials, and other accessories for the construction and service trades, as well as other business enterprises; 
i.  Vehicle maintenance and repair (body or mechanical), upholstery, automobile detailing and painting; 
j.  Welding and machining; 
k.  Woodworking, cabinetry manufacturing; and 
l.  Any other use determined by the director not to be incidental to or compatible with residential activities as set forth in the operating standards. 
C.  Application. A home occupation permit is required for any allowed home occupations. This permit is subject to the requirements of Section 17.62.100. A statement of continued compliance with the operating standards in subsection D shall be signed by the property owner and all adult occupants who shall engage in the home occupation prior to issuance of a home occupation permit. 
D.  Operating Standards. Home occupations shall comply with all of the following operating standards: 
1.  Accessory Use Only. The home occupation shall be clearly secondary and incidental to the full-time use of the structure as a dwelling unit; 
2.  Activities, Equipment and Materials. Activities conducted and equipment or material used in connection with an allowed and permitted home occupation shall not change the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the premises. The use shall not involve the storage of flammable, explosive or hazardous materials. No use shall create noise, dust, light, vibration, odor, gas, fumes, toxic/hazardous materials, smoke, glare, electrical interference, or other hazards or nuisances; 
3.  Exterior Evidence of Use. The use shall not require any modification not customarily found in a dwelling, nor shall the use be visible from the street or from neighboring properties. There shall be no window display, advertising sign, or other identification of the home occupation on the premises; 
4.  Limitation on Employees. The home occupation shall involve no more than two employees or independent contractor on the site other than full-time residents of the dwelling unit. This limitation applies only to an employee or independent contractor of the home occupation and does not regulate the use of housekeeping, gardening, child care, or cooking personnel which are unrelated to the home occupation; 
5.  Limitation on Clients. No more than one client or patron shall be allowed on the premises at any time for counseling, music lessons, tutoring, or other purposes related to the home occupation; 
6.  Location of Home Occupation. The home occupation shall be located entirely within an enclosed structure, and shall not be allowed in a trailer or other temporary structure. Further, no home occupation shall be established, operated, conducted, or maintained in a garage in such a manner to reduce the required number of parking spaces therein at any time; and 
7.  Vehicles and Traffic. Vehicles used by the permittee or by others, or in connection with the home occupation and traffic generated by the home occupation shall not exceed the type or number of vehicles and traffic volume normally generated by a home in a residential neighborhood that does not have an ongoing home occupation. All parking needs of the home occupation shall be met off the street and on the same site as the permitted home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.120 - Kennels and animal boarding. 
Kennels and animal boarding shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.125 - Marijuana based land uses and activities. 
This section is to be read in conjunction with Chapter 8.13 of this Code. 
A.  Allowed Uses. The private cultivation, processing, or use of marijuana (as defined in Title 8) for personal use, is allowed as an accessory and ancillary use in all residential zones, and is exempt from permitting, provided that such use or activity: 
1.  Is conducted for personal non-commercial purposes only by a legal residential occupant aged twenty-one (21) years or older; 
2.  Is accomplished entirely within a fully enclosed and secure structure that is either a legally established primary dwelling or a legally established accessory structure on the residential property; 
3.  Involves the cultivation of not more than six (6) individual living marijuana plants or the possession, processing or use of marijuana obtained from not more than six (6) individual marijuana plants; and, 
4.  Is accomplished in a manner fully consistent with the limitations established under California Health and Safety Code sections 11362.1, 11362.2, 11362.3, 11362.4 and 11362.45 and any other applicable state laws. 
B.  Prohibited Uses. Any land use, facility or activity which involves cultivation, manufacture, processing, packaging, warehousing, distribution, transport, or any other commercial activity or business related to marijuana or any marijuana product or derivative, whether for medical or recreational uses, and which is not expressly allowed under subsection 17.12.125.A., above, is prohibited as a land use or as an accessory use and may not be conducted in any zone, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Marijuana dispensaries, cooperatives, or any other marijuana-related businesses or commercial activity of any kind, whether for medical or recreational uses. 
2.  Any land use, facility or activity which involves cultivation, manufacture, processing, packaging, warehousing, distribution, transport, or any other commercial activity or business related to any drug or substance other than marijuana which is illegal to distribute or possess under state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2011-285, § 1, 9-14-2011; Ord. No. 2017-355 , § 2, 6-14-2017)  
17.12.130 - Mixed use projects. 
This section provides design criteria and development standards for mixed use projects, where allowed by Chapter 17.11 (Allowable Land Uses). A mixed use project combines residential and commercial uses (vertical mixed use). Residential units may be also allowed at ground level behind street-fronting commercial uses (horizontal mixed use) only under limited circumstances specified by this section. 
A.  Design Considerations. A mixed use project shall be designed to achieve the following objectives: 
1.  The design shall provide for internal compatibility between the residential and commercial uses on the site; 
2.  Potential glare, noise, odors, traffic, and other potentially significant impacts on residents shall be minimized to allow a compatible mix of residential and commercial uses on the same site; 
3.  The design shall take into consideration potential impacts on adjacent properties and shall include specific design features to minimize potential impacts; 
4.  The design shall ensure that the residential units are of a residential character, and that appropriate privacy between residential units and other uses on the site is provided; and 
5.  Site planning and building design shall provide for convenient pedestrian access from the public street into the commercial portions of the project, through courtyards, plazas, walkways, or similar features. 
B.  Mixed Use Standards. 
1.  Zoning District Standards. The density, floor area ratio (FAR), height, and street setbacks for a mixed-use development project shall be determined by the underlying zoning district. 
2.  Commercial Setbacks. When the residential units are located above the commercial uses, the structure shall be treated as a commercial type of structure for front and side setbacks. No rear yard setback is required unless specified for commercial uses. Floors above the ground floor shall incorporate off sets and design features to break up the vertical mass of the building. 
3.  Commercial Uses Along Street Frontages. 
a.  Commercial uses shall be located along street frontages and have a minimum depth of fifty (50) feet. The director may reduce the minimum depth for commercial uses for a secondary street. 
b.  On corner lots, the commercial space shall turn (wrap around) the corner for a minimum depth of fifty (50) feet. 
c.  The director shall determine the primary frontage for purposes of compliance with this Subsection. 
4.  Ground Floor Residential Units Allowed. If a structure is located on a corner lot, ground floor residential dwelling units are allowed only on the secondary street/frontage as determined by the director. 
5.  Community Space Requirements. 
a.  Community Space Defined. 
i.  Community space shall include both indoor/interior space and outdoor open space. 
ii.  Community space can be in the form of private open space (e.g., balconies) or common open space (e.g., pool or side or rear setback areas.) 
iii.  An indoor recreational room of up to six hundred (600) square feet may be credited toward fulfilling community space requirement in subsection (B)(5)(b) of this section. 
b.  Minimum Space Per Unit. Each development project shall provide a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of community space for each dwelling unit. 
c.  Required front and/or side setbacks do not count toward the community space requirement in subsection (B)(5)(b) of this section. 
d.  Private Open Space. 
i.  Private open space shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total requirement for community space. 
ii.  Each private open space shall have a minimum dimension of six feet by six feet. 
iii.  The private open space requirement contained herein may be modified by not more than five percent if determined to be necessary by the reviewing authority. 
e.  Community Space. Each community space shall have at least one minimum dimension of fifteen (15) feet and the other dimensions shall be at least six feet, except for private open space (e.g., balconies or patios). 
f.  Balconies and patios shall have a minimum dimension of six feet by six feet in order to count as required community space. 
6.  Lighting. Lighting for commercial uses shall be appropriately shielded to not cause light spillover onto the residential units and shall conform to Chapter 17.27. 
7.  Off-Street Loading. Off-street loading areas shall be located as far as possible from the residential units and shall be completely screened from view from the residential portion of the project. 
8.  Refuse and Recycling Areas. Areas for the collection and storage of refuse and recyclable materials shall be located on the site in locations that are convenient for both the residential and commercial uses. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.135 - Mobilehome parks/subdivisions. 
The following standards are intended to ensure that new, expanded or redeveloped mobilehome parks and new mobilehome subdivisions are located and established so as to be compatible with adjacent residential neighborhoods and commercial areas. The planning and design of mobilehome parks, including lots and other areas within parks, and the permitting of individual mobilehomes within mobilehome parks is regulated by the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD), and is not subject to the provisions of this section. 
A.  Site Planning and Design Standards. Mobilehome parks and subdivisions shall conform to the following minimum standards. 
1.  Minimum site area: five acres. 
2.  Density: a maximum of eight mobilehome spaces per acre. 
3.  Setbacks. All structures, including mobilehomes, shall be set back from property lines as follows: 
a.  Street frontage: thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Exterior park lot lines not abutting streets: ten (10) feet 
4.  Landscaping. The perimeter of mobilehome parks shall be landscaped as follows: 
a.  Street Frontages. Street frontage setback areas shall be provided with a landscaped buffer at least fifteen (15) feet wide, except where cut by access driveways. Landscaping shall occupy a minimum of sixty (60) percent of the required street frontage setback area required by subsection (A)(3) of this section. 
b.  Other Setback Areas. Other setback areas shall be landscaped with screen planting strips. 
c.  Interior Street Trees. Each mobilehome lot shall be provided at least one street tree of fifteen (15) gallon size or larger. 
d.  Interior Landscaping. All open areas of a mobilehome park not occupied by paving or common facilities shall be landscaped, including a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the total site area for each mobilehome, and a minimum of forty-five (45) (percent of the total common area(s) of the park. 
5.  Fencing. The perimeter of a mobilehome park or subdivision shall be enclosed by a six foot high solid masonry wall (or alternate material approved by the director), located at the setback line along street frontages, and adjacent to property lines not abutting streets. 
6.  Signs. Sign area shall be limited to one identification sign of fifty (50) square feet and one directional sign of twenty-five (25) square feet, subject to director approval. 
B.  Accessory Commercial Uses Permitted. A mobilehome park may contain commercial uses for the convenience of park residents. This uses shall include coin-operated laundry, soft drink dispensers, cigarette dispensers and similar machines, provided that these uses shall be located in the interior of the park and shall not occupy more than five hundred (500) square feet cumulatively for each fifty (50) mobilehomes or fraction thereof. 
C.  Use of Mobilehome Lots. No more than one occupied mobilehome shall be allowed on any one lot. No travel trailer, camper or other recreational vehicle shall be placed on any mobilehome lot, either for occupancy or storage. 
D.  Recreational Vehicle Areas. Mobilehome parks may include recreational vehicle storage areas, provided that the location, number and size of spaces shall be authorized as part of the conditional use permit approval. 
E.  Conversion of Mobilehome Park to another Use. Any subdivision of an existing mobilehome park or conversion of an existing mobilehome park to another land use is subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Permit Requirement. Conditional use permit approval (Section 17.62.060). 
2.  Application Content. The conditional use permit application shall include any report required by Government Code Section 66427.4 or 65863.7, as applicable, in addition to all information required by Section 17.60.030. 
F.  Special Notice Requirement. As required by Government Code Section 65863.8, at least thirty (30) days before the public hearing on the conditional use permit to convert the mobilehome park to another use, the department shall notify the applicant in writing of the provisions of Section 798.56 of the Civil Code regarding the responsibility of the applicant to notify residents and mobilehome owners of the mobilehome park of the proposed change in use. No hearing on a proposed mobile home park conversion shall be scheduled until the applicant has verified this notification to the satisfaction of the director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.140 - Mobilehomes. 
Mobilehomes (identified as manufactured homes by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974) on lots zoned for conventional single-family dwellings, and the storage of mobilehomes are subject to the requirements of this section. Mobilehomes placed in mobilehome parks (Section 17.12.135), that are regulated by the California Department of Housing and Community Development, are not subject to the provisions of this section. Modular (also known as factory-built) housing units are considered the same as single-family dwellings for the purposes of this development code, and are not subject to the provisions of this section. 
Mobilehomes to be used as permanent dwellings in compliance with this section are subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Certified Mobilehomes. Mobilehomes that are certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC Section 5401, et seq.), are subject to the following standards: 
1.  Location. As required by Government Code Section 65852.3, mobilehomes for permanent occupancy are considered the same as single-family dwellings, and are permitted by Chapter 17.11 in all zoning districts that allow single-family housing units; 
2.  Foundation System. The mobilehome shall be placed on a foundation system in compliance with Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code; and 
3.  Architectural Standards. Mobilehomes shall be designed and constructed with roof eave and gable overhangs of not less than one foot measured from the vertical side of the structure. 
B.  Non-certified Mobilehomes. Mobilehomes that are not certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974, and that do not meet the requirements of subsection (A) of this section shall be placed only in mobilehome parks. 
C.  Density. The number of certified mobilehomes (as described in subsection (A) of this section) that may be placed on a single parcel shall be the same as the number of single-family dwellings permitted by Section 17.12.030. The number of mobilehomes that may be placed in a mobilehome park is determined by Section 17.12.125. 
D.  Storage of Unoccupied Mobilehomes. Unoccupied mobilehomes or portions thereof that are not fixed to a foundation shall be stored only in a mobilehome sales lot, or an approved storage yard. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-2014)  
17.12.145 - Multi-family housing. 
Multi-family housing projects shall comply with the following requirements, in addition to all other applicable provisions of this development code. The requirements of this section may be modified through the development plan approval process as set forth in Section 17.62.070. 
A.  Setbacks. A proposed building shall be separated from any other building on the site by a minimum of twenty (20) feet. Proposed buildings shall be set back from internal roads and driveways a minimum of ten (10) feet. 
B.  Common Outdoor Space. Common outdoor space shall be provided at a ratio of four hundred (400) square feet per housing unit. Common outdoor space does not include (i) required front or street side setback areas, and (ii) areas usable for passive or active recreation. 
C.  Private Outdoor Space. Each multifamily housing unit shall be provided with private outdoor open space in the form of patios, decks, fenced yard areas, and other similar amenities, with the following minimum areas: 
1.  Studio and one-bedroom units: seventy-five (75) square feet. 
2.  Two bedroom units: one hundred fifty (150) square feet. 
3.  Three bedroom and larger units: two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet. 
D.  Fencing. The development of more than two multifamily housing units shall include the installation of solid wood or masonry fencing along the site perimeter side and rear property lines, in compliance with Section 17.20.100, to the maximum height allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.150 - Outdoor merchandise display and activities. 
Permanent outdoor sales, displays and rental establishments which do not entirely conduct business within a structure shall comply with the standards of this section. These establishments include but are not limited to automobile dealerships, automobile rental establishments, equipment sales or rental establishments, and other similar uses. Temporary outdoor sales, storage and display are subject to Section 17.62.030. 
A.  Outdoor Merchandise Display. The outdoor display of merchandise shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Screening Required. Except for automobile sales and rentals, an outdoor sales/activity area shall be screened from adjacent streets by decorative solid walls, fences or landscaped berms, a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches high, in a ten-foot landscaped area adjacent to the street property line; 
2.  Location of Merchandise. Displayed merchandise shall occupy a fixed, specifically approved and defined location that does not disrupt the normal function of the site or its circulation, and does not encroach upon required parking spaces, driveways, pedestrian walkways, or required landscape areas. These displays shall also not obstruct sight distance or otherwise create hazards for vehicle or pedestrian traffic; and 
3.  Signs. Generally, there shall be no signs in addition to that allowed by Chapter 17.30 that are visible from the street. Pricing signs shall be no larger than necessary to be read by on-site shoppers as determined by the director. 
B.  Outdoor Storage Areas. Where permitted by Article II all outdoor storage areas shall be entirely enclosed and screened by a solid wall or fence at least six feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.155 - Personal services—Massage therapy. 
When permitted in the zoning district applicable to a site, pursuant to Section 17.11.010 of this Development Code, all new massage therapy uses are subject to the provisions of this section. 
A.  General Requirements. The following requirements apply to all new massage therapy uses. 
1.  All persons, whether as agents, assistants, employees or independent contractors, who provide massage therapy services to another person in a facility or establishment shall, at all times, be certified by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC). 
2.  All persons who provide massage therapy services to another person in a facility or establishment shall, at all times, prominently display his or her California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) certificate at that facility or establishment. 
3.  All business establishments offering massage therapy services shall maintain on the premises at all times all applicable county and state licenses, certificates and permits. 
4.  Massage therapy services may be offered at a medical clinic, beauty/nail salon or similar establishment as an incidental activity consistent with the requirements of this section. As used herein, a beauty/nail salon means a facility or establishment that offers any services that are regulated by, or subject to, the California Barbering and Cosmetology Act and pertinent sections of the California Code of Regulations. 
5.  Once annually, on or before January 15 of each calendar year, each massage facility or establishment, established on or after the date of the ordinance codified in this section, shall furnish the city with copies of a California Massage Therapy Council certificate for each employee, agent, assistant or independent contractor who provides massage therapy services at that facility or establishment. 
6.  Any establishment that provides massage therapy services shall notify the city in writing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the effective date of a plan to rename, change management, or convey the business to another person. 
B.  Occupancy. Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for any new establishment that provides massage therapy services, the applicant shall furnish the city with a copy of a valid and current certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council for each employee, agent, assistant or independent contractor who will provide massage therapy services at the time of business opening. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-296, § 2, 4-25-2012)  
17.12.160 - Recycling facilities. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. The following provisions establish standards and procedures for the siting and operation of various types and sizes of commercial recycling facilities. Any recycling facility intending to operate in the city shall comply with all provisions of this section: 
B.  Permit Requirements. Recycling facilities in all commercial zoning districts shall first obtain the required permit according to the following schedule: 
Table 2-3 
Recycling Permit Requirements 
Type of facility 	Districts permitted 	Permit required 
Reverse vending machine(s) 	All commercial 	Administrative plan review for up to five reverse vending machines 
Small collection 	CR, CMU, CB 	Conditional use permit 
Large collection 	CB 	Conditional use permit 
 
C.  Development and Operating Standards. All recycling facilities shall comply with the following specific standards: 
1.  Reverse Vending Machines. Reverse vending machine(s) located on a commercial site shall not require additional parking spaces for recycling customers, and may be permitted in all commercial zoning districts, subject to administrative plan review and compliance with the following standards. 
a.  Accessory Use Only. The machines shall be installed as an accessory use. 
b.  Location Requirements: 
i.  If located inside a structure, the machines shall be within thirty (30) feet of the entrance and shall not obstruct pedestrian circulation; and 
ii.  If located outside a structure, the machines shall not occupy parking spaces required by the main use. 
c.  Maximum Size. The machines shall occupy no more than fifty (50) square feet for each installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight feet in height. 
d.  Signs. The machines shall have a maximum sign area of four square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions. 
e.  Lighting. Reverse vending machines shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation, if operating hours are between dusk and dawn. 
f.  Materials. If located outside a structure, the machines shall be constructed of durable waterproof and rustproof material. 
g.  Hours of Operation. The machines shall have operating hours consistent with the operating hours of the main use. 
2.  Small Collection Facilities. Small collection facilities are permitted within the CR, CMU and CB zoning districts, subject to conditional use permit approval and compliance with the following standards. 
a.  Location Requirements. Small collection facilities shall: 
i.  Be set back at least forty-five (45) feet from any public right-of-way, and not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
ii.  Not be located in any required parking, access, or sight distance area of any required setback; 
iii.  Not be located within fifty (50) feet of any parcel zoned or planned for residential use; and 
iv.  Permanently locate any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials at least thirty (30) feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use. 
b.  Maximum Size. Shall be no larger than five hundred (500) square feet and occupy no more than three parking spaces not including space that will be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers. 
c.  Appearance of Facility. Collection containers, site fencing, and signs shall be of a color and design so as to be both compatible and harmonious with the surrounding uses and neighborhood and any scenic corridor requirements. 
d.  Landscaping and Screening. The facility shall: 
i.  Not reduce or elimination the landscaping required by Chapter 17.26 for any concurrent use allowed by these regulations; 
ii.  Be screened from view from adjacent public rights-of-way through the use of fencing, landscaping, or other approved materials, in compliance with Section 17.20.100; and 
iii.  Be subject to landscaping and/or screening as determined through conditional use permit. 
e.  Parking Requirements. 
i.  No additional parking space shall be required for customers of a small collection facility located in the established parking lot of the main use. One space shall be provided for the attendant, if needed; 
ii.  Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present; and 
iii.  Use of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant shall not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the main use unless a parking study shows that existing capacity is not fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the site. 
f.  Signs. Signs may be provided as follows: 
i.  Recycling facilities may have identification signs with a maximum area of fifteen (15) percent or twelve (12) square feet per side of the structure whichever is greater. In the case of a wheeled facility, the side shall be measured from the ground to the top of the container; 
ii.  The sign shall contain only the hours of operation, redemption values, and the name of the operator, owner or beneficiary; and 
iii.  Directional signs, in compliance with Chapter 17.30, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with prior approval of the director if found necessary to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
g.  Operating Standards. Facilities shall: 
i.  Accept only glass, metal or plastic containers, paper and reusable items; 
ii.  Use no power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines; 
iii.  Use containers that are constructed with durable waterproof and rustproof material, covered when the site is not attended, secured from unauthorized removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and the collection schedule; 
iv.  Store all recyclable materials in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle, and shall not leave materials outside of containers when attendant is not present; and 
v.  Be maintained free of litter and any other waste materials, and the site for mobile facilities, at which truck(s) or containers are removed at the end of each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day. 
h.  Hours of Operation. Attended facilities located within one hundred (100) feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use shall operate only between the hours of nine a.m. and seven p.m. on any day except legal holidays. 
3.  Large Collection Facilities. A large collection facility which is larger than five hundred (500) square feet, or on a separate parcel not accessory to a primary use, which has a permanent structure may be allowed in the CB zoning district subject to conditional use permit approval and the following standards. 
a.  Location Requirements. The facility shall not abut a parcel zoned or planned for residential use. 
b.  Container Location. Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials shall be permanently located at least one hundred (100) feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use , constructed of sturdy, rustproof materials, with sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and secured from unauthorized entry or removal of materials. 
c.  Screening. The facility shall be screened from the public rights-of-way, within an enclosed structure, or behind fences, walls or landscape screening. 
d.  Setbacks and Landscaping. Structure setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those provided for the applicable zoning district. 
e.  Outdoor Storage. All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers which are secured, and maintained in good condition at all times. No storage, excluding truck trailers, shall be visible above the height of the wall or other screening barrier. 
f.  Operating Standards. The facility shall be operated and maintained in compliance with the following: 
i.  The site shall be maintained clean, sanitary and free of litter and any other waste materials, and shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis. Temporarily stored materials shall be moved to an approved processing site as soon as practical; and 
ii.  No dust, fumes, odor, smoke, noise or vibration above ambient levels shall be detectable from adjacent parcels. 
4.  Time Limits. Any permit issued in compliance with this section shall have a maximum term established by the approved land use permit. Prior to permit renewal, the director shall consider the permittee's history of compliance with the established conditions of approval, as well as the provisions of this section and the Municipal Code in determining whether the permit shall be renewed. 
D.  General Standards. All recycling facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Signs. Facilities shall be provided identification and informational signs, as follows, provided that all signs shall meet the standards of the applicable zoning district. 
a.  All collection containers and reverse vending machines shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited, and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or machine; and 
b.  The facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the operator and the hours of operation. 
Identification and informational signs and directional signs bearing no advertising message may be installed with the approval of the director, if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation. 
2.  Refuse Disposal. The facility shall maintain adequate on-site refuse containers for the disposal of non-recyclable, non-hazardous waste. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-297, § 1(Att. A), 5-23-2012; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-2014)  
17.12.165 - Residential accessory uses and structures. 
When permitted in the zoning district applicable to a site, pursuant to Section 17.11.010 of this development code, specific residential accessory uses are subject to the provisions of this section. Residential accessory uses include any use that is customarily related to a residence including swimming pools, workshops, studios, storage sheds, greenhouses and garages. Residential accessory structures for the purpose of this section shall not include secondary housing units which are regulated by Section 17.12.170. 
A.  General Requirements. All accessory uses and structures are subject to the following standards, except where more restrictive requirements are established by other provisions of this section for specific uses. 
1.  Relationship of Accessory Use to Principal Use. Accessory uses and structures shall be incidental to and not alter the character of the site from that created by the principal use. 
2.  Setback requirements: as provided by Section 17.13.020. 
B.  Antennas. Antennas are subject to the provisions of Section 17.12.050. 
C.  Decks. Decks are subject to the setback requirements of Section 17.20.180(E). The walking surface of a deck shall not exceed a height of five feet above finished grade. 
D.  Garage/Yard Sales. The sale of miscellaneous items by residents from a yard or open garage is permitted up to four times per year per property, for a maximum of three days per sale. 
E.  Garages. A garage shall provide at all times the minimum space required to accommodate the number of off-street parking spaces required by this title. A detached accessory garage shall not occupy more than five hundred (500) square feet per dwelling unit (including any workshop or storage space within a garage) unless a larger area is authorized by the commission through a site plan review. The floor area of an accessory garage that is attached to a principal structure is not limited, except as may be required by Title 15. 
F.  Greenhouses. An accessory greenhouse may occupy up to five hundred (500) square feet per dwelling unit or ten (10) percent of the lot, whichever is smaller. Larger greenhouses shall be considered to be plant nurseries, and are permitted only in the CL zoning district. 
G.  Home Occupations. Home occupations are subject to the requirements of Section 17.12.100. 
H.  Swimming Pools/Spas/Hot Tubs. Private swimming pools, spas and hot tubs are permitted accessory to approved residential uses on the same site, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Limitation on Use. The pool is to be used solely by occupants of the dwelling(s) on the same site and their guests. 
2.  Setbacks. Except where Title 15 requires greater setbacks, a pool/spa/hot tub shall be located at least five feet from any property line and at least five feet from the main residence. The setback shall be measured from the water line of a pool or spa or from the structure of an above-ground pool/spa hot tub. The setback for an infinity pool shall be measured from the edge of the catch basin (Figure 3-10). Related equipment shall be located at least three feet from the property line. 
3.  Except where Title 15 requires greater setbacks, all pool related structures including waterfalls, grottos and slides, when attached to the pool or intended to serve the pool, shall be located at least five feet from any property line. 
4.  Fencing. The swimming pool shall be secured by fencing or building walls to prevent uncontrolled access by children, in compliance with Title 15. Chain link fencing is not permitted around private swimming pools; and 
5.  For pools and spas, a two-foot minimum setback from the rear or side property line is allowed under special circumstances, and subject to administrative plan review approval, where: 
a.  The property line in question abuts an open space area of at least ten (10) feet in width, as measured from the property line, and said open space area is permanently protected or dedicated (through an easement or other dedication) for drainage, slope maintenance and management, or other open space purposes. 
I.  Outdoor Recreational Features. Outdoor recreational features such as fireplaces, pizza ovens, barbeque grills and fountains not exceeding six feet in height shall be a minimum of three feet from all property lines. Outdoor recreational features over six feet in height shall be a minimum of seven and one-half feet from a side property line and ten (10) feet from a front and rear property line. 
J.  Tennis and Other Recreational Courts. Noncommercial outdoor tennis courts and courts for other sports (e.g., racquetball) accessory to a residential use are subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Fencing. Fencing shall be subject to the design criteria of Section 17.20.100 and shall not exceed a maximum height of twelve (12) feet. Fences between six feet and twelve (12) feet in height shall be subject to administrative plan review approval; and 
2.  Lighting. Court lighting shall not exceed a maximum height of fourteen (14) feet, measured from the court surface. The lighting shall be directed downward, shall only illuminate the court, shall not illuminate adjacent property and is subject to the standards in Chapter 17.27. 
K.  Trash Enclosure. Any trash enclosure visible from the public right-of-way shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  The area shall be enclosed with an opaque wall that is compatible, in material, color and texture with the primary or main building. The wall shall be at least four feet high, or the height of the enclosure door in the closed position, whichever is greater. 
2.  The enclosure shall be large enough to accommodate at least three ninety-five-gallon carts for trash, recycling and organic waste. Minimum inside dimensions are four feet by ten (10) feet (or forty (40) square feet). The requirement increases sixteen (16) square feet for each additional container. 
3.  The storage area must be paved and sufficiently impervious to contain leaks and spills. 
L.  Vehicle Storage. The storage of vehicles, including incidental restoration and repair, is subject to Section 17.12.200. 
M.  Workshops, Studios, Pool Houses, and Other Similar Structures. 
1.  An accessory structure may be constructed or used as a workshop or studio in any residential zoning district solely for (i) noncommercial hobbies or amusements; (ii) for maintenance of the principal structure or yards; (iii) for artistic endeavors, (e.g. painting, photography or sculpture; (iv) maintenance or mechanical work on vehicles owned or operated by the occupants; or (v) for other similar purposes. Any use of such accessory structures for any commercial activity shall meet the standards for home occupations (Section 17.12.100). 
2.  An accessory structure may be constructed or used as a pool house in conjunction with a swimming pool. Unless there is an existing pool, the pool shall be constructed and completed prior to pool house construction. 
3.  A workshop, studio, pool house or other accessory structure shall not contain a kitchen and/or any other facilities for a kitchen. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-297, § 1(Att. A), 5-23-2012)  
17.12.170 - Accessory dwelling units. 
This section establishes standards for accessory dwelling units, also known as secondary housing units, where such housing units are allowed by Section 17.11.010. 
A.  Legislative Findings. In compliance with Government Code Section 65852.2, the city finds that accessory dwelling units are consistent with the allowable density and with the General Plan and zoning designations for residential single-family areas of the city. 
B.  Development Standards. A single accessory dwelling unit may be allowed on a legal lot located in the RS, RR, HM, RC, or OS zoning districts in addition to a primary single-family residential dwelling, subject to a zoning clearance, as follows: 
1.  Primary Dwelling and Sanitary Sewer Service Required. The lot shall be developed with one (1) legally established detached single-family dwelling and shall be served by sanitary sewer or septic system. 
2.  Primary and Accessory Dwellings Not Separable. The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately from the primary dwelling and may be rented. 
3.  Accessory Dwelling Unit Appearance. The design of the unit shall conform in general to the design of the primary dwelling. 
4.  Short-term Rentals Prohibited. Consistent with Section 17.12.175, the accessory dwelling unit shall not be used for any short-term rental or transient rental or occupancy for any purpose, including but not limited to a vacation, for less than thirty (30) days if that rental or occupancy occurs in exchange for any form of compensation or consideration. 
5.  Site Layout and Design Standards. The location and design of an accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the development standards applicable to the property zoning and any applicable overlay zone, as well as the following requirements (Table 2-4, below). Where any listed standard in Table 2-4 conflicts with a standard for the residential zone or an applicable overlay zone, the standard in Table 2-4 prevails). 
Table 2-4 
Accessory Dwelling Unit Requirements 
Development Feature 	Requirement 
Gross floor area 	Maximum 1,200 sq. ft. of habitable floor area not including garage. The maximum size of the floor area of an accessory dwelling unit shall also not exceed 50% of the living area of the primary unit, inclusive of any habitable basement or attic space. 
Location on a lot 	Detached unit: Rear yard of the lot, behind the primary dwelling. 
Site coverage, freestanding or primary residence addition units served by septic systems 	Accessory dwelling unit additions or freestanding properties located in the overlay zones of Old Topanga and the Calabasas Highlands must comply with zoning code standards. 
Site coverage, detached rear-yard units 	Maximum of 30% of the rear yard area may be covered by structures, including the areas covered by the accessory dwelling unit and any other accessory structures, and projections of the primary dwelling. 
Side Setbacks 	5 ft. minimum. Side setbacks for units constructed above a garage: 5 ft. No side setback requirements shall apply to units constructed entirely within an existing and legally established garage. 
Rear Setback 	10 ft. minimum. Rear setbacks for units constructed above a garage: 5 ft. No rear setback requirements shall apply to units constructed entirely within an existing and legally established garage. 
Interior Setbacks 	10 ft., minimum, from primary dwelling or other structure, if the accessory dwelling unit is detached. 
Height limit 	Detached units: One story, 15 ft. maximum (see Section 17.20.140 for height measurement). If accessory dwelling unit is located above a garage; the applicable zoning district's height standards apply. 
Parking 	One additional space above the number of off-street parking spaces required for the primary dwelling, which may include tandem parking or the use of a mechanical automobile parking lift. When a garage, carport, or other covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit or is converted to an accessory dwelling unit, and that garage, carport, or other covered parking structure provided required off-street parking for the primary dwelling unit, then the property owner shall replace the required off-street parking spaces with new covered parking spaces of the same type and with a sufficient number of spaces to maintain conformance with Code requirements for the primary residential dwelling or use. No additional parking space is required for the accessory dwelling unit if any of the following is true: 
A. The unit is located within one-half mile of a regularly scheduled public transit stop; 
B. The unit is located within a city council designated historic district; 
C. The unit is part of the existing legal primary residence or an existing legal accessory structure; 
D. On-street preferential permits are required by the city but not offered to the occupant of the unit; or 
E. A publicly accessible and presently operating car share vehicle parking facility is located within one block of the unit. 
 
5.  Notwithstanding the requirements in Table 2-4, one (1) accessory dwelling unit may be located on any lot that is zoned to allow for single-family residential use, provided that the accessory dwelling unit is contained entirely within the building envelope of an existing legally established primary residential dwelling, or is contained entirely within the building envelope of a legally established accessory structure to the primary dwelling, and where the accessory dwelling unit has exterior access that is independent from the existing legal primary residence and the side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety as determined by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2017-347 , § 3, 2-22-2017; Ord. No. 2019-369 , § 3, 1-23-2019)  
17.12.175 - Short-term rentals or occupancies of property prohibited, except for lawfully approved hotels, motels, and bed and breakfast inns. 
Any rental or occupancy of any property or a portion thereof located in the city for any purpose, including but not limited to a vacation, for less than thirty (30) days is prohibited if that rental or occupancy occurs in exchange for any form of compensation or consideration. Short-term rentals or occupancies that occur at lawfully approved hotels, motels, and bed and breakfast inns operated in full compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local rules and regulations including any and all required permits from the city are lawful. 
(Ord. No. 2018-364 , § 6, 4-25-2018)  
17.12.180 - Senior residential projects. 
The following provisions apply to senior residential projects: 
A.  Allowed Density. A senior housing project in the RM, CR, CT and CMU zoning district shall comply with the density requirements of the underlying zone. 
B.  Density Bonus or Other Incentive. A senior housing project shall qualify for a residential density bonus or other incentive, in compliance with Section 17.22.030. 
C.  Planning and Location Criteria. The planning and location of the project shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Site Location. Projects shall be within walking distance (one quarter mile) of available transit, major transportation routes, shopping facilities and medical facilities. If existing transit is not available, transportation services may be provided by the project to comply with this standard. 
2.  Land Uses within the Project. Land uses within the project shall be limited to residential, and where allowed by the applicable zoning district, assisted living facilities and accessory retail uses. 
3.  Age Limit. Projects shall limit the purchase, lease or occupancy of the dwelling units therein to persons fifty-five (55) years of age and older, unless a different age is required by state or federal law. 
D.  Development Standards. Senior residential projects located in commercial zoning districts shall comply with Section 17.12.145. Development standards not established in Section 17.12.145 shall be determined as part of the site plan review process. 
E.  Common Areas. Senior residential projects shall include a common area for the use of residents, which may include a sitting room, social areas and a central meeting area of adequate size to accommodate a majority of residents. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.190 - Service stations—Retail sales. 
The retail sales of food and beverage products and other general merchandise in conjunction with a gasoline service station is allowed subject to conditional use permit approval in compliance with Section 17.62.060, and the following standards: 
A.  Sales Area. Conditional use permit approval may restrict the sales area determined by the review authority to be appropriate because of site characteristics or surrounding traffic patterns. 
B.  Permitted Products. Retail sales of non-automotive products shall be limited to items for the convenience of travelers, including film, personal care products, packaged food items, and beverages. 
C.  Signs. No exterior signs are allowed to advertise specific items for sale or to advertise products or services offered by persons or entities located off-site. 
D.  Parking. On-site parking shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.28 and shall include sufficient spaces for all employees on a single shift. 
E.  Restrooms. Restrooms shall be provided, and shall be available to customers at all times during business hours. 
F.  Facility Upgrading. Applications involving existing stations shall include proposed measures to upgrade the facility to comply all current applicable provisions of this development code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.195 - Shopping centers—Restaurants. 
Restaurants located in shopping centers may occupy up to a total of ten (10) percent of the gross leasable floor area, while the shopping center maintains a parking requirement of one parking space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area, pursuant to Chapter 17.28. Restaurant space exceeding ten (10) percent of the gross leasable floor area of a shopping center may be allowed subject to a conditional use permit, and only when sufficient off-street parking is provided. In such cases the parking requirement shall be one space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross leasable floor area or as determined by a parking study prepared by a registered traffic engineer or similar professional. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.200 - Storage—Outdoor. 
A.  Screening Required. Outdoor storage areas shall be effectively screened so as not to be viewed from the public rights-of-way. This screening shall consist of fences, walls, or landscaping as determined by the review authority. 
B.  Vehicles for Sale. No vehicles may be stored or displayed for sale on any vacant site or at any vacant commercial/industrial location except in compliance with the land use permit requirements of Section 17.11.010. 
C.  Building Materials. Building materials for use on the same premises may be stored on the site only during the time that a valid building permit is in effect for construction. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.220 - Storage—Temporary portable containers. 
The use of portable storage containers including portable on-demand storage containers, steel shipping containers, and other similar storage containers are allowed under the following conditions: 
A.  The portable storage container shall be permitted only after obtaining a temporary use permit in compliance with Section 17.62.030. 
B.  There must be no more than one portable storage container per property. 
C.  The portable storage container must be no larger than eight feet wide, sixteen (16) feet long and eight feet high and one thousand twenty-four (1,024) cubic feet in volume. 
D.  The portable container must not remain at a property in any zoning district in excess of fifteen (15) consecutive days, and must not be placed at any one property in a zoning district in excess of thirty (30) days in any calendar year, except as allowed under Subsection I below. 
E.  The portable storage container must be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines. 
F.  The portable storage container must be set back a minimum of five feet from the nearest wall of a building. 
G.  The portable storage container must be placed on an asphalt or concrete surface. 
H.  The portable storage container must be in good repair and remain free of graffiti at all times. 
I.  Portable storage containers associated with the construction at a site where a building permit has been issued and the site is currently vacant are permitted for the duration of construction and shall be removed from the site within fourteen (14) days of the end of construction. Portable storage containers associated with construction, as allowed under this section, are exempt from subsections A to G. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.225 - Tobacco retailing. 
Standards for tobacco retailing: 
A.  Cigar and other tobacco product stores, where allowed by Section 17.11.010(F), shall be located no closer than five hundred (500) feet from any primary or secondary school located in the City of Calabasas. 
B.  Tobacco retailing, as defined in Section 5.18.020 of the Calabasas Municipal Code, shall not be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of any primary or secondary school located in the City of Calabasas. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer in the city without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's registration pursuant to Chapter 5.18 of the Calabasas Municipal Code for each location at which that activity is to occur. 
Distance between properties shall be measured from the property line of one property to that of another utilizing a straight line method. 
(Ord. No. 2010-272, § 5, 4-28-2010)  
17.12.230 - Veterinary clinics and animal hospitals. 
Veterinary clinics and animal hospitals shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district, and all facilities for keeping animals during diagnosis or treatment shall be located entirely within a structure. 
Veterinary clinics and animal hospitals, which keep animals overnight or for longer periods of time, shall provide an outside area adjacent to the facility for walking or exercising the animals. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.12.240 - Warehouse retail stores. 
Warehouse-type retail stores shall be designed and located in compliance with the following standards: 
A.  Building and Site Design. Building and site design shall complement surrounding commercial or industrial development. Structures shall be comparable to the architectural and design quality expected of new structures in the area, including quality of materials, structure design and orientation, site design, landscaping and buffering. The structure shall reflect the retail aspect of the use by incorporating storefront features, (e.g., facade ornamentation and special detailing) which identify the entryway and provide pedestrian-level interest to the facade. 
B.  Buffering and Screening. These facilities shall be screened or buffered, as appropriate, to ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses. Particular attention shall be given to screening or providing buffers for parking, loading and storage areas, solid waste containers, auto service areas, areas with high noise levels, and other features that are visible or can be heard anywhere off the site. 
C.  Development near Residential Zoning Districts. When evaluating applications for warehouse retail stores near residential zoning districts, the review authority shall give particular attention to the potential traffic, noise, visual and other effects of warehouse retail uses on residential uses. 
D.  Traffic and Parking. 
1.  Parking Lot Layout. The review authority shall specifically consider the impacts of the use and parking of shopping carts on the parking lot design. 
2.  Pedestrian Requirements. Because of high on-site pedestrian and auto activity, the design shall include clearly defined structure entrances, specially designated areas to accommodate customer pickup, and pedestrian walks from parking areas to the structure. 
3.  Site Location. The use shall be located only on streets determined by the director to have adequate traffic capacity for patrons and product suppliers of such stores. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.13 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
 
17.13.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of the individual residential zoning districts are as follows: 
A.  RS (Residential, Single-Family) District. The RS zoning district is intended for detached, single-family homes, including large lot estates, typical suburban tract developments, small detached single-family homes, and similar and related uses compatible with a quiet, family living environment. The RS zoning district is consistent with the R-SF, residential-single-family, land use district of the General Plan. The designation of an area in the RS zoning district may include establishing a minimum lot area for new subdivisions, expressed as a suffix to the RS zoning map symbol (e.g., RS-8, RS-10, etc.). 
B.  RM (Residential, Multifamily) District. The RM zoning district is intended for multiple-family housing developments, including apartments, small detached single-family homes, condominiums, townhomes, duplexes, and related compatible uses. The RM zoning district is consistent with the R-MF, residential-multiple-family, land use districts of the General Plan. The designation of an area in the RM zoning district may include establishing a minimum lot area for new subdivisions, expressed as a suffix to the RM zoning map symbol (e.g., RM-10, RM-20, etc.). 
C.  RMH (Residential, Mobile Home) District. The RMH zoning district is intended to accommodate the existing mobilehome park within the city by establishing a specific district enabling the operation of the site and recognizing its contribution to the mix of housing types in the city. The RMH zoning district is consistent with the R-MH, residential mobilehome, land use district of the General Plan. 
D.  RR (Rural Residential) District. The RR zoning district is intended to provide for single-family detached housing in a low-intensity, rural setting. The RR zoning district is consistent with the RR, rural residential, land use district of the General Plan. 
E.  RC (Rural Community) District. The RC zoning district is applied to areas of older semi-rural residential development with established and clearly evident community character, characterized by semi-rural residential uses. The RC zoning district is consistent with the RC, rural community, land use district of the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.13.020 - Residential district general development standards. 
A.  General Site Planning and Development Standards. Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, intensifications and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the following requirements: 
Table 2-5 
Residential District General Development Standards 
Use RS 	RM 	RR 	RC 	RMH 
Minimum Lot Size  	5,000 sq. ft. 	1 acre 	5 acres for a mobile home park 
Minimum Lot Width Width 	50 feet for interior lots, 65 feet for corner lots. 	75 feet 	
Residential Density 6 du/acre 20 du/acre 1 du/acre 8 du/acre 
Site Coverage 	50% of net site area, maximum, on lots less than 1/3 acre; 35% of net site area on lots of 1/3 acre or more or 7,260 square feet, whichever is greater, on lots of 1/3 acre or more 	55% of net site area, maximum 	30% of net site area, maximum. 	35% of net site area, maximum 	55% of net site area, maximum 
Setbacks Required (6) 		
  Front 	20 feet minimum 	30 feet minimum 	30 feet minimum (2) 
  Sides (each) 	10 feet minimum 	10 feet minimum 	10 feet minimum (2) 
  Street side 	15 feet minimum 	20 feet minimum 	30 feet minimum (2) 
  Distance Between Structures 	10 feet minimum 	20 feet minimum 	10 feet minimum 	10 feet minimum 
  Rear 	20 feet minimum 	20 feet minimum 	10 feet minimum (2) 
Height Limits (7) 	35 feet maximum 		18 ft/or 1 story whichever is less 
Hillside Development 	See Section 17.20.150 (Hillside and Ridgeline Development) 
Landscaping 	As required by Chapter 17.26 (Landscaping) 
Parking 	As required by Chapter 17.28 (Parking and Loading) 
 
1) Except where a suffix to the Zoning Map symbol applies, and Section 17.12.030B requires a larger minimum lot area or overall density. 
2) Where mobilehome lots rented to tenants in a mobilehome park are proposed to be converted to separate lots or parcels, the minimum lot area and setbacks of the proposed lots or parcels may correspond to those of the mobile home lots existing prior to the conversion. 
3) Maximum number of dwellings allowed on an existing lot and maximum density for subdivisions. 
4) Densities greater than the minimum may be permitted up to the maximum only if the impacts of the proposed development are less than those identified in Table 6-2 (Development Impacts of Individual Development Projects) in Chapter 17.60 and are consistent with the performance standards in Chapter 17.20. 
5) Allowed density will be determined through the conditional use permit process, and the maximum density may be approved only where the project complies with all applicable provisions of the development code. 
6) See Section 17.20.180 for setback measurement, exceptions, and encroachments. 
7) See Section 17.20.140 for measurement and exceptions. 
B.  Minimum Lot Area and Residential Density. The minimum area for each parcel proposed in a new subdivision and the maximum density of residential development is determined by subsection (A) of this section, except in areas of special limitations. 
1.  Minimum Lot Area for Subdivisions. When determined by this section, the minimum area for each parcel proposed in a new subdivision shall be as established by a numerical suffix to the residential zoning map symbol (e.g., RS-8, RR-20, etc.), as follows: 
Suffix to Zoning 
Map Symbol 	Minimum Lot 
Area Required 
-8 	 8,000 sq. ft. 
-9.5 	 9,500 sq. ft. 
-10 	10,000 sq. ft. 
-12 	12,000 sq. ft. 
-15 	15,000 sq. ft. 
-20 	20,000 sq. ft. 
 
2.  Maximum Density for Residential Development. When determined by this section, the maximum residential density (dwellings per net acre) allowed for development of an existing lot and the maximum number of dwellings allowed in a new subdivision shall be as established by a numerical suffix to the residential zoning map symbol. The form of the suffix shall consist of a number specifying the maximum allowable number of dwelling units per acre of site area, followed by the letter "D." For example, "RS-0.6D" means the subject site in the RS (residential, single-family) zoning district may be allowed a maximum of 0.6 dwellings per acre or RM-12D means that the subject site in the RM (residential, multi-family) zoning district may be allowed a maximum of twelve (12) dwellings per acre. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-2014)  
Chapter 17.14 - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
 
17.14.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of the individual commercial zoning districts are as follows: 
A.  CL (Commercial, Limited) District. The CL zoning district is applied to areas with access problems, or sensitive environmental features that cannot support the full range of business uses allowed in the CR, commercial, retail, district. Appropriate land uses in the CL zoning district include limited retail and commercial services, restaurants, plant nurseries, business and professional offices, and similar and related compatible uses. The CL zoning district is consistent with the business-limited intensity commercial land use district of the General Plan. 
B.  CR (Commercial, Retail) District. The CR zoning district is intended for a broad range of general shopping and commercial service uses. These uses include general retail markets, commercial services, restaurants, automotive repair and service, hardware and home improvement, durable goods sales, commercial recreation, and similar and related compatible uses. The CR zoning district is consistent with the business-retail land use district of the General Plan. 
C.  CO (Commercial, Office) District. The CO zoning district permits general business offices, medical, professional, real estate, financial, and other offices, and similar and related compatible uses. The CO zoning district is consistent with the business-professional office land use district of the General Plan. 
D.  CMU (Commercial, Mixed Use) District. The CMU zoning district is intended to provide for mixed-use developments with innovative site design and pedestrian orientation. Appropriate land uses include a broad range of office, retail, commercial services, high-intensity residential uses, entertainment, and similar and related compatible uses. The CMU zoning district is consistent with the mixed use land use district of the General Plan. 
E.  CB (Commercial, Business Park) District. The CB zoning district is applied to areas that will serve the office and light industrial needs of the community. Appropriate land uses include a broad range of office, light industrial uses, limited warehousing, and similar and related compatible uses. The CB zoning district is consistent with the business-business park land use district of the General Plan. 
F.  CT (Commercial, Old Town) District. The CT district defines the limits of Old Town Calabasas. Within this area, a variety of office, retail, and other commercial uses are appropriate, to the extent that development is designed to preserve and enhance the area's historic character, and comply with the Old Town Calabasas Master Plan and Design Guidelines. The CT zoning district is consistent with the Old Town land use district of the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.14.020 - Commercial district general development standards. 
A.  General Site Planning and Development Standards. Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and intensifications and alterations to existing uses or structures shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the following requirements. 
Table 2-6 
Commercial District General Development Standards 
Development 
Feature 	Requirement by Zoning District 
	CL 	CR 	CO 	CMU 	CB 	CT 
Minimum Lot Size 	Minimum lot area and width required for new parcels. 
 Area 	5,000 sq. ft. 	No minimum 	5,000 sq. ft. 	No minimum 	10,000 sq. ft. 	No minimum 
 Width 	50 feet 	50 feet 	100 feet 	
Residential Density (1) 	None allowed 	20 dwelling per acre 	None Allowed 	20 dwellings per acre (2) 	None allowed 	20 dwellings per acre 
Floor Area Ratio 	0.20 maximum 	0.20 minimum, 
0.40 maximum 	0.20 minimum, 
0.50 maximum 	0.6 minimum 
1.0 maximum 	0.2 minimum, 
0.6 maximum 	0.2 minimum, 
1.0 maximum 
Site Coverage 	72% of net site area, maximum 	78% of net site area, maximum 	76% of net site area, maximum 	62% of net site area, maximum 	72% of net site area, maximum 	72% of net site area, maximum 
Setbacks Required (3) 	
 Front 	20 ft. minimum 	None required 	20 ft. minimum 	None required 	30 feet minimum 	None allowed 
 Sides (each) 	20 ft. minimum adjacent to any residential zone on the same side of street. None required otherwise. 	None required 	20 ft. minimum adjacent to any residential zone on the same side of street. None required otherwise. 	None required 	20 feet minimum 	Determined through project review process 
 Street Side 	20 ft. minimum 	10 ft. minimum 	20 ft. minimum 	10 feet minimum 	30 feet minimum 	
 Rear 	20 ft. minimum adjacent to residential zone; none required otherwise. 	30 feet minimum 	
 Interior 	As required by California Building Code. 
Height Limits (4) 	35 ft. maximum 	35 ft. maximum; more height may be authorized by Development Plan. 	35 ft. maximum 
Landscaping 	As required by Chapter 17.26 (Landscaping) 
Parking and Loading 	See Chapter 17.28 (Parking and Loading) 
Sign Regulations 	See Chapter 17.30 (Signs) 
 
NOTES: 
1) Maximum number of dwellings allowed on an existing lot. 
2) New projects must include a minimum twenty (20) percent of the overall floor area for residential uses. Renovations or additions that retain the site in its current uses are not subject to this requirement. 
3) See Section 17.20.180 for setback measurement, exceptions, and encroachments. 
4) See Section 17.20.140 for measurement and exceptions. 
B.  Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The minimum and maximum floor area for each parcel and the maximum density of residential development is determined by subsection (A) of this section. 
1.  When calculating the maximum FAR allowed on a site in the CMU, CR and CT zoning districts, the maximum FAR shall include the maximum number of allowed dwelling units. 
2.  The maximum FAR in the CMU zone shall be as established by a numerical suffix to the CMU zoning map symbol. The form of the suffix shall consist of a number specifying the maximum allowable floor area ratio. For example, "CMU-0.95" means that the subject site may be allowed a maximum FAR of 0.95. 
3.  In the CMU-1.0 zone, fifty (50) percent of the floor area shall be dedicated to residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.16 - SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS 
 
17.16.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of the special purpose zoning districts are as follows: 
A.  PD (Planned Development) District. The PD zoning district denotes an area under single or common ownership that warrants detailed planning because of the presence of unique features, environmental conditions or development constraints. The PD zoning district is intended to accommodate a mix of uses with special standards that address the unique features, conditions, and constraints present. The PD zoning district is consistent with the PD land use district of the General Plan. 
B.  HM (Hillside/Mountainous) District. The HM zoning district is applied to areas of the city characterized by steep hillsides and rugged terrain, where appropriate development is limited to single-family dwellings and similar, related compatible uses at very low density, designed to avoid areas of severe physical constraints and safety problems. The HM zoning district is consistent with the HM land use district of the General Plan. 
C.  OS (Open Space) District. The OS zoning district is intended for areas of the city identified by the General Plan as having important environmental resources and hazards. The OS zoning district is consistent with the open space-resource protection land use district of the General Plan. 
D.  OS-DR (Open Space-Development Restricted) District. The OS-DR zoning district is intended for areas of the city with existing open space that have been development restricted through the use of deed restrictions, conservation easements or dedications of common open space as part of an approved subdivision. The OS-DR zoning district will also accommodate publicly owned open space land. 
E.  PF (Public Facilities) District. The PF zoning district is applied to land owned and operated by the city, county, state, or federal governments, or school districts, where a governmental, educational, recreational, or other institutional facility is the primary use of the site, and is sufficiently different from surrounding land uses to warrant a separate zoning district. The PF zoning district will also accommodate publicly or privately constructed uses and facilities developed on city-owned land and intended for a purpose found by the city to be in the public interest. The PF zoning district is consistent with the public facilities-institutional land use district of the General Plan. 
F.  REC (Recreation) District. The REC zoning district is intended for public and private lands within the city committed to leisure and recreational uses that are primarily open space in character. Allowable uses include city-owned parks, regional recreation facilities, and similar, related compatible uses. The REC zoning district is consistent with the open space-recreational and public facilities-recreational land use districts of the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.16.020 - Special purpose district general development standards. 
A.  Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and intensifications and alterations to existing uses or structures shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the following requirements. 
Table 2-7 
Special Purpose District General Development Standards 
Use	PD 	HM 	OS 	OS-DR 	PF 	REC 
Minimum Lot Area - 10 acres 160 acres -	- -  
Residential Density - 1 dwelling per 10 acres 1 dwelling per 160 acres - - -
Floor Area Ratio> 		Not Applicable 
Setbacks (2) 	
 Front 	Determined by Development Plan Process (Section 17.62.070) 	50 feet minimum 	Determined by Development Plan Process (Section 17.62.070) but in no case less than the minimum setbacks required in the RS zone. 	Not applicable 	Determined by Development Plan Process (Section 17.62.070) 
 Sides (each) 		25 feet minimum 			
 Street side 		30 feet minimum 			
 Rear 		50 feet minimum 			
 Interior 		10 feet minimum between structures 			
Height Limits 	35 feet maximum (3) 	25 feet maximum (3) 		
Hillside Development 	See Section 17.20.150 (Hillside and Ridgeline Development) 
Landscaping 	As required by Chapter 17.26 (Landscaping) 
Parking 	As required by Chapter 17.28 (Parking and Loading) 
 
Notes: 
1. Maximum number of dwellings allowed on an existing lot. 
2. See Section 17.20.180 for setback measurement, exceptions, and encroachments. 
3. See Section 17.20.140 for measurement and exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-2014)  
17.16.030 - Voter approval required for redesignation of open space for non-open space use. 
A.  Voter approval required as follows: 
1.  No amendment to the General Plan or any specific plan that would redesignate for non-open space use of any property in the city designated OS-R or OS-RP by the Land Use Map of the Calabasas General Plan, adopted on December 10, 2008 by Resolution Number 2008-1159 shall be effective for any purpose until that amendment has been approved by two-thirds of the voters of the city casting votes on the question. Prior to the placement of such amendment on the ballot, the city shall follow the procedures required by local, state, and federal law, including the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq. f. Such an amendment may take effect only upon two-thirds approval of those casting votes on the question. 
2.  No amendment to the General Plan or any specific plan that would redesignate for non-open space use any property in the city designated PF-R by the Land Use Map of the Calabasas General Plan, adopted on December 10, 2008 by Resolution Number 2008-1159 shall be effective for any purpose without compliance with the applicable requirements of California law related to the protection of park lands, including Government Code Sections 25550.7, 37111, 37111.1, 38440 through 38462, 38501 through 38510 and Public Resources Code Sections 5400 et seq. If any future amendment of these sections reduce or eliminate requirements for a supermajority council vote or for a vote of the city's electorate, then such supermajority council vote or vote of the electorate shall continue to be required for the redesignation for non-open space use of property in the city designated PF-R. 
B.  Subsection A. of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Amendments determined by the council, on the advice of the city attorney, to be necessary to avoid an unconstitutional taking of private property or otherwise required by law; 
2.  Reorganization, renumbering or updating elements of the General Plan in accordance with state law, provided that such actions do not reduce the property designated OS-R, OS-RP, and PF-R; or 
3.  Amendments which facilitate any of the following land uses: uses permitted in the PF land use district; uses in support of open space uses such as bus shelters, parking facilities, and comfort stations; and public utility facilities (e.g., antennae and pipelines). 
C.  Any land designated OS-R, OS-RP or PF-R after July 20, 2005, shall become subject to the requirements of this section upon such designation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2015-325, § 2 , 11-3-2015)  
17.16.040 - Planned development (PD) additional development standards. 
A.  Maximum allowable development. The regulations of the PD zoning district are intended to provide for a diversity of uses, land use relationships and open spaces in an innovative land plan and design. As shown on the General Plan Land Use Map adopted by Resolution 2008-1159 on December 10, 2008, only one area on the east side of Las Virgenes Road at Agoura Road has been designated Planned Development. The maximum allowable development for this area shall be as follows: 
1.  Sixty (60) multiple family residences. 
2.  One hundred fifty-five thousand (155,000) square feet of commercial (office/retail) development. 
B.  Minimum Development Area. The PD zoning district is intended to be applied only to those areas that are large enough to allow for overall planning and design in sufficient detail to achieve greater values and amenities than those achieved by present zoning districts. Within the PD zoning district, the minimum area shall be five acres, however, the minimum area may be less than five acres provided the director finds (i) there is a unique character to the site, to the proposed land use, or the proposed improvements; and (ii) the proposed reduction is consistent with the goals of the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.18 - OVERLAY ZONES 
 
17.18.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
The overlay zoning districts established by this chapter provide guidance for development and land uses in addition to the standards and regulations of the zoning districts, where important site, neighborhood, or area characteristics require particular attention in project planning. The applicability of any overlay zoning district to specific parcels is shown by the overlay zoning map symbol established by Section 17.10.020 appended as a suffix to the symbol for the primary zoning district. The provisions of this chapter apply to proposed land uses and development in addition to all other applicable requirements of this development code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.18.020 - Old Topanga (-OT) overlay zone. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. The Old Topanga (-OT) overlay zone is applied to the Old Topanga area of the city. This is a mountainous area where existing parcels were created before modern zoning and subdivision regulations required appropriate relationships between parcel size, terrain, and building size. The intent of this zoning district is to: 
1.  Ensure that the scale of residential development is in reasonable proportion to the size of the building site and its environmental constraints, including slope and vegetation; 
2.  Provide standards for appropriate development in relation to the high fire hazards, flood hazards, access problems, and steep slopes of the areas to which this overlay zoning district may be applied; and 
3.  Ensure that development is consistent with the hillside and ridgeline regulations in Article III and the grading ordinance in Title 15. 
B.  Permit and Application Requirements. All development within the -OT overlay zoning district shall be subject to site plan review and approval by the review authority. Applications shall include the forms provided by the city, and all information normally required by Section 17.62.030 for a site plan review application. Applications shall also include the following submittals, except where the director determines that existing information on file with the department or readily available to the city makes particular submittals unnecessary. 
1.  Additional Submittal Requirements for All Applications. All site plan review applications within any -OT overlay zone shall include the following materials. These materials shall include documentation demonstrating how the project will comply with the performance standards of Chapter 17.20. 
a.  Site Plan, Topography. A topographic map prepared by a licensed land surveyor or qualified registered civil engineer, showing the building site, existing slopes, and the location of all trees on the site, at a minimum scale of one inch equals ten (10) feet, with a maximum contour interval of two feet for all areas of the site where grading, other construction, or vegetation removal will occur. 
b.  Grading Plan. A conceptual grading plan for all access and lot improvements showing existing and proposed contours, cuts, fills and gradients. 
c.  Oak Tree Report. A report prepared by a city-qualified arborist consistent with the city's oak tree ordinance and guidelines. 
d.  Hydrology Report. A hydrologic data and hydraulic analysis report, indicating whether there will be potential drainage impacts on the site and other properties, particularly down slope properties, as a result of proposed vegetation removal or changes in natural grades, drainage, and impervious surface. If adverse drainage problems are identified, a mitigation plan may also be required. 
e.  Geology and Soils Report. A geology and soils report providing an assessment of site conditions, including geological hazards, that could potentially exacerbate or create (i) damage to the proposed development in the event of a seismic or other geological event, (ii) adverse effects upon existing development including adjacent properties. The conditions assessed are to include, where applicable, soils, slopes, slope failure potential, water table, bedrock geology, and any other substrate conditions that may affect seismic response, landslide risk or liquefaction potential. The report shall include recommendations for mitigating the effects of any identified adverse conditions. 
f.  On-Site Sewage Disposal Suitability Report. The geology and soils report required by subsection (B)(1)(e) of this section shall be expanded to include: analysis of the suitability of site soils for sewage disposal, a sieve (soils) test, and recommendations for appropriate system design. Where applicable, system design (including disposal field location) shall be consistent with the need to protect the root zones of oak trees, in compliance with Section 17.32.010. 
2.  Public Hearing. A public hearing before the commission shall be required in compliance with Section 17.62.020. 
C.  Old Topanga Standards. Development within the Old Topanga (-OT) overlay zone is subject to the following requirements, in addition to the standards for Hillside and Ridgeline Development in Section 17.20.150. 
Table 2-8 
Old Topanga Development Standards 
Development Feature 	Standard 
Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) 1 	
 First 10,000 sq. ft. 	.18 
 Each additional 10,000 sq. ft. 	.15 
 2 acre lots or less 	3,500 maximum 
 2 acre lots or more 	5,000 maximum 
Setbacks Required - Lots less than 1 acre 	
 Front 	20 feet - primary structure 
10 feet - garage or carport 2 
 Sides (each) 	20 percent of the parcel width 
5 foot minimum 
 Street Side 	20 feet 
10 feet - garage or carport 2 
 Rear 	20 feet 
Accessory structures comply with Title 15 
 Interior (between structures) 	6 feet 
Setbacks Required - Lots over 1 acre 	Must comply with setbacks of underlying zoning district. 
Height 3 
Non Sloping Lots 	27 ft. pitched roof 
24 ft. parapet roof 
Sloping Lots 	27 ft. pitched roof 
24 ft. parapet roof 
15 ft. to highest elevation on lot 
 Downhill Building Walls 	15 ft. 
 
1. The FAR shall include the following: house and all its floors, any portion of the garage that exceeds five hundred (500) sq. ft. and all accessory structures that total over five hundred (500) sq. ft. For purposes of this section, accessory structures shall not include hot tubes, jacuzzis, spas and swimming pools if they are not covered or enclosed by a roof or other structure. 
2. Allowed setback where the natural grade of the site at the front property line is more than five ft. above or below the elevation of the centerline of the street adjacent to the site. 
3. See Section 17.20.140 for height measurement requirements. 
1.  On lots fifty (50) feet or less in width, the minimum unobstructed inside dimensions of a garage may be reduced to eighteen (18) feet by eighteen (18) feet. 
2.  Sewage Disposal. Proposed development shall be served by the city sewer system, where available. In areas where on-site sewage disposal systems are authorized, the following criteria must be met: 
a.  Notwithstanding Article III of Title 15 of this Code, any conventional private sewage disposal system installed, replaced, or renovated shall include additional seepage pits, or subsurface drainfields, equivalent to at least two hundred (200) percent of the required original system. This requirement shall not apply to replacements or renovations if the property owner demonstrates that the original system or its design can absorb all the sewage effluent. No lot division or construction of any structures on a lot shall be made if such division or construction impairs the usefulness of the two hundred (200) percent expansion area. The requirement of this subsection shall not apply to alternative or demonstration private sewage disposal systems that provide secondary treatment of effluent as defined by this section that are installed, replaced, or renovated pursuant to Article III of Title 15 of this Code. 
For purposes of this section, secondary treatment is the processing of sewage effluent by means of a processing device, which produces a sewage effluent containing less than thirty (30) milligrams/liter biochemical oxygen demand, and less than ten (10) milligrams/liter total suspended solids, prior to discharge to an approved subsurface disposal area. 
b.  All septic tanks newly installed, replaced or renovated shall be equipped with an outlet sewage effluent filter as required by Article III of Title 15. 
c.  Sewage disposal areas shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the top of the bank of any watercourse. The director shall decide the location of the top of the bank. 
D.  Nonconforming Structures, Alterations and Repairs. Alterations and repairs to any dwelling unit that becomes nonconforming because of the provisions of this chapter shall comply with this section. 
1.  Alteration. The enlargement, extension, or structural alteration of a lawfully built dwelling unit that is nonconforming as to height limits and required setbacks may be allowed: 
a.  Where proposed additions conform with all applicable provisions of this development code; or 
b.  With conditional use permit approval if the exterior limits of new construction do not exceed the height limit or encroach any further into the setbacks than the lawfully built portions of the existing building, and the additions or repairs comply with all other applicable provisions of this development code. 
2.  In-Kind Restoration of a Damaged/Destroyed Unit. A lawfully built dwelling unit that has been damaged or destroyed by accident or natural event, may be restored to the same configuration (building envelope) and in the same location on the premises as existed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, provided that: 
a.  Restoration work pursuant to all required land use approvals and permits begins within two years from the date of damage and is pursued diligently to completion (the building official may authorize additional time to commence and complete reconstruction in cases of natural disaster); and 
b.  Reconstruction is in compliance with all applicable current building, plumbing, and electrical code requirements. 
3.  Replacement of Damaged/Destroyed Unit with a Different Unit. Reconstruction of a nonconforming structure in a different form or location than existed before its damage or destruction may be authorized through site plan review approval, where the review authority first makes the following findings, in addition to the findings required for site plans by Section 17.62.020(E): 
a.  The replacement structure is in a location that has less environmental impacts than the previous location; and/or 
b.  The replacement structure is less subject to fire, flood, and/or slope stability hazards than the former structure. 
E.  1.  No building, grading or other permit under Titles 15 and 17 of this Code may issue for a major construction project unless the public works director issues an encroachment permit for that project under this section to allow use of public rights-of-way for construction access, storage and staging. The public works director may impose such conditions on such permits as he or she deems necessary to allow reasonable construction access, storage and staging without unduly impairing access to other property in the overlay zone. An encroachment permit shall expire on the earlier of the expiration date stated in the permit or the date on which the building official issues a certificate of occupancy or final inspection approval for the major construction project. 
2.  Given the limited street system in the overlay zone: 
(i)  No more than three encroachment permits may be effective at any time in an overlay zone; 
(ii)  No more than one permit shall be issued on a city block or cul-de-sac within an overlay zone at any given time unless the block or cul-de-sac exceeds one thousand (1,000) lineal feet from intersection to intersection or intersection to terminus; 
(iii)  Up to two encroachment permits may be issued on streets or cul-de-sacs exceeding one thousand (1,000) feet in length, from intersection to intersection or intersection to terminus, provided the sites on which major construction projects are locate are at least five hundred (500) feet apart. 
3.  The public works director may revoke an encroachment permit in his or her reasonable discretion if: 
(i)  A responsible person, as that term is defined in Section 8.20.030 of this Code, violates any condition of the permit or any provision of this Code with respect the property for which the permit issued; 
(ii)  The major construction project with respect to which the permit issued is not actively pursued by or on behalf of the permittee for four weeks or more; or, 
(iii)  The active pursuit of the major construction project is slower than the pace normally attained by customary construction practices and revocation of the permit is necessary to allow issuance of a permit to another person who demonstrates the ability to promptly pursue a major construction project at the pace normally attained by customary construction practices. 
4.  A decision of the public works director to refuse issuance of an encroachment permit under this section, to condition such a permit, or to revoke such a permit may be appealed to the planning commission and city council pursuant to Chapter 17.74 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2010-267, § 3, 2-10-2010; Ord. No. 2012-297, § 1(Att. A), 5-23-2012; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-2014)  
17.18.025 - Calabasas Highlands (-CH) overlay zone. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. The Calabasas Highlands (-CH) overlay zone is applied to the Calabasas Highlands area of the city. These are mountainous areas where existing parcels were created before modern zoning and subdivision regulations required appropriate relationships between parcel size, terrain, and building size. The intent of this zoning district is to: 
1.  Ensure that the scale of residential development is in reasonable proportion to the size of the building site and its environmental constraints, including slope and vegetation; 
2.  Provide standards for appropriate development in relation to the high fire hazards, flood hazards, access problems, and steep slopes of the areas to which this overlay zoning district may be applied; and 
3.  Ensure that development is consistent with the hillside and ridgeline regulations of Article III in this title and the grading ordinance in Title 15. 
B.  Permit and Application Requirements. All development within the -CH overlay zoning district shall be subject to site plan review and approval by the review authority. Applications shall include the forms provided by the city, and all information normally required by Section 17.62.030 for site plan review application. Applications shall also include the following submittals, except where the director determines that existing information on file with the department or readily available to the city make particular submittals unnecessary. 
1.  Submittal Requirements for all Applications. All site plan review applications within any -CH overlay zone shall include the following materials. 
a.  Documentation which demonstrates how the project will comply with the Performance Standards in Chapter 17.20, including to the Performance Standards for Hillside Development, Erosion Control Performance Standards, Seismic and Geologic Hazards Management Performance Standards, Stormwater Management and Flooding Performance Standards, and Fire Hazard Management Performance Standards. 
b.  Site Plan, Topography. A topographic map prepared by a licensed land surveyor or qualified registered civil engineer, showing the building site, existing slopes, and the location of all trees on the site, at a minimum scale of one inch equals ten (10) feet, with a maximum contour interval of two feet for all areas of the size where grading, other construction, or vegetation removal occur. 
c.  Grading Plan. A conceptual grading plan for all access and lot improvements showing existing and proposed contours, cuts, fills and gradients. 
d.  Biology Report. If the director determines that biological resources may exist on a site, a report shall be prepared by a qualified professional which identifies important habitats, rare or endangered plant or animal species. The report shall include recommended mitigation measures. 
e.  Hydrology Report. A hydrologic data and hydraulic analysis report, indicating whether there will be potential drainage impacts on the site and other properties, particularly down slope properties, as a result of proposed vegetation removal or change in natural grades, drainage, and impervious surface. If adverse drainage problems are identified, a mitigation plan may also be required. 
f.  Geology and Soils Report. A geology and soils report providing an assessment of site conditions including geological hazards, that a could potentially exacerbate or create (i) damage to the proposed development in the event of a seismic or other geological event, or (ii) adverse effects upon existing development including adjacent properties. The conditions assessed are to include, where applicable, soils, slopes, slope failure potential, water table, bedrock geology, and any other substrate conditions that may affect seismic response, landslide risk or liquefaction potential. The report shall include recommendations for mitigating the effects of any identified adverse conditions. 
2.  Public Hearing. A public hearing before the commission shall be required in compliance with Section 17.62.020. 
C.  Calabasas Highlands Standards. Development within the Calabasas Highlands (-CH) overlay zone is subject to the following requirements, in addition to the standards for hillside and ridgeline development in Section 17.20.150: 
Table 2-9 
Calabasas Highlands Development Standards 
Development Feature 	Standard 
Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) 1 	.45 
Maximum square feet per lot 	3,500 sq. ft. maximum regardless of lot size 
Setbacks Required 	
 Front 	20 ft. - primary structure 
10 ft. - garage or carport 2 
 Sides (each) 3 	10 ft. 
 Interior (between structures) 	6 ft. unless a larger setback is required by Title 15 
 Street Side 	20 ft. 
10 ft. - garage or carport 2 
 Rear 	15 feet 
Height 4 	27 ft. pitched roof 
24 ft. parapet roof 
 Downhill Building Walls 	15 ft. 
 
1. The FAR shall include the following: house and all its floors, garage and all accessory structures. 
2. Allowed setback where the natural grade of the site at the front property line is more than five ft. above or below the elevation of the centerline of the street adjacent to the site. 
3. The dimension of the garage may be reduced to eighteen (18) by eighteen (18) feet on lots fifty (50) feet or less in width. 
4. See Section 17.20.140 for height measurement requirements. On those sites where the city engineer requires a modification of the grade for drainage purposes, the height shall be measured from the finished grade. The grade shall be raised the minimum amount necessary to meet public health and safety standards. 
1.  Sewage Disposal. All newly proposed single-family homes shall connect to the city sewer system in accordance with Title 15 of this Code as required by the most recently adopted Uniform Plumbing Code. For additions to existing homes a connection to the city sewer system shall be required if the addition increases the floor area by more than twenty-five (25) percent or if the addition adds any new plumbing fixtures. 
D.  Nonconforming Structures, Alterations and Repairs. Alterations and repairs to any dwelling unit that becomes nonconforming because of the provisions of this chapter shall comply with this section. 
1.  Alteration. The enlargement, extension or structural alteration of a lawfully built dwelling unit that is nonconforming as to height limits and required setbacks may be allowed: 
a.  Where proposed additions conform with all applicable provisions of this development code; or 
b.  With conditional use permit approval if the exterior limits of new construction do not exceed the height limit or encroach any further into the setbacks than the lawfully built portions of the existing building, and the additions or repairs comply with all other applicable provisions of this development code. 
2.  In-Kind Restoration of a Damaged/Destroyed Unit. A lawfully built dwelling unit that has been damaged or destroyed by accident or natural event, may be restored to the same configuration (building envelope) and in the same location on the premises as existed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, provided that: 
a.  Restoration work pursuant to all required land use approvals and permits begins within two years from the date of damage and is pursued diligently to completion (the building official may authorize additional time to commence and complete reconstruction in cases of natural disaster); and 
b.  Reconstruction is in compliance with all applicable current building, plumbing, and electrical code requirements. 
3.  Replacement of Damaged/Destroyed Unit with a Different Unit. Reconstruction of a nonconforming structure in a different form or location than existed before its damage or destruction may be authorized through site plan review approval, where the review authority first makes the following findings, in addition to the findings required for site plan review by Section 17.62.020(E): 
a.  The replacement structure is in a location that has less environmental impacts than the previous location; and/or 
b.  The replacement structure is less subject to fire, flood, and/or slope stability hazards than the former structure. 
E.  No building, grading or other permit under Titles 15 and 17 of this Code may issue for a major construction project in the Calabasas Highlands Overlay Zone unless the public works director issues an encroachment permit for that project as provided in Section 17.18.020(E) of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2010-267, § 4, 2-10-2010; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-2014)  
17.18.030 - Development Plan (-DP) overlay zone. 
A.  Purpose. The -DP overlay zoning district is intended to provide for maximum flexibility in site planning and design for residential, commercial, and mixed-use projects. The -DP overlay zoning district may be applied where site characteristics and environmental resources, adjacent land uses, or other community conditions may be benefited by accommodations in site planning or the design of structures that could not otherwise be accomplished through the development standards required by the primary zoning district. Development plans are encouraged to produce projects of equal or greater quality than that normally resulting from more traditional development. 
A DP overlay district may be considered only when the resultant development pattern (when compared to that which would otherwise be accomplished without the overlay) will be more conformant with the policies of the General Plan and more effective in implementation of applicable General Plan policies. 
B.  Applicability. The -DP overlay district shall be applied to property through rezoning (an amendment to the Calabasas Zoning Map - see Chapter 17.76), and may be combined with any residential, commercial or special purpose district established by Section 17.10.020. 
C.  Allowed Land Uses. Any land use normally allowed in the primary zoning district by Section 17.11.010 may be allowed within the -DP overlay district, except when the ordinance rezoning a site to this -DP overlay zone includes specific limitations on allowable land uses. 
D.  Permit Requirements. All development and new land uses proposed within the -DP overlay district are subject to approval pursuant to Section 17.62.070. 
E.  Development Standards. Approval of a development plan within the -DP overlay district may include specific modifications to any of the city's adopted street standards, and/or the following development standards which are set forth in this article and Article III: minimum lot area, setbacks, site coverage, floor area ratio, height limits, landscaping or parking. Proposed development and new land uses within the -DP overlay zone shall comply with all other applicable provisions of this development code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.18.035 - Commercial auto retailer (CAR) overlay zone. 
A.  Purpose and applicability. The purpose of the CAR overlay zoning district is to protect an important economic base of the city by incentivizing the development of businesses for automotive sales and service; to safeguard and enhance property values; to protect public and private investment, buildings and open spaces; and to protect and enhance the public health, safety, and welfare. 
1.  The CAR overlay zoning district applies to the West Calabasas Road area of the city, as shown on the City's zoning map. This is a Master Planned area where existing parcels were zoned prior to adoption of the City's West Calabasas Road Master Plan which calls for automotive-serving uses in the area. The CAR overlay zoning district accomplishes the following: 
a.  Ensures that auto sales and service, and other related automotive uses, are permitted within the area, consistent with the West Calabasas Road Master Plan; 
b.  Maximizes density for automotive uses in order to incentivize development consistent with the vision in the Master Plan; 
c.  Provides standards specific to appropriate automotive retailing development and operation as well as site development and design. 
2.  The CAR overlay zone shall be applied only when automotive related development consistent with that envisioned in West Calabasas Road Master Plan is proposed on a site. Projects proposing a use other than auto sales and service shall follow the development code requirements for the underlying zone. 
B.  Development Standards. All development within the CAR overlay zoning district shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Development Code, in addition to the following: 
1.  The following automotive-related land uses are permitted by right within the CAR overlay zone district: 
a.  Sales of new and used motor vehicles; 
b.  Sales of automotive parts and accessories (when accessory to sales of new and used motor vehicles); 
c.  Service and repair of motor vehicles (when accessory to sales of new and used motor vehicles); 
d.  Car washes and automobile detailing services (when accessory to sales of new and used motor vehicles); 
e.  Indoor and outdoor storage of motor vehicles for sale (when accessory to sales of new and used motor vehicles); 
f.  Off-site dealership and sales inventory lots (only if stored vehicles are dealership owned, stored for future sales, and storage is not open or available to the general public). 
2.  Specific building design and site development standards and guidelines applicable to this zone include those found in the West Calabasas Road Master Plan. 
3.  Hours of operation for automotive retailing businesses shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Sundays, except as may otherwise be established via a conditional use permit, or as may be allowed on a temporary basis for special events under a temporary use permit (issued by the community development director). 
4.  Lighting of rooftop inventory and parking areas shall be limited to levels necessary only for security and safety needs between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and daylight. Glare from site lighting shall not travel to adjacent residential communities. All lighting shall be shielded in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 17.27. 
5.  The maximum allowable aggregate floor area for buildings serving an auto sales and service use on a property within the CAR overlay zone may not exceed a net floor area ratio of 0.6. 
( Ord. No. 2017-351 , § 4, 3-22-2017)  
17.18.040 - Scenic corridor (-SC) overlay zone. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the -SC overlay zoning district is to protect an important economic and cultural base of the city by preventing the destruction of the natural beauty and environment of the city; to safeguard and enhance property values; to protect public and private investment, buildings and open spaces; and to protect and enhance the public health, safety, and welfare. 
B.  Application of Overlay District. The -SC overlay zoning district is intended to be applied to major roadways within the city identified in the General Plan as scenic corridors, from which the traveling public may enjoy scenic views of the hill and mountain areas to the north and south of the city, and scenic views of the city itself and surrounding landscape, from the hill and mountain areas of the city. The boundaries of the -SC overlay along designated scenic corridor roadways shall include all properties: 
1.  Located within five hundred (500) feet of a road designated as a scenic corridor; 
2.  Located between a designated scenic corridor road and the prominent ridgeline which defines the viewshed from the scenic corridor; and 
3.  Where the director determines development may have an impact upon the designated scenic corridor. 
C.  Scenic Corridor Permit. All development and proposed land uses within the -SC overlay zoning district shall receive land use permit approval in compliance with Section 17.62.050 by the review authority. Proposed development and land uses that do not require a discretionary permit must still meet the Scenic Corridor Development Guidelines on file with the department. 
D.  Development Standards. All development within the -SC overlay zoning district shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Performance Standards for Hillside Development and Urban Design Standards of Chapter 17.20, the Scenic Corridor Development Guidelines adopted by the council, all applicable provisions of this development code, and any applicable specific plan, master plan corridor design plan or design guidelines. 
E.  Historic Properties within a Scenic Corridor. A permit shall not be required under this section when a proposed development within the scenic corridor also requires a certificate of appropriateness or other permit under the city's historic preservation ordinance (Chapter 17.36). In addition, any guidelines adopted for the scenic corridor shall apply only if those guidelines do not conflict with any preservation or design guidelines established for historic properties or any provision of the historic preservation ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.18.050 - Park Moderne (-PM) Overlay Zone. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. The Park Moderne (-PM) Overlay Zone is applied to zone defined in Section 17.90.020 of this chapter. Parcels in this neighborhood were developed before modern standards for street access were established and this neighborhood is characterized by narrow, winding and generally inadequate streets. Public safety emergencies, including fires, earthquakes, and land movement may require evacuation of these neighborhoods and emergency access to these neighborhoods by police and fire vehicles and other equipment. 
As this neighborhood has developed in recent years, vehicle traffic and parking constraints have made difficult access to and from homes and posed challenges to the provision of public safety services. Accordingly, it is in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of residents and visitors to this area to control construction activity, with its attendant traffic and parking of large vehicles and use of streets for construction staging, materials storage and access, to prevent these uses from creating unsafe conditions which would arise from multiple, simultaneous construction projects that impair access to and from this neighborhood. 
B.  Permit Requirements. No building, grading or other permit under Titles 15 and 17 of this Code may issue for a major construction project in the Park Moderne Overlay Zone unless the public works director issues an encroachment permit for that project as provided in Section 17.18.020(E) of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2010-267, § 5, 2-10-2010)  
Article III. - Site Planning and Project Design Standards  
Chapter 17.20 - GENERAL PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT AND USE STANDARDS 
 
17.20.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
A.  Purpose. This chapter ensures that new or modified land uses and development produce a stable and desirable environment, which is harmonious with existing and future development, and protects the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties, consistent with the General Plan. 
B.  Applicability. The provisions of the chapter apply to a variety of land uses regardless of the applicable zoning district (e.g., residential, commercial, etc.), and therefore, are combined in this chapter. 
1.  These standards shall be considered in combination with the standards for each zoning district in Article II. Where perceived conflict exists, the standards specific to the zoning district shall override these general standards. 
2.  All new or modified structures and uses shall conform with all applicable provisions of this chapter prior to construction. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.020 - Access, circulation and transportation. 
A.  General Standard. Every structure or use shall have adequate physical and legal access to a public street in the form of street frontage, or permanent means of access by way of a public or private easement, or recorded reciprocal (mutual) access agreement. The review authority shall determine whether a structure or use has adequate access. The city engineer and director shall provide a written recommendation to the review authority. 
B.  Performance Standards. Proposed developments shall comply with the following access, circulation and transportation performance standards. The performance standards shall not apply to the following developments (i) an individual single-family dwelling unit on an existing lot, (ii) the expansion of existing commercial, office and business park developments, and (iii) the addition of new dwelling units within existing residential developments. 
1.  Projects that provide new driveways shall meet the following standards. 
a.  Driveway access should be limited to the local street system. Where feasible within business areas, reciprocal access agreements and joint access shall be required to promote shared use of driveways. 
b.  Existing driveways which are unnecessary or substandard shall be removed or upgraded in conjunction with any major or minor onsite development, as determined feasible by the review authority. 
c.  If single family residences must front collector or arterial roadways, circular driveways or onsite turnarounds shall be required, where feasible, to eliminate the need for residents to back onto the street. 
d.  Driveway locations shall maintain adequate separation from access points on the opposite side of the street or shall be aligned with access points on the opposite side of the street. 
e.  Driveways on corner parcels shall be located as far away from intersections as is possible. 
f.  Driveways shall not be located within passenger waiting areas of bus stops or within bus bays. Driveways shall be located so that drivers will be able to see around bus stop improvements, both existing and planned. 
2.  Where medians exist or where a project is required to provide a median, such projects shall meet the following: 
a.  Medians shall be required in order to fulfill the following objectives: access control, separation of opposing traffic flows, left turn storage, aesthetic improvement, and pedestrian refuge. 
b.  Projects shall provide median openings at the maximum feasible intervals. 
3.  Where an approved traffic study requires installation or improvement, traffic signals shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Where a series of traffic signals are provided along a route, traffic signals shall be coordinated to optimize traffic progression on a given route. 
b.  Traffic signalization should emphasize facilitating access from neighborhood areas onto the city's streets, and should work to discourage through traffic from using local city streets. 
c.  Actuated traffic signals should include push buttons to signal the need for pedestrians to cross. Actuated traffic signals along bicycle routes should include bicycle sensitive loop detectors or push buttons adjacent to the curb. 
d.  Traffic signals should be limited to urban areas, and should be avoided wherever feasible within rural areas as they tend to conflict with the rural character of outlying lands. 
4.  Where intersection improvements are required, the intersection shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Intersections should be spaced consistent with the primary function of the street. Accordingly, street intersections along heavily traveled arterials routes should be spaced closer than intersections along collectors. 
b.  Streets at intersections along arterials and collectors should not be offset and should be placed directly across the street from one another. Intersections along local and minor residential collector streets may be offset within the subdivision as a means of discouraging through traffic. 
c.  Intersections may be expanded to include additional turning and through lanes to relieve congestion and improve intersection operation, so long as the intersection will continue to accommodate pedestrians and bicyclists. The design of traffic system improvements which facilitate vehicular turning and bus movements should not discourage pedestrian or bicycle movements. 
d.  Collectors and local streets should intersect with arterial streets at right angles, even though the street alignment may be curvilinear. 
5.  The following standards shall factor into on-street parking considerations: 
a.  Parking on public streets shall be secondary to the street's primary purpose of providing safe and efficient travel for the public. 
b.  Parking is normally permitted on collector streets, but may be restricted to accommodate transit stops, on-street bicycle lanes, additional lanes at intersections, or other similar operational requirements. Removal of parking to increase capacity of traffic along the street should be avoided. 
6.  The following standards shall factor into alternate travel mode considerations: 
a.  Alternative modes of transportation should be integrated into the city's street system in order to: (i) reduce traffic congestion, (ii) improve air quality, (iii) conserve energy, and (iv) provide better transportation for non-motorist. 
b.  Park and ride lots should be provided to allow a safe, convenient place to park for a person utilizing a pre-arranged car pool, van pool or bus pool. 
c.  The number of bus bays should be limited because bus bays have the potential to significantly increase travel times of transit passengers. Bus bays may be used as an initial stage toward developing a queue jumper at an intersection. Bus bays are also acceptable on arterials at bus transfer locations and where boarding time delays are substantial. 
d.  The standard bus stop location is the far side (after an intersection). Bus stops may be located at the near side (before an intersection) or mid-block depending upon transit demand at a particular site and traffic safety considerations. 
e.  All existing and future bus stop locations should include a passenger waiting area adjacent to, but not interfering with, the sidewalk. The waiting area should be equipped with improvements based on the volume of bus patrons using that stop. The bus stop improvements include: a sign, a bench, and a shelter. Bus stop waiting areas should include landscaping, ADA compliant accessibility, lighting, and a paved landing area (if the sidewalk is set back from the curb). 
f.  Bicycle storage facilities shall be provided by uses which have a demand for bicycle use (e.g., schools, parks, offices, shopping centers, libraries). 
g.  Trails and bicycle facilities shall be provided as required by the maps and policies in the Trails Master Plan and Bicycle Master Plan. 
7.  Where the installation of sidewalks is required, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  Sidewalks or pedestrian paths approved by the city shall be designed to make direct connections between commercial, residential, schools, parks, bus stops, and other public facilities. Within Old Town Calabasas, where extensive pedestrian movement is desirable, a thematic walkway appropriate to the area's historic character should be adjacent to the roadway. 
b.  Sidewalks which will be adjacent to the curb should be a minimum of six feet wide. Sidewalks which will be set back from the curb should be a minimum of five feet wide, except for sidewalks within developed recreational areas, in which case, the minimum setback should be eight feet wide. 
c.  Sidewalks should be paved with a hard, all-weather surface which facilitates pedestrian use. Sidewalks and curbs should accommodate pedestrians with disabilities. Sidewalks or pedestrian path within an open space area should have specially paved surfaces or be unpaved so that the sidewalk or pedestrian path blends with the surrounding environment. 
d.  In general, sidewalks and pedestrian paths should be straight to provide a direct route for short to medium distance pedestrian trips, and to facilitate the movement of large numbers of pedestrians. Meandering sidewalks are appropriate in areas where the natural topography or low density land uses lend themselves to informal landscapes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.030 - Air quality maintenance. 
The following air quality performance standards shall apply to new residential subdivisions, multifamily, retail, and office and business park development: 
1.  New residential subdivisions and multi-family developments shall be designed to the following standards to encourage opportunities for residents to work at home, thereby reducing vehicle trips and associated vehicular emissions: 
a.  Building designs which provide work spaces are encouraged. 
b.  Where feasible, high-technology telecommunication links (fiber optic) are to be incorporated into project infrastructure. 
c.  The development's roadway system is to be designed to accommodate bicycle travel. Roadway widths shall be adequate to accommodate both vehicular and bicycle traffic. 
d.  Where feasible, multiple walkway/bicycle access points shall be provided along the perimeter of the subdivision, as well as through cul-de-sacs so that more direct and convenient access for those modes of transportation will encourage their use. 
e.  Neighborhood pedestrian/bicycle routes are to be connected to community routes to facilitate their use in replacing some automobile trips. 
f.  Where projects are located adjacent to shopping centers, schools, parks and other local destinations, pedestrian walks and bicycle routes should connect directly into these facilities to facilitate their use and replace some automobile trips. 
g.  Pedestrian barriers along walkways (e.g., lighting standards, utilities/transformers) shall be minimized. Where pedestrian barriers cannot be avoided, additional width shall be provided along the walkway to facilitate pedestrian access. 
h.  Within gated developments, provision of separate, but proximate, access points for pedestrians and vehicles shall be provided where feasible to enhance the convenience of pedestrian/bicycle travel without sacrificing access control. 
i.  Street trees shall be provided which will assist in shading streets during summer time and thereby reduce the amount of reflective heat on adjacent structures. 
j.  To reduce the use of single occupant vehicular travel, telecommuting centers shall be provided in multi-family developments exceeding one hundred fifty (150) dwelling units. Whenever possible, these centers are to be located within the project recreation center so as to eliminate the need to construct a separate structure. 
2.  To facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access and afford it a priority equal to vehicular circulation, the following design features shall be incorporated into retail, office, and business park developments where feasible: 
a.  Berms and other grade differentials which require the pedestrian or bicyclist to make a strenuous ascent between buildings or to access the development, and thereby make pedestrian or bicycle travel difficult, are to be avoided. 
b.  Onsite circulation should separate pedestrian and bicycle traffic from vehicular traffic. Pedestrian walkways shall be clearly defined to enhance safety and convenience, particularly in instances where pedestrians must cross large parking areas. 
c.  Retail centers should follow an "L" or "U" shape, with a portion of the buildings located near the street and parking located between or behind buildings. Centers designed with parking as the sole use along the street frontage are to be avoided. 
d.  Retail centers and office buildings should be sited on the front of the lot, adjacent to the streetscape to reduce pedestrian travel distances to transit stops. 
e.  When requested by the Metropolitan Transit Authority, a transit stop shall be constructed along the adjacent public road as part of required street improvements. 
f.  Site planning should favor pedestrian traffic by providing canopy trees to shade walkways, furnishing gathering places, and organizing buildings so that users have a continuous pedestrian level experience. 
g.  Office buildings should be located near the street and parking located between or behind buildings. Office complexes with parking as the sole use along the street frontage are to be avoided. 
3.  Where the application of all feasible mitigation measures for reducing air pollutant emissions will not reduce emissions below the thresholds of significance maintained by the South Coast AQMD for construction or operations, offsetting indirect mitigation will be required. Such offsetting mitigation may consist of the following items or other measures as would be required by CEQA: 
a.  Establishment or contribution toward the establishment of a telecommuting facility or teleconferencing facility; 
b.  Construction of offsite pedestrian facilities; 
c.  Off-site contributions to regional transit (e.g., right-of-way, park and ride lots, transit stops and/or shelters); 
d.  Contribution to an adopted traffic signal synchronization project; 
e.  Construction or contribution toward the construction of bicycle facilities; 
f.  Implementation of a home dispatching system where employees receive routing schedules by phone rather than by driving to work; 
g.  Replacement of fleet vehicles with low emission vehicles or contribution toward replacement of school or transit buses with low emission vehicles; 
h.  Establishment or contribution toward establishment of a shuttle service along Calabasas Road to connect office uses with commercial establishments and fast food establishments along Calabasas Road and at the Las Virgenes Road freeway interchange. 
i.  Provision of on-site child day care facilities, or contribution toward the establishment of nearby child day care facilities; 
j.  Provision of transit incentives by commercial establishments within a retail center. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.040 - Archaeological, historical and paleontological resources. 
A.  General Standard. In the event that archaeological resources are discovered during any construction, construction activities shall cease, and the department shall be notified so that the extent and location of discovered archaeological resources may be recorded by a qualified archaeologist and disposition of artifacts may occur in compliance with state and federal law and the city's Historic Preservation Ordinance (Chapter 17.36). 
B.  Performance Standards. Any proposed development or any intensification of an existing development which will (i) result in any disturbance to the natural ground surface; or (ii)) involve an historical resource, shall conform to the city's Historic Preservation Ordinance (Chapter 17.36). 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.050 - Biotic resource protection. 
A.  The following Performance Standards for Biotic Resources shall apply to all development projects: 
1.  Disturbances of biotic resources shall be avoided, to the extent feasible as determined by the review authority. 
2.  Vegetative resources which contribute to habitat carrying capacity (vegetative species diversity, faunal resting areas, foraging areas and food sources) and other significant biotic features are to be preserved in their existing location and condition. 
3.  The significant impacts identified in Table 6-2 in Chapter 17.60 shall be avoided, to the extent feasible as determined by the review authority. 
4.  Significant biotic resources are to be preserved in place unless the only feasible project design alternatives would isolate the resources in such a manner as to jeopardize their long-term survival. Offsite mitigation into a recognized habitat management program may be acceptable. 
5.  Development within or adjacent to sensitive biological habitat shall provide one hundred-foot setback from sensitive habitats or other distance determined by a qualified biologist in accordance with Section 17.20.150(D). The setback will preferably be accompanied by protective fencing or other buffers during the construction phase. This minimum setback may be enlarged as necessary to prevent indirect impacts on sensitive biotic resources. 
6.  Protect Riparian Vegetation. Where riparian vegetation has previously been removed, except for channelization, the buffer that is provided shall allow for the reestablishment of riparian vegetation to its prior extent as feasible. 
7.  Require conservation or open space easements, grant deeds, or other similar mechanisms over sensitive habitat areas where the development may directly impact such habitats or may indirectly impact these habitats through changes in intensity of use on the parcel to the extent the conditions bear a nexus to, and are proportionate to, the impacts of the development. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.055 - Cluster development standards. 
A.  Cluster Development Standards for HM and RR Zones. In accordance with General Plan policies, clustered development standards allow for superior subdivision design in situations where sensitive or significant natural features warrant preservation or conservation. By adhering to the following standards, clustered development will generally result in the preservation of a greater amount of open space with fewer impacts to the environment, including reduced site grading and a reduced development footprint, fewer oak tree impacts, fewer biological impacts, and minimization of the urban-wildland interface. Accordingly, the following standards apply to all clustered development projects: 
1.  Clustered development shall be accomplished via a tract map and a development plan, processed in accordance with Chapter 17.62 of this development code; 
2.  Clustered development shall be allowed only when impacts to resources are determined to be comparatively less severe compared to impacts caused by the non-clustered alternative for the same project, and where such determination is based upon a review of potential project impacts documented in an Environmental Impact Report or as otherwise accomplished under CEQA; 
3.  Except where lot configuration and sizing modifications may otherwise be accomplished as part of the tract map and development plan, clustered development shall conform to the goals and policies of the General Plan, and all applicable standards of this development code; 
4.  A clustered subdivision shall not include a greater number of lots than could otherwise be accommodated in a non-clustered lot configuration under the applicable zoning and non-clustering subdivision standards and requirements; 
5.  Where an average slope for a project exceeds twenty (20) percent, dwelling units should be clustered together on the more level portions of a site and steeper areas should be preserved in a natural state. 
6.  At least fifty (50) percent of the subdivision shall be preserved as permanent open space. 
7.  The following factors, among other relevant factors, shall be balanced to determine the location of lots: topography and efficiency of access, preservation of open space, need for secondary access, geologic hazards and constraints, visual impacts, and conservation of natural resources and landscape features. 
8.  Land within the subdivision site not contained in lots, roads, or utility easements, shall be in one or more parcels dedicated or reserved as permanent open space. 
9.  The open space shall be generally configured as large, contiguous areas of undisturbed native habitat capable of serving the various purposes of such open space, including view preservation of the natural areas, habitat preservation and wildlife corridor preservation. The open space set aside calculation should not include lawns, landscaping, manufactured slopes, or other artificially landscaped features but may include habitat restoration areas. 
10.  Each dedicated open space parcel shall be shown on all subdivision plans with a notation of its area and its intended open space use. 
11.  To minimize visual impact of clustered homes from the public rights-of-way buffers consisting of native landscaping shall be utilized. 
12.  To avoid a crowded appearance, clustered homes shall be setback from scenic roadways and screened from view with extensive landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.060 - Community Standards. 
A.  The performance standards for Fiscally Responsible Development, Educational Facilities, Parks and Recreation, Municipal Services and Facilities, Quality of Life and Responsible Regionalism shall apply to new development as follows: 
1.  To ensure that new development meets the Fiscal Management Objectives in the General Plan and "pays for itself," new development shall: 
a.  Construct and/or pay for new on-site capital improvements required by the project; 
b,  Construct and/or contribute to off-site capital improvements required by the project; 
c.  Provide for public services necessary to serve the project; 
d.  Not result in any long-term reduction in the level of public services provided to existing development; 
e.  Not result in any substantial, short-term reduction in the level of public services provided to existing development; 
f.  Where necessary, shall be phased so as to ensure that the capital facilities used by the new development meet applicable performance criteria in this chapter; and 
g.  Where a fiscal impact study determines that the aggregate cost of providing new and additional facilities and services to support a new project will exceed the projected aggregate value of contributions, dedications, and exactions, and that a projected shortfall is therefore calculated, the city may negotiate and enter into a development agreement with the project developer to devise appropriate additional funding and contributions to off-set such projected shortfall. 
2.  To ensure that new development meets the Educational Services Objectives in the General Plan, new development shall provide full mitigation for school impacts. 
3.  To ensure that there is ample access to high quality spaces for leisure and active recreation, new development shall comply with the following standards; 
a.  Except in cases where mitigation fees or facilities to mitigate impacts have already been provided, all new residential development, including single family and multi-family projects shall be required to dedicate land or to pay such development impacts fees as the city may establish for the provision of parks and recreational facilities. 
b.  Multi-family development projects shall provide usable open space or parkland within the project or pay comparable impact fees, in accordance with the Quimby Act. 
c.  To the extent that the city programs make available recreational activities and facilities for area employees and businesses (e.g., ball fields and gymnasium facilities available for corporate leagues, corporate fitness programs), new commercial, office, and business park developments shall be required to pay development impact fees as may be established by the city for the provision of parks and recreational facilities. 
4.  To ensure the availability of adequate municipal services and facilities the following standards shall apply: 
a.  Applications for discretionary development permits, which also include a proposed General Plan Amendment, may be approved only after the city's reviewing authority has first determined that the services, infrastructure, and facilities necessary to serve such development are in place and are adequate to serve the additional service demands created by the project, or that the project will contribute its fair share toward any infrastructure improvements or service expansion as deemed necessary to serve the project. 
b.  In the event that General Plan objectives for services, infrastructure, and facilities are not being met due to existing development, then only the minimum development intensity defined in the zoning map will be permitted for new development. In addition, new development shall be required to provide such facilities as are necessary to ensure that performance objectives are met for the services, infrastructure, and facilities provided to the new development. 
c.  The use of interim facilities by new development shall be permitted only when it is found that development of such interim facilities will not impair the financing or development of master planned facilities. 
5.  To preserve the quality of life for residents, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  The design of new developments shall consider the privacy of existing residential dwellings and their yard areas to the extent feasible. 
b.  Protect residential neighborhoods by avoiding the need for local residential streets to carry cut through traffic or to provide primary access to new residential subdivisions unless to do so would constitute a taking or otherwise violate the legal rights of the subdivider. The intent of this performance standard is to prevent traffic from leaving an arterial or collector roadway and passing through one or several local street segments to reach and continue traveling on another collector or arterial roadway. The various street types are identified in Figure VI-1 of the General Plan. 
c.  For residential neighborhoods served by substandard streets, access from new development, other than improvements to existing legal lots, shall be avoided unless to do so would constitute a taking or otherwise violate the legal rights of the proponent of the new development. 
d.  Where needed, active programs are to be undertaken to minimize or prohibit through traffic from using neighborhood collectors and local streets. Visual deterrents to through traffic will be emphasized, using physical deterrents only as a last resort. 
e.  To maintain natural lighting and solar access, the elements of a site plan (buildings and landscaping) shall not cast a shadow onto adjacent properties greater than that which would be cast by a hypothetical twenty-five-foot wall located at the property line between the hours of nine a.m. and three p.m., Pacific Standard Time, on December 21. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-297, § 1(Att. A), 5-23-2012)  
17.20.070 - Design considerations. 
A.  General Design Guidelines. The following General Urban Design Guidelines shall be utilized by the architectural review panel in their review of all development as specified below. The guidelines also apply to the expansion of existing commercial, office and business park development, and the addition of housing units within an existing multifamily development. 
1.  The size, height, bulk, and location of buildings are to be managed in relation to the size of the parcel and overall site design to avoid a crowded appearance, preserve a visual appearance of openness, and to maintain the existing low rise character of Calabasas. 
2.  New development shall be, as much as feasible, compatible with the surrounding environment and existing developments. Inclusion of gateways which create a visual sense of entry in all developments is encouraged. 
a.  Gateways or entry features should range in scale as appropriate with their importance, and may identify an entrance to the city, neighborhood, development project, or single building. 
b.  Gateways or entry features should include enriched paving, raised medians, signage, landscaping, and other features as appropriate. 
3.  All exterior wall elevations of buildings and screen walls shall have architectural treatments which enhance their appearance. 
a.  Uniform materials and consistent style should be evident within all exterior elevations. 
b.  Secondary accent materials and colors should be used to highlight building features and provide visual interest. 
4.  The use of transition and buffering techniques will be required where one or more of the following situations exist: 
a.  Along the boundaries between residential and business uses; 
b.  At the edge of areas being preserved because of their environmental sensitivity or significance. 
5.  New multi-family, commercial, office, and business park developments shall emphasize pedestrian level activities by utilizing the following techniques in addition to those discussed as part of air quality performance standards set forth in Section 17.29.030 of this development code: 
a.  Incorporate a central plaza or main visual focus which is oriented toward pedestrians; 
b.  Incorporate plaza areas which can be used as informal gathering places; 
c.  Utilize "street furniture" (planters, benches, bike racks, trash receptacles) to create and enhance open spaces; and 
d.  Within commercial, office, and business park developments, encourage architectural styles which provide covered verandas and other similar pedestrian-oriented shade features. 
6.  New development within the freeway corridor shall comply with following urban design guidelines: 
a.  Landscaped setbacks for structures and required parking spaces shall be used in such a manner as to soften the appearance of development along the freeway right-of-way. These setbacks are to be of a sufficient distance and density, and are to be designed to make the landscaping, rather than the development, the dominant visual feature for freeway motorists. 
b.  Structures may be set back various distances from the freeway right-of-way to avoid flat, straight walls at the edge of a fixed setback line. 
c.  Project site plans may be oriented either to the freeway or to the adjacent street but in either case should provide an equal amount of site amenities throughout the project. Buildings should not turn their backs completely to either the freeway or adjacent street(s). 
d.  Building forms and elevations should create interesting roof silhouettes, strong patterns of light and shadow, and integrated architectural detail. Box-like structures and flat monotonous facades are to be avoided. 
e.  Buildings visible from the freeway, regardless of their orientation, are to be designed to provide the same level of architectural detail on the freeway elevation as on other elevations. 
f.  Buildings should maintain a low profile and be visually integrated with the natural terrain to the greatest extent possible. 
g.  Building materials should blend with the colors and textures of the surrounding hillsides. The use of mirrored glass is strongly discouraged. 
h.  Buildings that have the potential to impact views from the freeway shall submit viewshed studies to determine visual impacts. 
7.  New business park development shall comply with following urban design guidelines: 
a.  Business park and office development shall have a quality, contemporary, low-rise, campus-like design. 
b.  A variety of structure and parking setbacks should be provided in order to avoid long monotonous facades and to create diversity within the project. 
c.  Setbacks from property lines should be provided proportionate to the scale of the building and in consideration of adjacent development. Larger buildings require additional setback areas for a balance of scale and so as not to impose on neighboring uses. 
d.  Placement of structures should create opportunities for plazas, courts, or gardens. 
e.  The main elements of appropriate business park design include the following: 
i.  A low-rise campus-like setting with strong pedestrian orientation; 
ii.  Plazas, courtyards, and landscaped open space; 
iii.  Convenient access, visitor parking, and on-site circulation; 
iv.  Service areas located at the sides and rear of structures; 
v.  Screening of outdoor storage, work areas, and equipment; and 
vi.  An emphasis on the primary business entry with significant landscaping. 
f.  Parking lots should not be the dominant visual element on the site. Large expansive paved areas located between the street and the buildings are to be avoided in favor of smaller multiple lots separated by buildings and landscaping. 
g.  Buildings should be located on "turf islands," where the main entrance does not directly abut paved parking areas. A minimum five- to seven-foot wide landscape strip should be provided between parking areas and buildings. 
h.  Parking lots adjacent to and visible from public rights-of-way should be screened from view through combinations of earth berms, low screen walls, changes in elevation, and landscaping. 
i.  A variety of design techniques, including color, should be used to help overcome plain semi-industrial buildings constructed in unattractive, "box-like" forms, and to achieve the character of development that reinforces Calabasas' low-rise image. 
j.  There should be a consistent use of colors, materials, and detailing throughout all elevations of a building. As such, elevations which do not directly face a street should likewise receive architectural treatment. 
k.  Encourage the use of architectural elements to define the main entrance and organize space at the ground plane (e.g., arcades, colonnades, and covered walkways). These elements shall reinforce the pedestrian scale of a building and contribute to its overall low-rise character. 
l.  Refuse containers, service areas, loading docks, and other similar facilities shall be (i) be located out of view from the general public or fully screened; and (ii) not interfere with parking and circulation. 
8.  New development shall comply with following streetscape design guidelines: 
a.  Provide landscaping and trees along streets to act as a buffer for developed sites from street noise and other disturbances. This landscaping shall maintain safe site distances for pedestrians and motorist. In addition, this landscaping should serve the following functions: climate and glare control, aesthetics, architectural enhancement, erosion protection, and delineation of space. 
b.  Provide functional travel routes for pedestrians, and, where designated, for bicyclists, horse riders, hikers, joggers, these travel routes shall be buffered from automobile traffic. 
c.  Provide visually attractive and physically comfortable environments which encourage the congregation of people. These environments shall be integrated with similar environments of adjacent private property. 
d.  Provide visually attractive environments for motorists and users of public transportation. 
e.  Combine plant materials with man-made structures to (i) visually soften the built-up environment, (ii) clean the air, and (iii) reduce the heat island effect caused by pavement and concrete. 
f.  Plant palettes and irrigation systems shall be designed to be water efficient. The emphasis in plant selection should be on native and naturalized plants. 
g.  Where they are relevant to landscaping issues, cultural, environmental, and historical considerations should be considered when selecting a plant palette for the streetscape. 
h.  Landscape plans should account for the size of plants when they are mature so as to avoid an overgrown appearance. Landscape plans shall protect necessary sight visibility triangles for all motorists. Landscape plans shall avoid conflicts with existing utilities. 
i.  Street landscaping shall be composed of plants which are suitable for road side environments and have tolerance for high levels of reflected heat and glare and vehicle air pollutant emissions. These plants should be easy to maintain and replace. 
j.  Existing mature trees should, wherever feasible, be retained in roadway design. 
k.  Trees should be used to provide (i) scale, (ii) unify unrelated elements, (iii) overhead and vertical planes to create sheltered spaces, (iv) shade and block winds, and (v) either screening of undesirable views or enhance desirable views. 
l.  Shrubs should be used to provide mid-level vertical planes so as to (i) create space, (ii) screen or enhance views, (iii) direct and guide circulation, and (iv) provide a protective barrier between pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
m.  Groundcovers should be used to provide ground level visual interest and direct and guide pedestrian and bicycle circulation. 
n.  The design and location of street furniture should not reduce sightlines for motorists or conflicts with existing utilities. 
o.  Lighting should accommodate street uses during the evening and promote security through well-lit pedestrian walkways. notwithstanding the foregoing, lighting shall fully comply with the city's dark night sky policy. 
p.  Where a distinctive aesthetic street character is important, such as in Old Town, the types and colors of lighting fixtures should be consistent with that character. In all other areas of the city, decorative lighting fixtures should be used. 
q.  Pedestrian furniture (e.g., benches, planter seating, trash containers, drinking fountains, and other similar fixtures or items) should enhance the aesthetic character of pedestrian gathering places. Pedestrian furniture should also be (i) compatible with a streetscape theme, (ii) durable, (iii) easily maintained, and (iv) easily replaced. 
r.  As pedestrian furniture is both in the public right-of-way and on private property, the style and placement of furniture should be coordinated on public and private property, and should not interfere with pedestrian use of the sidewalk. 
s.  Benches and planters should provide comfortable and adequate seating. 
t.  Trash containers should be of such size and quantity so as to discourage littering. 
u.  Transportation-related furniture (e.g., bicycle parking, bus shelters, bus benches, pedestrian channelization features, railings, bollards) should accommodate and encourage the use of non-automobile travel modes, without blocking sidewalk travel. 
v.  Bus passenger waiting areas should be placed between the sidewalk and the street where adequate space exists. Inadequate space or driveway proximity may necessitate placing the passenger shelter behind the sidewalk. 
w.  The design of utilities (e.g., traffic signal boxes, power poles, transformers, underground cables) should minimize the visual presence of these features within the streetscape. 
9.  Design Guidelines for Second Stories of Single Family Homes. The following guidelines shall be utilized by the architectural review panel and community development director in their review of new second story additions or new two story homes. Alternative design features may be allowed, if the reviewing body finds they are consistent with the intent of the guidelines. 
a.  Changes in wall planes and consistent level of articulation should be incorporated into every elevation of the home visible from public view. 
b.  Street facing elevations should incorporate architectural features that indicate where a first story ends and a second story begins. For example, floor delineations can be accomplished by adding rooflines. 
c.  Where appropriate, some portions of the second story roof should be lowered to the gutter or eave line of the first story roof to reduce the apparent volume of the building. 
d.  Building heights should be compatible with the size of a lot, as well as the context of the surrounding neighborhood. The height of a structure should be compatible with the established building heights in the neighborhood. 
e.  First and second story plate heights should be consistent with the other homes in the neighborhood. 
f.  Long, uninterrupted side walls should be avoided. Second stories should be setback further from the side property line than the first floor. 
g.  If it would safeguard the privacy of an adjacent neighbor's backyard or the interior of his or her home, second story should include one or more of the following: (i) stagger or alternate windows, (ii) utilize clerestory windows, and (iii) on side elevations fix or obscure windows to a height of six feet above the second floor, (iv) permanent exterior louvers to a height of six feet above the second floor or (v) incorporate a sill height of five feet or greater. 
h.  Colors and materials should be consistent with the colors and materials utilized for the existing house. 
B.  Old Town Calabasas. Proposed development and new land uses within the CT zoning district shall comply with the Old Town Master Plan and Design Guidelines. 
C.  Scenic Corridor Areas. Proposed development and new land uses within a scenic corridor designated by the -SC overlay zoning district shall comply with the city's Scenic Corridor Development Guidelines. 
D.  Specific Design Guidelines Areas. Proposed development and new land uses within any area for which the city has adopted specific design guidelines shall comply with those design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-2014)  
17.20.080 - Disaster response. 
The following Disaster Response Performance Standard shall apply to all new proposed discretionary development projects. 
A.  Discretionary development projects will be required to provide points of ingress and egress, to include emergency access for police and fire vehicles, as required by the Los Angeles County Consolidated Fire Districts (LACFD) and the City of Calabasas. If LACFD determines adequate access is provided with only one access point, these projects shall have no more than one access point. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.090 - Energy conservation. 
A.  The Energy Conservation Performance Standards of this section shall apply to all proposed development, including the expansion or remodeling of existing commercial, business park, and multifamily developments. Energy conservation requirements for proposed subdivisions are in Section 17.46.040. All proposed commercial developments shall also meet the city's Green Building Ordinance (Chapter 17.34). 
B.  Performance Standards. To ensure that the city's performance objectives on energy are met, projects shall be reviewed to assess their compliance with the following criteria: 
1.  Design buildings in groups or clusters with protected indoor or plaza/open areas which promote both exterior accessibility and enjoyment within a protected environment. 
2.  Construct internal circulation roadways at the minimum widths necessary for safe circulation to minimize solar reflection and heat radiation. Developments shall utilize shade trees within parking areas so that fifty (50) percent of the parking area surface is placed in the shade at noon during the summer equinox within five years of installation. 
3.  Where possible, locate reflective surfaces (e.g., parking lots) on the north and east sides of buildings to decrease potential heat gain and reflection to adjacent buildings. In the alternative, where parking areas must be located to the south or west of buildings, developments shall have landscaping to reduce potential heat gain. 
4.  Where possible, orient glass toward the south, the side with the greatest amount of solar access (heat gain potential).Use appropriate building shapes and locations to promote maximum feasible solar access to individual units. 
5.  Design individual buildings to maximize natural internal lighting through the use of court wells, interior patio areas, and building architecture. Site plan elements (e.g., buildings, landscaping) should protect access to sunshine for planned solar energy systems and/or for solar oriented rooftop surfaces which can support a solar collector or collectors capable of providing for the anticipated hot water needs of a building between the hours of nine a.m. and three p.m., Pacific Standard Time, on December 21. 
6.  Use canopies and overhangs to shade windows during summer months while allowing for reflection of direct sunlight during winter months. 
7.  Install windows and vents in commercial and industrial buildings to provide the opportunity for through ventilation. 
8.  Use reflective roof materials to reduce solar gains, unless a passive heat system is provided. 
9.  Incorporate the use of deciduous trees in landscaping plans, especially near buildings and around large expanses of parking lots or other paved areas. 
10.  Incorporate deciduous vines on walls, trellises and canopies to shade south and west facing walls, to cool them in summer months. 
11.  Incorporate wind breaks to protect against winter winds. 
12.  Cooperation, where feasible, is encouraged with Southern California Edison (SCE), the Gas Company, and the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) for the purposes of establishing energy conservation demonstration projects, or serving as a laboratory for testing new energy conservation techniques. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.100 - Fences, walls and hedges. 
The following standards shall apply to the installation of all fences, walls and hedges. Fences require administrative plan review in all zoning districts except Residential Zones unless located in the scenic corridor. Fences in the Residential Zone zoning district that are located in the scenic corridor shall require a minor scenic corridor permit. See Section 17.02.020(B) for situations where fences require no permit. 
A.  Exempt Fences. Fences (wood, wrought iron, chain link) in the residential zoning districts, which comply with the height limits in subsection (B) of this section, are exempt from land use permit requirements. 
B.  Height Limitations. Fences, walls and hedges are subject to the height limitations in this subsection. 
1.  General Height Limit. Freestanding fences, walls and hedges shall be limited to a maximum height of forty-two (42) inches at the front property line, and may increase in height within the front setback area by six inches for every two feet of distance back from the property line, to a maximum of six feet at ten (10) feet from the property line. 
a.  Fences, walls and hedges are limited to a height of six feet beyond the front setback. 
b.  Fences, walls, and hedges within side yard or rear yard setback areas may not exceed six feet in height. 
c.  Entry features over front yard gates (e.g., arches, trellises, pilasters, pedestals), with a maximum height of eight feet, may be authorized through site plan review provided that the entry features are no wider than eight feet. 
d.  Tennis court fences, with a maximum height of twelve (12) feet, may be allowed consistent with Section 17.12.165(J). 
2.  Corner Parcels. No fence, wall, hedge, shrubbery, mounds of earth, or other visual obstruction over forty-two (42) inches in height above the top of the existing or planned curb elevation shall be located within a traffic safety visibility area. See Section 17.20.140(F). 
This requirement shall not apply to: public utility poles; trees trimmed (to the trunk) to a line at least six feet above the elevation of the intersection; saplings or plant species of open growth habits and not planted in the form of a hedge, which are so planted and trimmed as to leave, at all seasons, a clear and unobstructed cross view; supporting members of appurtenances to permanent structures existing on July 1, 1998; and official warning signs or signals. 
3.  Retaining Walls. Individual retaining walls shall not exceed a height of six feet unless otherwise approved by the director. Outward-facing retaining walls in the front setback may not exceed a height of four feet. See Figure 3-1. Outward-facing retaining walls within a side yard or rear yard setback, and which face a street or public park, may not exceed four feet in height unless approved by the director to a height not exceeding six feet. All retained slopes should be terraced and landscaped/screened as shown in Figure 3-2. The minimum horizontal distance between terraced or tiered retaining walls shall be four feet. See Figure 3-2. 
4.  Director Discretion. The director shall have discretion to approve walls or fences which are up to twenty-five (25) percent higher than the height limitations listed in subsections (B)(1) through (B)(3) of this section; however, the average height of any wall or fence may not exceed six feet six inches without a variance. 
  
  
C.  Fence Design. 
1.  Perimeter fences/walls adjacent to public rights-of-way shall be articulated by providing a minimum of one, two-foot deep by five-foot long landscaped recession for every one hundred (100) feet of continuous wall. The design may include an appropriate mix of materials and finish subject to the approval of the director. 
2.  Uninterrupted fences and walls facing the public right-of-way are to be avoided, unless they are needed for specific screening, safety, or sound attenuation purposes. 
3.  Fences or walls should be consistent with the site being developed and surrounding developments, open spaces, streets, and pedestrian ways. 
4.  Fencing and walls should respect existing view corridors, by among other things, preserving existing views of surrounding hillsides to the greatest extent possible. 
5.  Fencing and walls should incorporate landscape elements or such materials, colors, or textures which will prevent graffiti, undue glare, heat, reflection, or aesthetic inconsistencies. 
D.  Required Fences Exempt. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a fence or wall required by any law or regulation of the city, state or any agency thereof. 
E.  Prohibited Materials. The use of barbed wire, electrified fence or razor wire fence in conjunction with any fence, wall or hedge, or by itself within any zoning district, is prohibited unless required by any law or regulation of the city, state or any agency thereof. 
F.  Chain Link Fencing. Temporary chain link fencing for construction projects and chain link fencing for private and commercial baseball fields, tennis courts, and other recreational facilities are permitted in any zoning district. Chain link fencing is permitted only in OS, HM, RR, RC and CL zoning districts, as follows: 
1.  Residential and Commercial Districts. Chain link fencing within the RC and CL zoning districts shall only be located along the side property line, behind the front yard setback and along the rear property line with vegetation planted in sufficient density and height to screen the fence from adjacent parcels and public areas; and 
2.  Scenic Corridors. Where allowed in a scenic corridor, chain link fencing shall be covered with vines or other screening plant materials. 
G.  Fences Between Different Land Uses. Fences or walls may be required between different land uses (e.g., commercial and residential, multifamily residential and single-family residential) in compliance with Section 17.20.100. 
H.  Fencing for Wildlife Movement. Fencing on properties in the RR, HM, and OS zoning districts located adjacent to or partially or wholly within sensitive biological resource areas, Los Angeles County significant ecological areas, wildlife linkage and corridors or ecological areas and corridors as mapped on Figures IV-1 and VI-2 in the General Plan shall be wildlife friendly except as provided below: 
1.  Areas of immediate development and daily use (to include residences and accessory structures, surrounding hardscape areas, swimming pools and patios) may be enclosed entirely or in part by non-wildlife-friendly fencing as necessary for the purpose of protecting public safety. 
2.  Animal containment facilities may be enclosed subject to the standards in Section 17.12.040. 
3.  Perimeter fencing of a parcel shall be prohibited except where the perimeter is part of the immediate development area or the fence is designed and constructed as a wildlife friendly fence. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-297, § 1(Att. A), 5-23-2012)  
17.20.120 - Freeway corridor development. 
The Urban Design - Freeway Corridor Design Guidelines of Section 17.20.080 shall apply to all proposed development within the Ventura Freeway Corridor, including the expansion or remodeling of existing commercial, office and business park developments, where the proposed project: 
A.  Is within five hundred (500) feet of the Ventura Freeway right-of-way; 
B.  Is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the Ventura Freeway right-of-way and is on a parcel larger than forty thousand (40,000) square feet; or 
C.  Is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the Ventura Freeway right-of-way and structures of three or more stories in height are proposed; or 
D.  Proposes Freeway-Oriented Signs. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.130 - Hazards. 
A.  The following performance standards apply to new development and include hazardous materials, seismic and geologic hazards, and fire hazards. 
1.  The use, handling, storage and transportation of hazardous substances shall comply with all applicable state laws (Government Code Section 65850.2 and Health and Safety Code Sections 25505, et seq.), and the Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. Residential uses shall also comply with the standards of the Calabasas Household Hazardous Waste Management Element. 
2.  New commercial, office, and business park uses will be required to comply with the provisions of the Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan; the most current amendments to Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations; and any other applicable city, county, state or federal standard relating to the use, storage, handling, transportation, or disposal of hazardous materials. 
3.  Concurrent with submittal of discretionary development applications, project proponents will be required to submit a history of onsite soil use, and, if warranted, a soil survey to determining the potential presence of hazardous substances in the soil. 
4.  The design of all new structures shall comply with the latest California Building Code seismic design standards, as well as such supplemental design criteria as the city may adopt to ensure that a) buildings are designed so as to avoid structural collapse; and b) all uses needed for emergency response are designed to withstand sufficient "g" force to remain functional. 
5.  Site-specific soils studies will be required to be submitted concurrent with submittal of grading and/or building permit applications to determine onsite soils and geologic conditions and meet safety standards as established by the city engineer. As part of these studies, the potential for hillside areas to become unstable when saturated at the surface and liquefying shall be investigated and mitigated. 
6.  To prevent future slope failures, new development shall be required to 1) achieve a factor of safety of 1.5 against shear failure; and 2) achieve a factor of safety of 1.1 against seismically induced slope failure. 
7.  Roadways and internal circulation systems shall be designed to accommodate fire suppression equipment with adequate turn-around areas as determined by the Los Angeles County Consolidated Fire District. 
8.  All new development shall be provided with the water facilities needed to meet fire flow requirements as determined by the Los Angeles County Consolidated Fire District. 
9.  Fire hydrants and "blue dots" to identify fire hydrant locations are to be provided as required by the Los Angeles County Consolidated Fire District. 
10.  The City of Calabasas is designated within Fire Hazard Zone IV by the Los Angeles County Consolidated Fire Districts. This zone includes wildland fire hazard areas defined as watershed lands that contain native growth and vegetation. Development located in or within five hundred (500) feet of native vegetation is subject to the following development provisions: 
a.  Within the HM, RR, or RC zones, structures intended for human occupancy are to be located along a paved, all weather, accessible (to emergency personnel) road for the purpose of avoiding the need for firefighters to move equipment onto properties without adequate turnaround space. If a structure cannot feasibly be sited in this manner, the structure shall contain sprinklers as required by the city. 
b.  Prior to approval of a building permit for any new structure intended for human occupancy within areas subject to wildland fires, applicants should meet with the County Consolidated Fire Districts to determine the most fire-safe location for the structure. New structures intended for human occupancy within areas subject to wildland fires are generally to be located on the lowest portion of the site. In addition, adequate setbacks from the top of slopes which have natural vegetation shall be maintained so as to reduce the spread of wildland fires to structures. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.140 - Height measurement and height limit exceptions. 
A.  Maximum Height. The height of structures shall not exceed the standard for the applicable zoning district established by Article II, or other height limit provided by this article. 
B.  Height Measurement. Maximum allowable height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the natural or finished grade, whichever is lower, of the site to an imaginary plane located the allowed number of feet above and parallel to the natural or finished grade. See Figure 3-3. 
C.  Non-Sloping Lots. Building height shall be limited to the maximum allowed height, as established by a zoning district or overlay zone, above natural or finished grade; whichever is lower, where average parcel slope is less than twenty (20) percent. 
D.  Sloping Lots. Building height of sites with an average slope of twenty (20) percent or more shall be limited as follows: 
1.  Total Height. Total building height shall not exceed the maximum allowed height, as established by a zoning district or overlay zone, above natural or finished grade, whichever is lower, and fifteen (15) feet from the highest elevation on the parcel to the highest point on the building. See Figure 3.3. 
2.  Downhill Building Walls. No single building wall on the downhill side of a house shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height above natural or finished grade, whichever is lower. Additional building height on a downhill side may be allowed in fifteen-foot increments, where each increment is stepped-back from the lower wall a minimum of ten (10) feet. In addition, a portion of a second story may be built to the front building wall as long as that portion does not exceed more than twenty-five (25) percent of the width of the front building elevation. See Figure 3-3. This section applies to enclosed space as well as covered porches and patios. 
  
E.  Exceptions to Height Limits. The height limits of this development code shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Agricultural structures (e.g., commercial equestrian barns, water tanks, windmills and other similar agricultural structures if located at least fifty (50) feet from any property line, and is not adjacent to a public street; 
2.  Chimneys with a maximum height of thirty (30) inches above the highest point of the roof; 
3.  Cooling towers, elevator penthouses, grain elevators, and stairs providing roof access; 
4.  Church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes; and 
5.  Structures for public assembly (e.g., churches, schools and other permitted public and semi-public structures), with no more than one story, provided that: 
a.  The side and rear setbacks of the structure normally required by the applicable zoning district are increased by one additional foot for each foot that the structure exceeds the height limit of the zoning district, and 
b.  The structure does not exceed the maximum height established by the applicable zoning district by more than fifty (50) percent without the approval of a variance. 
F.  Traffic Safety Visibility Area Required. Proposed development on corner parcels shall be designed to provide a traffic safety visibility area, for public safety purposes. No structure or landscape element placed within the traffic safety visibility area shall exceed a height of forty-two (42) inches, unless approved by the director. This triangular area is formed by measuring thirty-five (35) feet from the intersection of the front and street side property lines of a corner parcel, and connecting the lines across the property. See Figure 3-4. 
  
G.  Height Limits for Specific Structures-Decks. The walking surface of a deck shall not exceed a maximum height of five feet above natural grade. 
H.  Final Pad Elevations. Final pad elevations shall be reviewed and approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.150 - Hillside and ridgeline development. 
The general requirements of this section apply to development proposed on sites with a natural slope greater than ten (10) percent, or that include a ridgeline. 
A.  Performance Standards. All development shall comply with the applicable performance standards of this chapter. These include, but are not limited to the performance standards for hillside development addressing grading, project site planning, architectural design, landscape treatment and slope maintenance, and hazards ( seismic, geologic and fire). 
B.  Performance Standards for Hillside Development. Grading and project design shall conform to the city's grading ordinance (Title 15) and the following standards: 
1.  Projects within hillside areas shall be designed to protect important natural features and to minimize the amount of grading. To this end, grading plans shall conform to the following guidelines: 
a.  Slopes less than ten (10) percent: For property on slopes less than ten (10) percent, redistribution of earth over large areas may be permitted. 
b.  Slopes between ten (10) and twenty (20) percent: Some grading may occur on property on slopes between ten (10) and twenty (20) percent, but landforms must retain their natural character. Padded building sites may be allowed, but split level designs, stacking and clustering are required to mitigate the need for large padded building areas. 
c.  Slopes between twenty (20) and thirty (30) percent: Limited grading may occur on property on slopes between twenty (20) and thirty (30) percent; however, major topographic features including ridge lines, bluffs, rock outcroppings, and natural drainage ways shall retain their natural landforms. Special hillside architectural and design techniques shall be required in order to conform to the natural land form, by using techniques such as split level foundations of greater than eighteen (18) inches, stem walls, stacking and clustering. 
d.  Slopes between thirty (30) and fifty (50) percent: Development and limited grading can occur on property on slopes between thirty (30) and fifty (50) percent, but only if it can be clearly demonstrated that safety hazards, environmental degradation, and aesthetic impacts will be avoided. Variable setbacks and building structural techniques (e.g., stepped or post and beam foundations) is required for development and limited grading on these properties. Structures shall blend with the natural environment through their shape, materials and colors. Impact of traffic and roadways is to be minimized by following natural contours or using grade separations. 
e.  Slopes greater than fifty (50) percent: Except in areas limited in size and in isolated locations development in areas with slopes greater than fifty (50) percent shall be avoided. 
The intent of this section is to limit the amount of grading on the steeper portions of a lot. In order to ensure compliance with the intent of this section, the director may require a slope analysis to determine areas and subareas of different slope conditions. 
2.  Grading and project design shall address and avoid impacts to habitat linkages and wildlife corridors. 
3.  Overall project design and layout shall adapt to the natural hillside topography and maximize view opportunities to and from a development. A development should preserve the hillside rather than alter it to fit the development. 
4.  Grading plans should allow for different lot shapes and sizes based primarily on the natural terrain. Encourage split pads in large developments. 
5.  Flag lots will be allowed; provided that, it can be demonstrated that (i) the natural topography is preserved through minimal grading; and (ii) adequate visibility is maintained for emergency vehicles. 
6.  Structures shall be sited in a manner that will: 
a.  Fit into hillside contours and the form of the terrain; 
b.  Retain outward views from the maximum number of units and maintain the natural character of the hillside; and, 
c.  Preserve natural hillside areas and ridgelines views from the public right-of-way. 
7.  Streets should follow the natural contours of the hillside to minimize cut and fill. Streets may be split into two one-way streets in steeper areas to minimize grading and blend with the terrain. Cul-de-sacs or loop roads are encouraged where necessary to fit the terrain. On-street parking and sidewalks may be eliminated, subject to a determination by the review authority that is will reduce required grading. 
8.  In subdivisions, the project design should maximize public access to canyons, overlooks, and open space areas by providing open space easements or such other rights-of-way to allow the development's residents to access these locations. 
9.  Development should use retaining structures when it significantly reduces grading; however, such retaining structures shall be located and restricted in height so that they do not become a dominant visual feature of a parcel. 
10.  Where retaining walls face public streets, the retaining walls should be covered with or contain materials that help blend the wall with the natural terrain. 
11.  Large retaining walls in a uniform plane should be avoided. Retaining walls should be divided into terraces. Developments should use landscaping to screen retaining walls from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties. 
12.  The overall scale and massing of structures shall respect the natural surroundings and unique visual resources of the area by incorporating designs which (i) minimize bulk and mass, (ii) follow natural topography, and (iii) minimize visual intrusion on the natural landscape. 
13.  The overall height of a building is an important aspect of how well it fits into the existing character of a neighborhood and its hillside environment. Houses shall not be excessively tall so as to dominate their surroundings or create a crowded appearance in areas of small lots. Structures should be stepped down a hillside and contained within a limited envelope parallel to the natural grade rather than jut out over the natural slope. 
14.  Building forms shall be scaled to the particular environmental setting so as to complement the hillside character and to avoid excessively massive forms that fail to enhance the hillside character. 
15.  Building facades shall change plane or use overhangs as a means to create changing shadow lines to further break up massive forms. 
16.  Wall surfaces facing towards viewshed areas shall be minimized through the use of single story elements, setbacks, roof pitches, and landscaping. 
17.  Collective mass roof lines and elements shall blend with the hillside or reflect the naturally occurring ridgeline silhouettes and topographical variation. 
18.  Medium to dark colors which blend with the surrounding environment should be used for building elevations and roof materials in view-sensitive areas. 
19.  Architectural style, including materials and colors, should be compatible with the natural setting and the surrounding neighborhood. No one dwelling should stand out. 
20.  Exposed structural and mechanical elements shall be avoided. 
21.  Roof materials shall be of fire-retardant material. Roof design shall reflect the underlying contour of the land. 
22.  Slope plantings should create a gradual transition from developed slope areas into natural areas. New landscape should blend with the natural vegetation, in part, by extending plantings in finger-like configurations into existing slopes. 
23.  Plantings along the slope side of a development shall be designed to allow controlled views from the development. At the same, these planting shall partially screen and soften the architecture of the development. No less than fifty (50) percent of screening should consist of plant materials. 
24.  Trees shall be randomly spaced and massed together, and they shall be used to reduce the scale of long, steep slopes. 
25.  Shrubs are to be randomly placed and massed together. 
26.  To act as a backdrop for structures, landscaping shall be used along any recontoured ridge or hillside located behind and at a higher elevation than structures in order to recreate the linear line of the recontoured ridge or hillside. Trees shall be planted to create a continuous linear silhouette to avoid gaps in the planting. 
27.  Trees of sufficient height or height capacity shall be planted between structures to eliminate any open gap and blend the roof lines into one continuous silhouette. 
28.  New subdivisions, commercial and multi-family development within hillside areas shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Recordation of a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions requiring the maintenance of manufactured slopes; 
b.  Developer shall prepare a program for preventive maintenance of major manufactured slope areas. This preventive maintenance program shall include homeowner slope maintenance requirements and guidelines declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions which shall be recorded against each parcel within the development. Developer shall submit its preventive maintenance program to the department for its review and approval prior to final map approval. 
c.  Developer shall prepare and submit to the department for its review and approval a minimum five year revegetation monitoring and maintenance program. Program inspections shall be performed by a qualified botanist. This requirement shall only apply to developments which require slope bank or habitat vegetation. 
C.  Standards for the Location of Structures. The following provisions shall apply to the placement of proposed structures on sloping sites. 
1.  General Siting Principles. Buildings should be located in the most accessible, least visually prominent, and most geologically stable portion or portions of a site. Buildings should be located in the least visually prominent locations of a property, on open, grassy hillsides, where the prominence of buildings should be minimized by placing them in locations where they will be screened by existing vegetation, rock outcroppings, or depressions in topography. In wooded areas, building placement may be guided by the fire hazard prevention performance standards of Section 17.20.130. 
2.  Ridgelines. For the purposes of maintaining the natural appearance of the ridge, structures should not be placed on or near ridgelines so that they appear silhouetted against the sky when viewed from any point on a roadway designated as a scenic corridor by the General Plan (see Figure 3-5). For significant ridgelines identified in the Open Space Element of the General Plan (Figure III-4), the highest point of any structure that requires a permit shall be located at least fifty (50) vertical feet and fifty (50) horizontal feet from a significant ridgeline, excluding chimneys, rooftop antennas, and amateur radio antennas. 
However, this ridgeline setback provision shall not apply to: 
a.  Any addition to a legally established residence or accessory structure(s) existing as of the effective date of this ordinance that is located on a significant ridgeline, or within the ridgeline protection area of fifty (50) vertical and fifty (50) horizontal feet from the significant ridgeline, such that said addition does not cumulatively with any other permitted additions enlarge the structure by an amount exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) or one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of additional gross floor area, whichever is less, above the structure's original size. 
b.  Any new accessory structure which is otherwise allowed within the applicable zoning district and which complies fully with the development standards for the zone. 
3.  Where structures on a lot or parcel of land cannot meet the standards prescribed in subsection C.2, above, a variance as provided in Section 17.62.080 shall be required. In addition to the required findings set forth in subsection E. of Section 17.62.080, findings shall be made that: 
a.  Alternative sites within the property or project have been considered and eliminated from consideration based on physical infeasibility or the potential for substantial habitat damage or destruction if any such alternative site is used and that the siting principles outlined under subsection (C)(4) have been applied; and 
b.  The proposed project maintains the maximum view of the applicable significant ridgeline through the use of design features for the project including minimized grading, reduced structural height, clustered structures, shape, materials, and color that allow the structures to blend with the natural setting, and use of native landscaping for concealment of the project. 
  
  
4.  Siting Priorities. Based on the principles in subsections (C)(1) and (2) of this section, the building sites selection for subdivision design and the development of existing individual lots should occur according to the following priorities: 
a.  The first priority for building site selection should be areas below the tops of ridgelines, on slopes less than twenty (20) percent. 
b.  In cases where a lot has no building site of at least four thousand (4,000) square feet that satisfies subsection (C)(4)(a) of this section, the second priority should be areas below the tops of ridgelines, on slopes between twenty (20) and thirty (30) percent, where development can occur with careful attention to minimizing grading through building designs that employ stepped foundations. 
c.  Where a lot has no potential building sites that satisfy subsection (C)(4)(b) of this section, the third priority for site selection should be areas on ridge tops with slopes less than twenty (20) percent. Proposed buildings should be set back as far as possible from the edge of the ridge (where downhill slopes begin to exceed twenty (20) percent and landscaped, to minimize visibility. 
D.  Watercourse Setbacks. Structures, paving and grading (other than grading determined by the review authority to be necessary for slope stabilization) shall be set back from the from the outer edge of the riparian vegetation canopy of a perennial or intermittent stream by a minimum of one hundred (100) feet, or other distance determined by a qualified biologist approved by the city to be adequate for the preservation of existing riparian vegetation and habitat. Where riparian vegetation is not present, the one-hundred-foot buffer shall be measured from the outer edge of the bank of the subject stream. A one-hundred-foot setback or other distance determined by a qualified biologist approved by the city shall also be maintained from ephemeral streams which contain riparian vegetation as determined by the city qualified biologist. Provided that no development shall be: 
1.  Placed in an area identified by a flood insurance rate map (FIRM) as being subject to flooding, except in compliance with applicable federal regulations; or 
2.  Located within an intermittent drainage channel known to be subject to dangerous storm water flows during heavy rains. 
E.  Access. To ensure adequate all-weather access for emergency vehicles and any necessary excavations, access to the lot shall be from a paved, city-maintained roadway, or a private road/driveway in compliance with the following standards. 
1.  Width. The minimum width of a proposed driveway shall be sixteen (16) feet, or twenty (20) feet if the driveway slope exceeds ten (10) percent. 
2.  Slope and Surface. The average slope of a driveway shall not exceed seventeen (17) percent, with no portion of the driveway exceeding a slope of twenty (20) percent. Driveways shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or other surfacing approved by the city engineer, and shall include proper drainage facilities, as approved by the city engineer. 
3.  Fuel Modification Area. A fuel modification area shall be provided at the time of driveway construction, and permanently maintained. 
4.  In no event shall a driveway exceed three hundred (300) feet unless there is no other feasible location to site the structure. 
F.  Parking. The development of lots along city streets or private roads with pavement less than thirty-two (32) feet wide shall be required to provide two off-street parking spaces for guests, in addition to the parking normally required for a residence by Chapter 17.28. 
G.  Improvements to Paper Streets. Where residential construction is proposed on a site adjacent to a paper street (a recorded, but unimproved road right-of-way), project review by the department shall include a determination of the adequacy of proposed access, and project approval may include requirements to improve a paper street right-of-way proposed to serve a site, to ensure adequate, all-weather emergency vehicle access, and safe evacuation routes. Standards for improvements (e.g., the location of pavement within the right-of-way, horizontal and vertical alignments, drainage measures, the structural section of pavement and base materials, and other such standards ), and requirements for right-of-way dedication shall be determined by the city engineer, and shall at a minimum comply with subsection (E) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-297, § 1(Att. A), 5-23-2012; Ord. No. 2016-340 , § 3, 10-26-2016)  
17.20.160 - Noise. 
A.  Performance Standards. The following noise management performance standards shall apply to all proposed development, except for the construction of one single-family home on an existing lot, the expansion of existing commercial, office and business park projects, and the addition of housing units to an existing multifamily residential project. 
1.  Limit project-related noise to no greater than a sixty (60) dBA CNEL (Community Noise Equivalent Level) within known wildlife nesting or migration areas, as well as within natural open space areas, as necessary to maintain tranquil open space and viable wildlife habitats and mobility. 
2.  One or more of the following mitigation measures shall be provided as necessary to mitigate project-related noise: 
Project Site Planning 
a.  Orient buildings to buffer or attenuate noise. 
b.  Route or align roadways away from noise sensitive receptors where such routing and alignment can be accomplished without creating other significant impacts. 
c.  Locate the highest noise sources as far away from adjacent sensitive uses as is feasible. 
d.  Provide sound attenuation walls (open space buffers and berms are preferred). 
e.  Utilize landscape materials and "softscape" design to break up hard surfaces for the purpose of minimizing reverberation (mandatory for noise, as well as aesthetic purposes). 
Landscape Treatment 
f.  Utilize open space and landscaped buffers between uses to naturally attenuate noise with distance. Project applicants shall be responsible for providing open space buffers in the form of easements to eliminate noise encroachment from having an adverse effect. The distance shall be sufficient to meet the exterior noise standards established in Sections 17.20.160 (C) and (D). 
g.  For commercial retail and business park uses place fixed equipment, such as air conditioning units, inside an enclosed space, or in shielded locations. 
Architectural Design 
h.  For commercial, office, and business park uses, place rooftop equipment at an appropriate setback from property lines, or in acoustically treated mechanical rooms or in shielded equipment wells, to meet noise standards and minimize disturbance potential. 
i.  Provide one or more of the following: sound rated windows, additional exterior wall or roof insulation, vent or mail slot modifications or relocation, or forced air ventilation. 
B.  Noise Standards. Sections 17.20.160 (D) and (E) establish standards for acceptable exterior and interior noise levels. These standards are intended to protect persons from excessive noise levels, which are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety since they have the potential to: (i) interfere with sleep, communication, relaxation and the full enjoyment of property; (ii) contribute to hearing impairment and a wide range of adverse physiological stress conditions; and (iii) adversely affect the value of real property. It is the intent of this chapter to protect persons from excessive noise levels within or near various residential development and other specified noise-sensitive land uses. 
C.  Exceptions to Noise Standards. The standards of Section 17.20.160 (D) are not applicable to noise from the following sources: 
1.  Activities conducted in public parks, public playgrounds and public or private school grounds, including school athletic and entertainment events; 
2.  The use of any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment related to or connected with emergency activities or emergency work; 
3.  Safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves; 
4.  Noise sources associated with construction, including the idling of construction vehicles, provided such activities do not take place before seven a.m. or after six p.m. on any day except Saturday in which no construction is allowed before eight a.m. or after five p.m. No construction is allowed on Sunday's or federal holidays. These requirements may be modified by a conditional use permit. 
5.  Noise sources associated with work performed by private or public utilities in the maintenance or modification of their facilities; 
6.  Noise sources associated with the collection of waste or garbage from property devoted to other than residential uses. 
7.  Traffic on public roads and any other activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law. 
D.  Exterior Noise Level Standards. No person shall cause or allow exterior noise levels to exceed the levels set forth in Table 3-1 on any property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person. 
Table 3-1 
Exterior Noise Level Standards 
Zone 	Time Interval 	Hourly Equivalent 
Sound Level (Leq, dBA) 
Residential Zones 	Monday— 
Friday 	
RS, RM, RMH, RR, RC, HM, OS 	10 p.m. to 7 a.m. 	50 dBA 
RS, RM, RMH 	7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 	65 dBA 
RR, RC, HM, OS 	7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 	60 dBA 
		
	Saturday and 
Sunday 	
RS, RM, RMH, RR, RC, HM, OS 	10 p.m. to 8 a.m. 	50 dBA 
	8 a.m. to 10 p.m. 	60 dBA 
		
Commercial and Special 
Purpose Zones 	All days of 
Week 	
PD, CL, CR, CO, CMU, CB, CT, PF,REC 	10 p.m. to 7 a.m. 	60 dBA 
PD, CL, CR, CO, CMU, CB, CT, PF 	7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 	65 dBA 
REC with active recreation areas 	7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 	70 dBA 
 
E.  Interior Noise Level Standards for Residential Uses. No person shall operate or cause to operate any source of sound within any residential dwelling unit or allow the creation of noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person which causes the noise level, when measured inside a neighboring dwelling unit to exceed the levels set forth in Table 3-2. 
Table 3-2 
Interior Noise Level Standards 
	Daytime 
(7 a.m. to 10 p.m.) 	Nighttime 
(10 p.m. to 7 a.m.) 
Hourly Equivalent Sound Level (Leq, dBA) 	45 	40 
 Maximum level, dBA 	60 	55 
 
F.  Mixed Use Standards. Noise level standards in Tables 3-1 and 3-2 shall be increased by 5 dBA for mixed used projects. 
G.  Noise Level Measurement. For the purpose of evaluating conformance with the standards of this chapter, noise levels shall be measured as follows: 
1.  Use of Meter. Any noise measurement required by this section shall be made with a sound level meter using the A-weighted network (scale). Measurement equipment with an acoustical calibrator shall be calibrated immediately prior to recording any noise data. 
2.  Measuring Exterior Noise Levels. Exterior noise levels shall be measured at the property line. Where practical, a microphone shall be positioned five feet above the ground and away from reflective surfaces. 
3.  Measuring Interior Noise Levels. Interior noise levels shall be measured within the affected residential use at points at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source, with windows in their normal seasonal position. The reported interior noise level shall be the average of the various microphone location readings. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.170 - Screening. 
A.  Screening Between Uses. Wherever a site within a commercial zoning district abuts a residential zoning district, a six-foot high solid decorative masonry wall shall be constructed along the property line abutting the residential zoning district. The wall shall be architecturally treated on both sides, subject to the approval of the director. 
B.  Screening of Equipment. Any equipment, whether on the roof, side of structure, or ground, shall be properly screened from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties. The method of screening shall be architecturally compatible with other site development in terms of materials, colors, shape and size. Landscaping shall be installed and maintained for screening purposes for all ground-mounted equipment. The screening design and construction shall be subject to the approval of the director and shall blend with the design and construction of the structure(s) on the site. Where feasible, ground-mounting of mechanical equipment shall be required as an alternative to roof mounting. 
C.  Screening of Loading and Service Areas. Loading, service, storage, special equipment, and maintenance areas should be screened from public right-of-way and adjacent properties with landscaping and architectural elements. Loading docks and service areas should be located on interior side yards, and shall be concealed from public view. 
D.  Utility equipment and communication devices shall be screened so that the project will appear free of all such devices. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.180 - Setback requirements and exceptions. 
A.  Purpose. The following setback standards provide open areas around structures for: visibility, traffic safety; access to and around structures; natural light access; ventilation; incompatible land uses separation; privacy; landscaping and recreation. 
B.  Setback Requirements. All structures shall comply with the setback requirements of each zoning district (See Article II) and with any special setbacks established for specific uses by this article, except as otherwise provided by this section. No portion of any structure, including eaves or roof overhangs, shall extend beyond a property line; or into an access easement or public right-of-way, without first securing an encroachment permit or other legal right to do so. 
1.  Infill Development Within Previously Approved Projects. Any setback requirements of a recorded subdivision map, or specific plan, development agreement, conditional use permit, or other planned development entitlement shall apply to continuing development within the approved project instead of the setbacks requirements set forth in Article II. 
2.  Special Setbacks for Development Plan Projects. The council may authorize uniform setbacks for a specific subdivision project that are different from those required by Article II, through the approval of a development plan (Section 17.62.070), or specific plan (Chapter 17.66). 
3.  Front Setback - Limitations of Paved Surface. No more than fifty (50) percent of the required front setback for any lot in a RS zone that contains a single family dwelling shall be paved with asphalt, cement or any other impervious surface. 
C.  Exemptions from Setback Requirements. The minimum setback requirements of this development code apply to all development and new land uses, except the following: 
1.  Fences or walls six feet or less in height above the grade of the site, when located outside of the front setback; and 
2.  Decks, earthworks, free-standing solar devices, steps, terraces and other site design elements that are placed directly upon grade and do not exceed a height of eighteen (18) inches above the surrounding grade at any point. See Section 17.12.180(H) for setback requirements for spas/hot tubs and swimming pools. 
D.  Measurement of Setbacks. Setbacks shall be measured as follows. See Figure 3-7 located at the end of this section. 
1.  Front Yard Setbacks. The front yard setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the front property line of the parcel (or edge of access easement on a private street) to the nearest point of the wall of the structure, except as follows. 
a.  Flag Lots. For a parcel with a fee ownership strip extending from a street or right-of-way to the building area of the parcel, the measurement shall be taken from the nearest point of the wall of the structure to the point where the access strip ("flag pole") meets the bulk of the parcel along a continuous line, establishing a parallel setback line. See Figure 3-8 located at the end of this section. 
b.  Corner Lots. The measurement shall be taken from the nearest point of the structure to the nearest point of the front lot line. 
2.  Side Yard Setbacks. The side yard setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the side property line of the parcel to the nearest line of the structure; establishing a setback line parallel to the side property line, which extends between the front and rear yards. 
3.  Street Side Yard Setbacks. The side yard on the street side of a corner parcel shall be measured from the nearest point of the side property line bounding the street, or the easement for a private road. 
4.  Rear Yard Setbacks. The rear yard shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the rear property line to the nearest line of the structure, establishing a setback line parallel to the rear property line, which extends between the side yards. The rear yard on the street side of a double-frontage parcel shall be measured from the nearest point on the rear property line bounding the street, or the easement for a private road. 
E.  Allowed Projections into Setbacks. Attached architectural features and certain detached structures may project beyond the wall of the structure and into the front, side and rear yard setbacks, in compliance with the following requirements: 
1.  Architectural Features. Architectural features attached to the primary structure may extend beyond the wall of the structure and into the front, side and rear yard setbacks, in compliance with the following table. See also Figure 3-9. 
Table 3-3 
Allowed Projections Into Setbacks 
	Allowed Projection into Specified Setback 
Feature 	Front Setback 	Side Setback 	Rear Setback 
Chimney, bay/garden window (1) (2) (3) 	30 in. 	30 in. 	30 in. 
Cornice, eave, roof 
overhang (1) (3) 	30 in. 	30 in. 	30 in. 
Deck (1) (4) 	6 ft. 	5 ft. 	10 ft. 
Porch (1) (2) (5) 	6 ft. 	36 in. 	6 ft. 
Stairway (2) (6) 	6 ft. 	36 in. 	6 ft. 
Unenclosed patios covers 
and trellises (7) 	6 ft. 	30 in. 	7.5 ft. 
 
Notes: 
(1) Chimney's that project into a side yard setback shall not exceed six feet in width. Ground-story bay windows, porches and decks shall not project into the side yard over half the length of the side wall. 
(2) Features may project not closer than thirty-six (36) inches to the property line. 
(3) The cantilevered architectural features that may project into setbacks include balconies, bay windows, cornices, eaves and solar devices. 
(4) Decks less than eighteen (18) inches above grade are exempt, in compliance with Section 17.20.170(C) (Exemptions from Setback Requirements), above. 
(5) A roofed porch allowed to project into a setback shall be enclosed only by a railing in compliance with Title 15 (Building and Construction) of the Municipal Code, and shall be located at the same level as the entrance floor of the structure. 
(6) A stairway that may project into a setback shall not be roofed or enclosed above or below the steps. 
(7) The setback for trellises and unenclosed patio covers shall be measured from the support post. The additional roof overhang of thirty (30) inches as noted above may be allowed. 
2.  Equipment. Swimming pool equipment, air conditioning and heating equipment, and other equipment, shall not be closer than thirty-six (36) inches to the side or rear property line. 
F.  Setback Requirements for Specific Structures: 
1.  Fences. See Section 17.20.100. 
2.  Site Design Elements. Detached decks, earthworks, freestanding solar devices, steps, terraces, and other site design elements which are placed directly upon the grade, and which exceed a height of eighteen (18) inches above the surrounding grade at any point, shall conform to the setback requirements of the underlying zone (site design elements less than eighteen (18) inches above grade are exempt in compliance with subsection (C)(2) of this section). 
3.  Hot Tubs, Swimming Pools and Appurtenant Features and Structures. See Section 17.12.165. 
4.  Retaining Walls. Retaining walls less than six feet in height may be located within a required setback. Refer to Section 17.20.100 for standards applicable to retaining walls. 
5.  Outdoor recreational features, such as fireplaces, built-in pizza ovens, or built-in barbeque grills. See Section 17.12.165(1). 
6.  The following setbacks shall apply to storage sheds: 
a.  For a storage shed that qualifies for the exemption in Section 17.02.020 (B)(7) of this Code and is less than six feet in height, the minimum required setback shall be five feet from all property lines. 
b.  In the RS, RM, RR, and RC zoning districts, if an storage shed does not qualify for the exemption in Section 17.02.020(B)(7) of this title and/or it is over six feet in height, the storage shed shall meet the required setback of the zoning district in which it is located. 
c.  In the HM and OS zoning districts, if an storage shed (i) does not qualify for the exemption in Section 17.02.020(B)(7) of this title, it must meet the required setback of the zoning district in which it is located; or (ii) qualifies for the exemption in Section 17.02.020(B)(7) of the code but is over six feet in height, the accessory must meet a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from the side property line and twenty (20) feet from the rear property line 
G.  Restrictions on the Use of Residential Setbacks. No front or street side setback within a residential zoning district shall be used for the storage of scrap, junk, boats, habitable trailers, utility trailers, or other similar vehicles or equipment. This restriction includes the storage of operable or inoperable vehicles in other than improved parking areas. 
  
  
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-297, § 1(Att. A), 5-23-2012)  
17.20.190 - Solar energy development standards. 
Any proposed active or passive heating and cooling features shall be incorporated into the design of a structure as follows: 
A.  Roof-mounted solar collectors shall be placed in a location least visible from the street and adjacent properties, without significantly reducing the operating efficiency of the collectors. Wall-mounted and ground-mounted collectors shall be screened from a public right-of-way; 
B.  Roof-mounted collectors shall be installed at the same angle or as close as possible to the pitch of a roof; 
C.  Accessory equipment, particularly plumbing and related fixtures, should be installed in attic space; and 
D.  Exterior surfaces of the collectors and related equipment shall have a non-reflective finish and shall be color-coordinated to harmonize with roof materials and other dominate colors of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.195 - Survey. 
An application for a permit under this title for the construction or alteration of any structure to be located within ten (10) feet of a property which is zoned Open-Space or Open-Space Development-Restricted, as identified in the City's zoning map, shall not be complete unless accompanied by a survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor or another person authorized by law to conduct and prepare a survey. This survey shall be required to depict (i) the boundaries of the property, (ii) the work to be constructed, and (iii) the boundary of the property nearest the site of the work which is zoned Open-Space or Open-Space Development-Restricted, as identified in the city's zoning map. A survey is a construction document subject to all of the requirements and exceptions of Section 106 of the California Building Code. In addition to the foregoing, prior to the issuance of a building permit for any structure located within ten (10) feet of a property which is zoned Open-Space or Open-Space Development-Restricted, as identified in the city's zoning map, an applicant or property owner shall be required to perform a stake survey in the manner required by the director. Any stakes installed to fulfill the foregoing requirement shall not be moved or removed and shall remain in place consistent with the survey until the completion of the work for which the permit issues. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.200 - Solid waste/recyclable materials storage. 
The following provisions establish standards for the construction and operation of solid waste and recyclable material storage areas in compliance with the California Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling Access Act (Public Resources Code Sections 42900 through 42911). 
A.  General Requirement. All proposed development shall comply with applicable provisions of the city's source reduction and recycling element. 
B.  Required Storage for Multifamily Projects. Multifamily residential projects, with five or more units shall provide solid waste and recyclable material storage areas as follows: 
1.  Individual Unit Storage Requirements. Each dwelling unit shall be provided an area with a minimum of six cubic feet designed for the indoor storage of solid waste and recyclable material. A minimum of three cubic feet shall be provided for the storage of solid waste and a minimum of three cubic feet shall be provided for the storage of recyclable material; and 
2.  Multi-family projects shall provide the following minimum solid waste and recyclable material storage areas, which may be located indoors or outdoors as long as they are readily accessible to all residents. These requirements apply to each individual structure. All required areas are measured in square feet. 
Table 3-4 
Shared Storage Requirements 
Number of 
Dwellings 	Minimum Storage 
Areas Required 
(sq. ft.): Solid 
Waste 	Minimum Storage 
Areas Required (sq. 
ft.): Recycling 	Minimum Storage 
Areas Required (sq. 
ft.): Total Area 
2-6 	12 	12 	24 
7-15 	24 	24 	48 
16-25 	48 	48 	96 
26-50 	96 	96 	192 
51-75 	144 	144 	288 
76-100 	192 	192 	384 
101-125 	240 	240 	480 
126-150 	288 	288 	576 
151-175 	336 	336 	672 
176-200 	384 	384 	768 
201+ 	* 	* 	* 
 
* Every additional twenty-five (25) dwellings shall require an additional one hundred (100) sq. ft. for solid waste and one hundred (100) sq. ft. for recyclables. 
C.  Nonresidential structures and uses within all zoning districts shall provide solid waste and recyclable material storage areas. The following are minimum storage area requirements. These requirements apply to each individual structure. All required areas are measured in square feet. 
Table 3-5 
Required Storage for Nonresidential Structures and Uses 
Building Floor Area (sq. ft.) 	Minimum 
Storage Areas 
Required (sq. 
ft.): Solid 
Waste 	Minimum 
Storage Areas 
Required (sq. 
ft.): Recycling 	Minimum 
Storage Areas 
Required (sq. 
ft.): Total Area 
0-5,000 	12 	12 	24 
5,001-10,000 	24 	24 	48 
10,001-25,000 	48 	48 	96 
25,001-50,000 	96 	96 	192 
50,001-75,000 	144 	144 	288 
75,001-100,000 	192 	192 	384 
100,001+ 	* 	* 	* 
 
* Every additional twenty-five thousand (25,000) sq. ft. shall require an additional forty-eight (48) sq. ft. for solid waste and forty-eight (48) sq. ft. for recyclables. 
1.  Purpose. Enclosures should be designed to reduce container visibility and prevent their misplacement of containers, especially in parking areas. Enclosures should increase efficient solid waste and recycling practices and enhance the aesthetic appearance of the community. 
2.  Except development of a single-family residence or multi-family residence of up to four units, any new development shall comply with the following: 
a.  Space Allocation. Each refuse enclosure shall be large enough to fit at least one receptacle for trash, one receptacle for recycling and one receptacle for organic waste. Each enclosure shall be sized to provide for three receptacles without one blocking the other for proper access. The minimum interior dimensions of a refuse enclosure are seven feet by twenty (20) feet. Enclosure wall height shall be at least six feet high from the base. The roof will be spaced two feet higher than the top of the wall of the enclosure, making height clearance eight feet. There must be ventilation occupying the space between the roof and the wall; however, this space shall be covered with a wire mesh (painted to match the enclosure) to keep animals out and debris in. The enclosure should be at the same level as the concrete outside of its walls. 
b.  Materials. The refuse enclosure shall resemble the exterior surface of the main building. It should blend with the texture and color of the primary building(s). The refuse enclosure should be made of material that is harmonious with the material of the main building and surrounding buildings. The floor of the enclosure should be paved with concrete and graded toward the sanitary sewer. 
c.  Roofing. A permanent, waterproof and noncombustible roof must be present to prevent rainfall from entering the enclosure. The roof shall overhang the enclosure on all sides. Acting as protection over the enclosure, the roof shall be at a height of eight feet. The roof should limit contaminated water from escaping into nearby storm drains and creeks. The roof should be designed in such a way that rainwater from the enclosure roof discharges into the surrounding landscape. 
d.  Screening. Refuse enclosure areas shall be enclosed such that they are screened from view. The enclosure gates shall be swing or roll-up and be of a color and design that is compatible with the enclosure. Swinging doors shall be permanent and made of solid steel. Wire mesh is acceptable as long as it has small holes, so that the inside of the enclosure is not visible from the outside. The opening for the gates should be at least eight feet wide and should allow for an overhead clearance of at least seven feet. The gates shall not open towards the street; they shall instead open towards the structures of the development. Double swing gates should have swivel spots outside of the opening area of the enclosure. Swivel points shall be attached to concrete filled steel posts or columns at the ends of the walls. In addition, six inch diameter bollards shall be installed to ensure that the gates do not open into adjacent structures or parking spaces. These bollards shall be brightly colored with reflective taping at the top. For commercial and industrial sites, property owners shall have the option to lock the enclosure after business hours, and, in some cases, the owner can choose to lock the enclosure during business hours. 
e.  Interior Design. Refuse enclosures shall have six inch high wheel stops to prevent the bins from damaging the walls. In addition, a six inch high curb should be created within the perimeter of the interior enclosure walls further protecting the walls from possible damage caused by the bins. The concrete curb shall be eight inches from the wall in order to provide an eight inch clearance from all three walls of the enclosure. 
f.  Lighting. Adequate lighting should be provided within the refuse enclosure to ensure safety and to discourage illegal dumping into and around the enclosures. The lighting shall be equipped with sensors to turn off automatically when not in use. 
g.  Sanitary Sewer Connection. A drain shall be located on the floor of the refuse enclosure. This drain shall be connected to the sanitary sewer to facilitate disposal of leachate resulting from cleaning of the enclosure. The enclosure shall have adequate filtration at the sewer drain so that hazardous waste does not enter the sewer system. 
h.  Prohibited Waste. No other materials (e.g. hazardous wastes, grease, equipment, furniture) shall be stored in the refuse enclosure. The property owner shall prevent the storage of these materials within the enclosure. If there is cooking oil or grease, it must be disposed into a grease receptacle. 
i.  Oil and Grease Receptacle. Any commercial or industrial refuse enclosure shall reserve adequate space for oil and grease receptacle, regardless of the current or planned use. This space shall be at least twelve (12) square feet in addition to the minimum dimensions in this section. 
j.  Signage. Unless otherwise provided for by a solid waste hauler permanent signage shall be posted on recycling and organic waste containers to distinguish these bins from the solid waste containers. The enclosure shall have eighteen (18) inch by thirty-six (36) inch signage that reads, "Do Not Mix Recyclable Materials with Trash…" posted on its front wall or on the gate of the enclosure. "NO PARKING" signs shall also be posted. All required signage shall be adequately lighted. 
k.  Location and Accessibility. Refuse enclosures shall be located within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of a residential unit but not closer than fifty (50) feet. Refuse enclosure shall provide convenient access for solid waste vehicles and sufficient space for turnaround movements. The turning radius for the enclosure shall be at least forty (40) feet. The front of a refuse enclosure shall also have striped "keep clear" areas. A reinforced four to six inch thick concrete pad shall be located outside the entrance of the refuse enclosure. The pad shall not be sloped so that it drains towards the refuse enclosure; rather the pad shall be sloped so that it drains away from it. The refuse enclosure may have both a pedestrian and a service access. All refuse enclosures must be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from any storm drain inlet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.210 - Urban runoff mitigation. 
Proposed development shall comply with all applicable provisions of Chapter 8.28. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.220 - Undergrounding of utilities. 
A.  Facilities to be Undergrounded. All existing and proposed on-site utility facilities (including electric, telecommunications and cable television lines) intended to serve a new structure shall be installed underground from the utility company distribution line to the structure, except for equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, including surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
B.  Responsibility of Applicant. The applicant is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for facility installation. 
The review authority may waive the requirements of this section if topographical, soil, or any other factors or conditions make underground installation unreasonable or impractical. 
C.  Location of Installation. Underground utility lines may be installed within public rights-of-way or along any lot line. When installed within public rights-of-way, their location and method of installation shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.20.230 - Water conservation. 
A.  The Water Conservation Performance Standards of this section apply to all proposed development, including the expansion or remodeling of existing commercial, office, business park, or multifamily residential developments. Landscaping on individual single-family parcels shall comply with the provisions of Section 17.26.050. 
B.  Performance Standards. To meet the city's overall water conservation performance objectives, projects shall comply with Section 17.26.050 and with the following: 
1.  Landscaped areas shall be clustered to maximize the efficiency of irrigation systems. Irrigation systems shall be designed to eliminate watering of impervious surfaces and reduce runoff. 
2.  Water conserving kitchen and bathroom fixtures and appliances shall be installed along with, thermostatically controlled mixing valves for baths and showers. Hot water lines shall be insulated. 
3.  Where reclaimed water is or can be feasibly made available by the Las Virgenes Municipal Water District and where use of reclaimed wastewater is legally permissible, the installation of a reclaimed water system for irrigation purposes will be required. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.22 - AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
 
17.22.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter shall assist implementation of the goals and policies of the housing element of the General Plan and state statutes promoting the provision of affordable housing, including Chapter 4.3 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code. This chapter implements the foregoing by: (i) offering density bonuses and other incentives to residential projects that incorporate housing that is affordable to very low, low and/or moderate income households, senior citizens and their family members, and transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, and homeless persons; (ii) requiring an in-lieu fee for nonresidential projects that create excessive demands for new housing, and (iii) requiring an in-lieu fee for residential projects that do not incorporate housing for very low, low and/or moderate income households and/or senior citizens and their family members. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2017-346 , § 3, 2-8-2017)  
17.22.020 - Affordable housing requirements; eligibility for bonus and incentives. 
A.  Affordable Housing Requirement. All residential or mixed use development projects proposing five or more housing units shall include housing that is affordable to low, very low and/or moderate income households, in compliance with this section. Housing units provided in compliance with this section that meet the requirements of both this Section 17.22.020(A) and Section 17.22.020(B) shall be eligible for density bonuses and incentives in compliance with Section 17.22.030. At a minimum, a proposed residential development project shall include the following number of affordable housing units at the stated rental rates or sales prices, or shall provide off-site alternatives in compliance with the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  Twenty (20) percent of the total number of units shall be rented or sold at prices affordable to households with an income of up to one hundred ten (110) percent of the county median income; or 
2.  Fifteen (15) percent of the total number of units shall be rented or sold at prices affordable to households with an income of up to ninety (90) percent of the county median income; or 
3.  Ten (10) percent of the total number of units shall be rented or sold at prices affordable to households with an income of up to seventy-five (75) percent of the county median income; or 
4.  Five percent of the total number of units shall be rented or sold at prices affordable to households with an income of up to fifty (50) percent of the county median income. 
B.  In order to be eligible for a density bonus and other incentives as provided by this chapter, a proposed residential development project shall: 
1.  Consist of five or more dwelling units; and 
2.  Provide for the construction of one or more of the following within the development, one of which the permit applicant shall elect as the basis for its request for a density bonus: 
a.  Ten (10) percent of the total units of a housing development for low income households, as defined in Health and Safety Code section 50079.5; or 
b.  Five percent of the total units of a housing development for very low income households, as defined in Health and Safety Code section 50105; or 
c.  A senior citizen housing development as defined in Civil Code sections 51.3 and 51.12, or mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Civil Code section 798.76 or 799.5; or 
d.  Ten (10) percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development as defined in Civil Code section 1351, for persons and families of moderate income, as defined in Health and Safety Code section 50093, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase; or 
e.  Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for transitional foster youth, as defined in Section 66025.9 of the Education Code, disabled veterans, as defined in Section 18541, or homeless persons, as defined in the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. Sec. 11301 et seq.). The units described in this subparagraph shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction of 55 years and shall be provided at the same affordability level as very low income units. 
3.  Satisfy all other applicable provisions of this development code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A), 2-12-2014; Ord. No. 2017-346 , § 3, 2-8-2017)  
17.22.030 - Types of bonus and incentives allowed. 
As required by Government Code Section 65915, this section offers density bonuses, incentives, concessions, and waivers, as applicable, to permit applicants for providing housing that is affordable to the types of households and qualifying residents identified in subsection (A) of this section. A housing or mixed-use development that satisfies all applicable provisions of this section shall be entitled to one density bonus and one or more incentives or concessions, described below. If the density bonus, incentives, or concessions cannot be accommodated on a site due to strict compliance with the provisions of this development code, the council shall waive or modify development standards, to the extent required by state law, to accommodate the bonus units, incentives, or concessions to which the development would be entitled, unless such waiver or modification does not result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs or would have a specific, adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon public health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact. In offering these incentives, this section carries out the requirements of Government Code Sections 65302, 65913, and 65915, et seq. 
A.  Density Bonus. The density bonus granted to a residential development project shall consist of an increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and land use element of the General Plan as of the date of application. The applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of a density bonus. The amount of density bonus to which the applicant is entitled shall vary according to the amount and type of affordable housing units provided, and shall be set at the amount specified in Government Code section 65915. The City will also grant a density bonus for qualifying projects containing affordable housing provided by partnership between a commercial developer and an affordable housing developer, as required by Government Code section 65915.7. 
B.  Additional Density Bonus. When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates developable land to the city as provided for in Government Code Section 65915, the applicant shall be entitled to an increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and land use element of the General Plan for the entire development, as required and at the amounts set by Government Code section 65915. This increase is in addition to any density bonus provided by subsection (A)(2) of this section, up to a maximum combined density increase of thirty-five (35) percent. 
C.  Incentives and Concessions, Number. An eligible project shall receive one, two or three incentives or concessions as follows: 
1.  One incentive or concession for a project that includes at least ten (10) percent of the total units for lower income households, at least five percent for very low income households, or at least ten (10) percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development; 
2.  Two incentives or concessions for a project that includes at least twenty (20) percent of the total units for lower income households, at least ten (10) percent for very low income households, or at least twenty (20) percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development; and 
3.  Three incentives or concessions for a project that includes at least thirty (30) percent of the total units for lower income households, at least fifteen (15) percent for very low income households, or at least thirty (30) percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development. 
D.  Incentives and Concessions, Description. A project that is eligible to receive incentives pursuant to subsection (C) above shall be entitled to at least one of the following incentives identified in Government Code Section 65915(I): 
1.  A reduction in the site development standards (as defined by Government Code Section 65915 Subsection (o)(1)) or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission. 
2.  Approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if nonresidential land uses would reduce the cost of the housing project, and the nonresidential land uses would be compatible with the housing project and adjoining development. 
3.  Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the permit applicant or the city that would result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set at the applicable affordability levels. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city to provide, or limit the city's ability to provide, direct financial incentives for housing development, including the provision of publicly owned land by the city or the waiver of fees and dedication requirements. 
E.  Limitations and Exceptions. 
1.  In order to receive incentives or concessions as described in subsections (C) and (D), an applicant must submit a proposal to the city requesting the specific incentives or concessions that the applicant desires. The applicant must file an application for a density bonus, on the form provided by the Community Development Director and with the attachments required by that form, which is part of and must be filed with the application for the development project itself. The applicant must provide reasonable documentation to establish eligibility for a requested density bonus, incentives or concessions, and/or waivers or reductions of development standards and parking ratios, including information demonstrating that the requested incentives, concessions, or waivers will result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set at the applicable affordability levels. The application for a density bonus is part of the application for the development project itself, as such the application for a density bonus may not be deemed complete until the application for the housing or mixed use development is deemed complete. 
2.  The city shall grant the incentives or concessions requested by the permit applicant pursuant to subsection (E)(1) and required pursuant to subsection (C), unless the city makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of either of the following: 
a.  The incentive or concession will not result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5 or for rents for the targeted units to be set at the applicable affordability levels; or 
b.  The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low-income and moderate income households. 
3.  The city's granting of an incentive, concession, or density bonus shall not require or be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a General Plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. 
4.  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the city to waive or reduce development standards or to grant an incentive or concession that would violate applicable state or federal law or have a specific, adverse impact upon public health, safety or the physical environment for which there is no feasible method of mitigating or avoiding the specific adverse impact; nor shall this subsection require the city to waive or reduce development standards or to grant an incentive that would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources. 
F.  Continued Availability and Affordability. Before the issuance of a building permit for any dwelling unit in a development for which density bonus units have been awarded or incentives or concessions have been received, the land use permit application for the residential project shall include the procedures proposed by the permit applicant to maintain the continued affordability of all lower income and restricted occupancy density bonus units, and the permit applicant shall identify the restricted units and enter into a written covenant with the city to guarantee the continued affordability of all lower income and restricted occupancy density bonus units as required by Government Code section 65915. 
G.  Recordation of Agreement. The terms and conditions of the covenant set forth in subsection (F) shall run with the land which is to be developed, shall be binding upon the successor(s)-in-interest of the permit applicant, shall be recorded in the county recorder's office, and shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney as compliance with applicable state law. 
H.  Processing of Bonus Request. 
1.  Permit Required. Requests for affordable units shall require approval of a building permit, together with all other permits required by this code, in compliance with the requirements of this development code which shall be reviewed and recommended by the commission, and approved by the council. 
2.  Criteria to Be Considered. Criteria to be considered in analyzing a requested density bonus shall include whether the applicant has agreed to construct a development that meets the requirements of Section 17.22.020. Criteria to be considered in analyzing a requested incentive or concession shall include whether the applicant has provided information demonstrating that the requested incentives, concessions, or waivers will result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set at the applicable affordability levels and whether an incentive or concession has a specific adverse impact upon health, safety or the physical environment, and whether there is no feasible method to eliminate or mitigate such specific adverse impact. 
3.  Findings for Approval. In addition to the findings required for the approval of a building permit in compliance with the requirements of this development code, the approval of a density bonus shall require the following additional findings to be made: 
a.  The development project would not be a hazard or public nuisance or establish a use or development inconsistent with the goals and policies of the General Plan; 
b.  Adequate evidence exists to ensure that the development of the property would result in the provision of affordable housing in a manner consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter, including information demonstrating that the requested incentives, concessions, or waivers will result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set at the applicable affordability levels and that the provision of any requested incentives, concessions, or waivers will not violate applicable state or federal law, not have a specific, adverse impact upon public health, safety or the physical environment for which there is no feasible method of mitigating or avoiding the specific adverse impact, and will not have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources; 
c.  In the event that the city does not grant at least one financial concession or incentive as defined in Government Code Section 65915 in addition to the density bonus, that additional concessions or incentives will not result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set at the applicable affordability levels; and 
d.  There are sufficient provisions to guarantee that the units will remain affordable in the future. 
4.  Development Standards. In no case may the city apply any development standard that would have the effect of precluding the construction of a development meeting the criteria of Section 17.22.020(B) at the densities or with the incentives or concessions permitted by this chapter. An applicant may submit to the city a proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards. The applicant must show that the waiver or modification is necessary to not physical preclude the construction of a development meeting the criteria of subdivision (b) at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted under this chapter. 
I.  Appeal. Appeals of commission actions on the granting of density bonuses in compliance with Chapter 17.74 will be heard by the council. Additionally, an applicant may initiate judicial proceedings if the city refuses to grant a requested density bonus, incentive, or modification or waiver of a development standard. If a court finds that the refusal to grant a requested density bonus, incentive, or modification or waiver of a development standard is in violation of this chapter or Government Code Section 65915, the court shall award the plaintiff reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the city to waive or reduce development standards or to grant an incentive that would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health, safety or the physical environment for which there is no feasible method of mitigating or avoiding the specific adverse impact; nor shall this subsection require the city to waive or reduce development standards or to grant an incentive that would have a specific adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2017-346 , § 5, 2-8-2017)  
17.22.040 - Location of assisted housing units—Additional housing requirements. 
The location of affordable units within the qualifying project shall be at the discretion of the city with the goal to integrate the units into the overall project. The city has determined that, to the extent feasible, projects that provide housing units for very low, low and moderate income households should be designed to locate the units as follows: 
A.  The number of assisted housing units in any project, except for those designed for the elderly or disabled, should not exceed forty (40) percent of the total number of units in the project; 
B.  Assisted housing should be located within reasonable proximity to public facilities, including convenient shopping, public schools, park and recreation facilities, transportation services, and employment centers; and 
C.  Assisted units, except those for the elderly, should be distributed throughout the project site, and not grouped together in a single area. 
D.  To the extent that subsections (A) through (C) are not feasible, or circumstances arise in which the public interest would be served by allowing some or all of the affordable units associated with one housing development to be produced and operated at an alternative development site, such a site may be utilized. Under these circumstances, the resulting linked developments shall be considered a single housing development for purposes of this chapter, and the permit applicant shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter for the affordable units to be provided on the alternative site. Where the director determines that on-site provision of affordable housing is not feasible, the review authority may approve one or more of the alternatives listed below (or other alternatives determined by the review authority to be equally effective). Any approved alternatives shall be carried out under a development agreement (Chapter 17.68) between the applicant and the city for covering the entire project. 
1.  New Construction of Affordable Housing. An applicant may construct a number of new affordable units off-site equal to the number that would otherwise have been required on-site. 
2.  New Construction of Special Needs Housing. An applicant may construct new units off-site that are specifically designed to meet the needs of an identified special needs population. This housing may include emergency shelters, special care homes, employee housing, senior housing and hospices. Each unit created under this alternative shall satisfy the requirement for two affordable units as required by subsection (A)(1) of this section. 
3.  Conversion of Market Rate Housing. An applicant may convert market rate housing to affordable housing through a "buy down" mechanism, and establishing restrictive covenants or similar protection of the affordability of the converted units. 
4.  Rehabilitation of Existing Housing Stock. An applicant may rehabilitate structures that currently do not comply with Title 15 of this Code, and have been deemed uninhabitable by the city. Housing appropriate for rehabilitation need not be price restricted, and must be determined by the review authority to be affordable based on its age and/or condition. 
5.  Preservation of Existing Affordable Housing. An applicant may extend the lifetime of an existing restrictive covenant on affordable units that have been identified by the city as being "at risk" of conversion to market rate housing within a five-year period. 
6.  Payment of In-Lieu Fee. An applicant may pay an in-lieu fee as set by council resolution. The fee shall be deposited in a designated fund to be used for the preservation and development of affordable housing. 
7.  Timing of Fee Payment. Where a fee is required, the fee shall be paid prior to issuance of building permits. 
E.  Commercial Projects. A commercial, office or manufacturing/industrial development that introduces new workers into the community and thereby creates a need for more new housing than is available within a five-mile radius of the site, shall either, as determined to be appropriate by the director: 
1.  Design the development as a mixed-use project, providing housing affordable to employees within the project site; or 
2.  Pay to the city the housing impact fee established by the council, which will be placed into a housing trust fund administered as provided by the General Plan and council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.24 - ART IN PUBLIC PLACES* 
 
17.24.010 - Statement of intent and purpose. 
In its awareness of the aesthetic enhancement and enrichment of the community by the inclusion of fine art throughout the city, the city council adopts this chapter. The goal of Calabasas' art in public places program is to provide a collection of nationally recognized permanent artwork. The program is designed to present the community with a wide range of artwork styles, themes and media, all of the highest quality. All pieces must be of monumental scale in proportion to the size of the buildings. Balance and variety are qualities to strive for as the program grows. This program will provide a collection of public artworks throughout the city to be enjoyed by all. Therefore, an art in public places fee is established on all applicable building projects within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.24.020 - Program requirements. 
A.  Any person constructing or reconstructing a commercial building within the city shall be assessed a fee for acquisition of artwork based on the total building valuation. Where the installation of art is impractical or inaccessible, the developer will contribute the assessed fees to the art in public places fund. Art purchased from the fund will be installed within the city at the discretion of the city council based on the recommendation of the art in public places advisory committee. 
B.  The fee shall be one percent of the building valuation as computed using the latest building valuation data as set forth by the International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO). The maximum fee per project will be set at one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.24.040 - Art project approval. 
Prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy for a commercial structure, the artist and art project shall be approved by the art in public places advisory committee and the artwork installed after the art in public places advisory committee recommendation is approved by the city council; or the appropriate fees shall be collected by the city building and safety division. A list of professional artists will be provided to the developer to assist in the decision making process and to insure the professional quality of the artwork. The art must be displayed at the building, in a place highly visible to the public. This location will be reviewed by the art in public places advisory committee and approved by the city council before the art is permanently placed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.24.050 - Separate fund to be established and use of fees collected. 
All fees collected under this chapter shall be held in a separate fund of the city. The city manager shall be responsible for maintaining the records relating to the art in public places fund, and these records shall be reviewed and approved by the city council annually. 
All fine art purchased with such funds shall be the property of the city. Monies appropriated under this chapter may be used for hiring artists to develop design concepts and for the selection, acquisition, purchase and commissioning of public artworks. Monies appropriated under this chapter may be used for operating costs of the art in public places program, including the cost of public dedications when the artwork is completed. Funds not expended in any given year shall be carried over into the next year and shall be used solely for the art in public places program. 
Fees collected under this chapter shall not be used for the following: 
A.  Directional elements such as super graphics, signage, or color coding except where these elements are integral parts of the original work of art or executed by artists in unique or limited editions; 
B.  Art objects which are mass produced of standard design such as playground equipment or fountains; 
C.  Decorative or functional elements or architectural details, which are designed solely by the building architect as opposed to an artist commissioned for this purpose working individually or in collaboration with the building architect; 
D.  Landscape architecture and landscape gardening except where these elements are designed by the artist and are an integral part of the work of art by the artist. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.24.060 - Definition of public artworks. 
The works of art are to be enduring original artworks. They should be of the highest quality and craftsmanship. They should engage one's mind and senses while enhancing and enriching the quality of life of the city. The artworks will be generally permanently sited and an integral part of the landscaping and/or architecture of the building. The artwork shall be constructed in a scale that is proportional to the scale of the development. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.24.070 - Selection of artworks and creation of advisory committee. 
An art in public places advisory committee shall be approved by the city council. The committee shall be comprised of a parks and recreation commissioner appointed by the chair, a planning commissioner appointed by the chair and one at-large member appointed by the city council and the committee shall be advisory to the city council. All members shall be residents of the city. This committee shall provide general oversight of the art in public places program, its projects, the sites, scope of project, artworks, and artists to be selected. The committee shall review and the city council shall approve the developers' choice of artist and proposed art piece prior to any approval of occupancy by the building and safety division. 
The composition and ultimate responsibilities of the art in public places advisory committee shall be established by the city council in a separate resolution. A comprehensive policy manual will be developed to outline the program scope and to assist developers in complying with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.26 - LANDSCAPING 
 
17.26.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes landscape regulations that enhance a development's appearance, reduce heat and glare, control soil erosion, retain and conserve water, screen incompatible land uses, preserve neighborhood integrity, and improve pedestrian and vehicular traffic and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.26.020 - Applicability. 
The requirements of this chapter for landscape installation and prior plan approval apply to development as follows. 
A.  Compliance with Chapter Required. The requirements of this chapter apply to: 
1.  All new residential and nonresidential development; 
2.  Landscape alterations in existing developments exceeding fifty (50) percent of the total planted area; and, 
3.  Golf courses, community gardens, and existing common open space areas of one acre or more. 
B.  Exempt Projects. The following projects are exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
2.  Replacement or repair of existing plant material or irrigation systems in conjunction with routine maintenance, so long as replacement or repair does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total landscape area; 
3.  Interior remodels, tenant improvements (interior modifications only) and approved demolitions; and 
4.  Revegetation projects after a wildfire or prescribed burn. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.26.030 - Landscape plan requirements. 
A.  Applicability. This section applies to all proposed development, except for the construction of one single-family dwelling on an individual lot that is not constructed in conjunction with two or more units, or proposed on a site with a cut bank of twenty (20) feet or more in height. Applicants for the approval of individual dwellings, except those located in a scenic corridor, shall instead submit a preliminary planting plan with a planting palette, prior to approval of a final building inspection. Individual dwellings located in a scenic corridor shall submit a preliminary planting plan with a planting palette prior to approval by the reviewing authority. Approved landscaping shall then be installed within ninety (90) days of occupancy 
B.  Conceptual Landscape Plan. A conceptual landscape plan shall be submitted with any application for a land use permit, subdivision, new development, or major redevelopment, excluding properties in the RS zoning district. 
C.  Landscape Documentation Package. After approval of a land use permit application, a landscape documentation package shall be prepared and submitted concurrent with a building permit application. The landscape documentation package shall be approved before building permit issuance. 
D.  Content. Conceptual landscape plans and landscape documentation packages shall contain all information specified in the instructions for preparing landscape plans, provided by the department. 
E.  Plan Preparation. A conceptual landscape plan and landscape documentation package shall be prepared by a certified landscape professional registered to practice in the state of California, unless waived by the director. 
F.  Review and Approval. After initial application review in compliance with Section 17.60.050, the director and a certified landscape professional selected by the director shall review each conceptual landscape plan and landscape documentation package to verify its compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The director may approve the submittal in compliance with this chapter, and may disapprove or require changes to a submittal that is not in compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.26.040 - Landscape installation requirements. 
Landscape shall be provided where required by this section, in compliance with Section 17.26.050, in addition to any areas required by Chapters 17.20 and 17.12. 
A.  General Locations for Landscape. Landscape shall be provided in the following locations: 
1.  Setbacks. All required setback areas shall be landscaped in compliance with this section, except where (i) enclosed and screened from the public right-of-way and adjoining properties by solid fencing, (ii) a required setback is occupied by a sidewalk or driveway. 
2.  Unused Areas. All areas shall be landscaped in compliance with this section, except areas (i) identified in a site plan for a specific use or purpose such as a building, parking lot or site amenities; except where enclosed and screened from the public right-of-way and adjoining properties. 
3.  Parking Areas. Landscape shall be provided within parking areas in compliance with subsection (B)(2) of this section and Section 17.28.070. 
4.  Slopes. All slopes shall be landscaped in compliance with this section, where grading or the removal of natural vegetation has occurred. 
B.  Minimum Areas for Landscaping and Pervious Surfaces. Proposed development and new land uses shall be designed, constructed and maintained with minimum areas of landscaping and pervious paving materials in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Pervious paving materials allow infiltration of water into soil below paving and minimize surface water runoff. Pervious surface materials can include wood slatted decking, pavers, brick or stone with spaces to allow percolation between the surface materials, pervious concrete or asphalt, or other similar methods approved by the director. The water surface of a lake, pond or swimming pool is considered pervious; 
1.  Overall Site Requirements. Proposed development and new land uses shall provide the following landscape and pervious surface areas. Specific requirements for parking areas are provided in subsection (B)(2) of this section. 
Table 3-10 
Minimum Areas for Landscape and Pervious Surface 
Zoning District 	Minimum % of Site Area for Landscaping 
and Pervious Surface 
Residential, Single Family (RS) 	50% for sites ;lt; 1/3 acre; 
	65% for sites ;gt;= 1/3 acre 
Residential, Multifamily (RM) 	45% 
Residential, Mobilehome (RMP) 	25% 
Planned Development (PD) 	22% 
Residential, Rural (RR) 	70% 
Rural, Community (RC) 	65% 
Hillside Mountainous (HM) 	86% 
Commercial, Limited (CL) 	24% 
Commercial, Office (CO) 	24% 
Commercial, Retail (CR) 	22% 
Commercial, Mixed Use (CMU) 	38% 
Commercial, Business (CB) 	28% 
Commercial Old Town (CT) 	28% 
 
a.  Whenever there is residential subdivision with permanent open space dedicated as part of the original subdivision approval and which is controlled by the city, another public agency, or an active Homeowners Association, individual lots within that subdivision may receive a credit against the landscape and pervious surface requirements. This credit shall be equal to the percentage of the total dedicated permanent open space within the lot as determined by the director. 
b.  Existing single family homes can receive a ten (10) percent credit against the minimum landscape and pervious surface requirements, if a system of storm water management and artificial recharge of precipitation is submitted and approved by the director. Alternative methods may include use of any of the various roof runoff controls: cisterns, rain barrels, dry wells (french drains) and infiltration trenches, stormwater detention tanks, and routing roof runoff through landscape areas. See Figure 3-11. 
  
2.  Parking Area Requirements. Required parking area landscaping shall be provided as set forth herein, and as required by Section 17.28.070E (see also, Figure 3-12 at the end of Section 17.28.070), unless otherwise specified in this chapter. A minimum of thirty (30) percent of all parking lots shall be designed, constructed and maintained as landscaped areas, or other pervious surfacing as approved by the review authority. The landscape and pervious surface required by this subsection may be counted toward compliance with the overall landscape/pervious surface requirements of subsection (B)(1) of this section. 
a.  Perimeter Landscaping. 
i.  Adjacent to Streets. Parking areas with more than ten (10) spaces adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be designed to provide a landscaped planting strip between the right-of-way and parking, equal in depth to the setback required by the zoning district or ten (10) feet, whichever is less. The buffer should be increased to twenty (20) feet on sites that are deep (two hundred (200) feet or more) or large (fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or more). Any planting, sign or other structure within the traffic safety visibility area of a driveway shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches in height. 
ii.  Adjacent to Residential Use. Parking areas for nonresidential uses adjacent to residential uses shall be designed to provide a landscaped planting strip a minimum of ten (10) feet in width between the parking area and the property line bordering the residential use. A screening wall shall also be provided in compliance with Section 17.20.070(H). 
iii.  Side Yard Landscaping—CL, CO and CMU Zones. A minimum of five feet of side yard landscaping shall be provided adjacent to all parking areas abutting nonresidential uses. 
iv.  Parking Lot Screening—CB Zone. All parking areas shall be screened to a minimum height of forty-two (42) inches from the top of curb by landscaping, berms/mounding, decorative fences or walls, or appropriate combination of each. 
b.  Interior Landscaping. 
i.  Planting Strips between Parking Aisles. Parking areas with multiple parking aisles shall be designed to provide a continuous planter strip between each aisle. The planter strip shall be six feet wide, with six-foot by eighteen-foot projecting landscaped islands every ten (10) parking spaces. As determined by the director, adequate pedestrian paths shall be provided throughout the landscaped areas. The planting strips shall include at least one twenty-four (24) inch box shade tree for every three parking spaces. Trees shall be clustered as required by the director. 
ii.  Projecting Islands. Planting strips between aisles in parking lots with more than fifteen (15) parking spaces shall include projecting islands to accommodate additional trees and other landscape materials. Islands shall be provided between every ten (10) parking spaces, and shall be a minimum of six feet wide. 
iii.  Required Shading. The landscaping program (including tree species selected) shall be designed to provide shading for fifty (50) percent of the parking lot area within fifteen (15) years. 
iv.  Bumper Overhang Areas. To increase the parking lot landscaped area, a maximum of two feet of the parking stall depth may be landscaped with low-growth, hearty materials in lieu of asphalt, allowing a bumper overhang while maintaining the required parking dimensions. 
v.  Areas not Used for Parking. Areas in a parking lot not used for driveways, maneuvering areas, parking spaces, or pedestrian walkways, shall be landscaped and permanently maintained, in compliance with a program submitted by the applicant and approved by the director. 
c.  Curbing and Irrigation. All areas containing plant materials shall be bordered by a concrete curb at least six inches high and six inches wide, and provided with an approved automatic irrigation system. 
C.  Specific Zone Landscaping Requirements. The following landscape standards are established for the specified zoning districts, in addition to the standards in subsection (A) of this section. The following landscaped areas may be used to comply with the minimum requirements of subsection (B) of this section. 
1.  RS Residential Zone. Fifty (50) percent of the required front setback area shall be permanently landscaped. Street trees shall be planted in front of all structures with a height greater than eighteen (18) feet. 
2.  Commercial Zones. 
a.  CR Zone: 
i.  A minimum ten-foot wide landscape buffer shall be provided along all street frontages. The buffer shall include a landscaped berm with a height of forty-two (42) inches, and two to one slope; 
ii.  In instances where a building is not proposed on the property line, a minimum five-foot wide screen planting shall be established along all interior property lines, except that property lines bordering residential zoning districts shall have a ten-foot landscaped setback, including trees at least every twenty (20) feet; and 
iii.  Medium-to-large size trees shall be used and in scale with the commercial areas and serve as sidewalk canopies, screening and parking area shade and relief. 
b.  CL, CO and CMU Zones. Property lines bordering residential zoning districts shall have a ten-foot landscaped setback where required by the review authority, including trees at least every twenty (20) feet. 
c.  CB Zone: 
i.  A landscaped area with a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet shall be provided from the property line to parking areas, and of thirty (30) feet from the property line to buildings. The landscaped area shall include meandering sidewalks, appropriate mounded landscaping, lawns, shrubs, street trees and clusters of trees, coordinated to create a continuous design along the street frontages; and 
ii.  Landscaping shall be designed to create and enhance the visual quality and park-like nature of development within the CB zoning district. Landscaping shall be used (i) to screen and soften parking areas and other broad expanses of paving as provided above; (ii) to provide a park-like setting for structures; and (iii) to buffer and merge the various uses proposed on a site. 
d.  CT Zone: The landscape requirements for the CT zone shall be determined by the Old Town Calabasas Master Plan and Design Guidelines. 
3.  Special-Purpose Zones. The landscape requirements for the HM, OS, PF and REC zoning districts shall be established and designed for each individual project as part of land use permit approval for each use. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.26.050 - Landscape standards. 
Landscape areas and materials shall be designed, installed, and maintained as provided by this section. 
A.  Design Standards and Guidelines. The following features shall be incorporated into the design of the proposed landscape and shown on required landscape plans (Section 17.26.030). 
1.  Proposed landscape should relate to the architectural design of the structures on the site, and it should be compatible with the character of adjacent landscaping; provided, that this landscaping complies with this chapter. 
2.  The protection and preservation of native species and natural site features and areas is encouraged. 
3.  Tree planting is encouraged, in addition to that required by Section 17.26.040. Tree selection shall take into consideration the potential for future root damage to public sidewalks and growth of the tree canopy into or near overhead utilities. 
4.  Plants with similar water needs shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones. 
5.  Parkway strips shall include design provisions to ensure blending and smooth transitions between different types and patterns of landscaping, and public and private property. To accomplish the foregoing, parkway strips shall utilize street trees and complementary landscaping. 
6.  When inorganic groundcover is used, it shall be in combination with live plants and shall only be used as an accent feature. 
7.  Irrigation systems shall be equipped with smart irrigation controllers. 
8.  Landscaping should be designed as an integral part of the overall site plan design. Landscaping and open spaces should not be relegated to pieces of the site left over after buildings, parking, and circulation have been laid out. 
9.  Landscape design should accent the overall design theme and reinforce the pedestrian scale of the project through the use of structures, arbors, and trellises that are appropriate to the particular architectural style of the project. Pedestrian amenities should be provided throughout the project including benches, trash receptacles, drinking fountains, and lighting. 
10.  Unless a street has an existing landscape theme, whenever landscaping of the public parkway is required it should be designed in coordination with the project's on-site landscaping to provide an integrated design concept along street frontages. 
11.  Project entries should be designed as special statements reflective of the character of the project so that they reinforce an identity for tenants, and visitors. Accent planting, specimen trees, enhanced paving, and project entry signs should be used in furtherance of the foregoing. 
12.  Deciduous shade trees should be planted on the south and east side of structures to maximize summer shade and winter sun. 
B.  Plant Material Limitations. Plant materials shall be selected and installed to comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Plant materials shall emphasize drought-tolerant and native species; 
2.  Plant materials in areas adjacent to and not physically separated from native chaparral should be selected to prevent invasion of the chaparral. 
3.  Trees and shrubs shall be planted so that, at maturity, they do not interfere with service lines, and traffic safety visibility areas. See Section17.20.120(D). 
4.  Trees planted near public bicycle trails, pedestrian paths, or curbs shall be of a species and installed in a manner which prevents physical damage to sidewalks, curbs, gutters and other public improvements. 
C.  Irrigation. Irrigation systems shall be designed and installed as follows. 
1.  Equipment. 
a.  Anti-Drain Valves. Integral, under the head, or in-line anti-drain valves shall be installed as needed to prevent low head drainage. 
b.  Automatic Control Valves. Different hydrozones shall be irrigated by separate valves. 
c.  Controllers. Automatic control systems shall be required for all irrigation systems and must be able to accommodate all aspects of the design. Automatic controllers shall be digital, have multiple programs, multiple cycles (start-times), and have sensor input capabilities. 
d.  Rain Sensor Devices. Rain sensing override devices shall be required where appropriate on all irrigation systems. 
e.  Soil Moisture Sensors. Soil moisture sensing devices shall be considered where appropriate, such as turf areas. 
f.  Sprinkler Heads. Sprinkler heads shall be selected for proper area coverage, application rate, operating pressure and adjustment capability. Sprinklers shall have matched precipitation and application rates within each control valve circuit. 
g.  Water Meters. Separate landscape water meters or sub-meters shall be installed for all projects with landscape and non-landscape areas. Landscape sub-meters, if used, shall be purchased, installed and maintained by the owner. 
2.  Recycled Water. For those sites where recycled water systems are feasible (commercial, manufacturing/industrial and common areas for residential developments), a recycled water irrigation system (dual distribution system) shall be required to allow for the current and future use of recycled water in compliance with the requirements of the Las Virgenes Municipal Water District. A recycled water irrigation system shall be designed and operated in accordance with all local and state codes. 
3.  Runoff and Overspray. All irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid runoff, low head drainage, overspray or other similar conditions where water flows or drifts onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, pedestrian walkways, roadways or structures. 
4.  System Performance—Turf Areas. Irrigation systems for turf areas must achieve a minimum distribution uniformity of: 
a.  Seventy-five (75) percent for areas of one acre or more of contiguous area; 
b.  Sixty-five (75) percent for areas less than one acre but greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet of contiguous area; and, 
c.  Fifty-five (55) percent for areas less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of contiguous area. 
5.  Water Efficient Systems. Irrigation systems shall be designed to reduce overall water consumption, including irrigation water consumption. The following methods should be utilized in designing water efficient irrigation systems. 
a.  Group plants with similar water requirements, and to match these plant groupings with precipitation heads and emitters. 
b.  Use drip irrigation for trees, shrub beds and areas of groundcover to eliminate evaporation losses. 
c.  Choose low-volume, low-angle sprinklers for lawn areas. 
d.  Select heads that fit the size and shape of the areas to be watered. 
e.  Program automatic controllers for night irrigation to reduce water losses due to evaporation and wind drift. 
f.  Select controllers with adjustable watering schedules and moisture sensors to account for seasonal variations, and calibrate them during installation. 
g.  Place three to five inches of mulch on planting beds each spring to minimize evaporation. 
h.  Install sub-grade drip irrigation systems to converse water. 
D.  Installation. All landscape materials and support equipment shown in an approved landscape documentation package shall be installed on a site as follows: 
1.  Timing of Installation. 
a.  Building Construction Projects. Except as set forth in Section 17.26.030 (A), required landscape shall be installed and verified by the department prior to approval of a final building inspection or certificate of occupancy. 
b.  Residential Subdivisions. The city shall require as a condition of approval that each developer of a residential subdivision record with the county record's office a condition, covenant or restriction against each parcel of the subdivision requiring the complete installation of landscaping in full compliance with this chapter no later than six months from the time title passes to the first purchaser of a constructed residence within the subdivision. 
c.  Individual Homes. Prior to approval of a final building inspection, landscape plans shall be reviewed and approved and landscape and irrigation shall be installed. 
d.  Delayed Installation. In the event that weather conditions prevent the effective installation of required landscape prior to occupancy, a performance bond in the amount equal to the value of the landscape materials may be permitted, subject to the approval of the director. 
2.  Special Requirements for Model Homes. Model homes shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. Code compliant model home landscaping shall include signs identifying the model home as an example of a water efficient landscaping and feature any equipment that has been utilized to achieve water efficiency. The model home shall include information to the visiting public describing the water efficient landscape along with its design, installation, and required maintenance. 
3.  Changes to Design. Changes to any portion of an approved landscape documentation package must be approved by the director. 
E.  Maintenance of Landscape. Landscape shall be permanently maintained as follows: 
1.  General Standard. Maintenance of approved landscape installations shall consist of regular watering, pruning, fertilizing, debris and weed clearing, dead plant removal and replacement, and the repair and replacement of irrigation systems and integrated architectural features. 
2.  Maintenance of Common Open Space Areas. For new residential subdivisions, landscaped areas with common open space in excess of one acre, owned and maintained by a homeowner's association shall work with the city to establish a water budget within the first year after installation of all landscaping in the development. The applicant shall have up to five years in which to implement all necessary landscape improvements to the satisfaction of the director. 
F.  Oak Tree Removal. No oak tree shall be altered or removed, except one confirmed by city staff as dead, without first obtaining an oak tree permit pursuant to Chapter 17.32. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.27 - Lighting 
 
17.27.005 - Compliance. 
Exterior lighting on private property within the city shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.27.010 - Purpose and legislative intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for outdoor lighting in order to protect the suburban, semi-rural and rural character of the City of Calabasas from inappropriate levels of night lighting. It is this chapter's intent to encourage lower level illumination in the city, to institute lighting practices and systems that conserve energy, to provide for lighting that minimizes conflicts with wildlife movement, and to enhance the visibility of natural features during night-time hours. These goals are to be accomplished through the regulation of the types, kinds, construction, installation and use of outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices. Moreover, the purposes of this chapter are to be satisfied without significantly decreasing public safety and security, the utility of recreational spaces or interfering with business activities and economic productivity. 
In general terms, the overall legislative intents of these regulations are (i) to minimize artificial light effect on the night sky, (ii) to provide for well designed commercial spaces with appropriate lighting levels, and (iii) to preserve the significance of darkness to the human and wildlife populations occupying the surrounding rural and semi-rural areas in the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.27.015 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all new development proposals including: 
A.  Applications for all new commercial, industrial, recreational and residential projects or other permitted uses under the development code; 
B.  Lighting in parking lots, parking structures and areas of concentrated parking, including car dealerships; 
C.  Private streets and driveways; 
D.  Private roadway signs, security lighting, pedestrian sidewalks and bikeways; and 
E.  Commercial and residential sports courts (e.g., tennis, basketball, and volleyball). 
This chapter does not apply to public property (including city facilities, streets, and parks) or to retrofitting of existing lighting on residential homes (single-family and multifamily) and appurtenant yard landscaping unless an application is filed for a conditional use permit, site plan review or other new development permit subject to planning department review and approval. Residential lighting of sixty (60) watts or less shall not be subject to this chapter. Other specific exemptions are listed in Section 17.27.050. It is the intent of the city to establish a separate and distinct program to extend these standards to public road illumination and lighting at other public facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.27.020 - General guidelines. 
General guidelines are provided to assist the public in designing lighting consistent with this chapter. When considering development proposals with prospective applicants for city permits and entitlements subject to this chapter, the following lighting related guidelines are to be incorporated into project designs to ensure conformance with this chapter: 
A.  All outdoor light fixtures installed prior to November 20, 2002, the effective date of this chapter, and thereafter maintained upon private property used for commercial, industrial, recreational or residential purposes (including lighting along private roadways) should limit light trespass and glare through the use of shielding and directional lighting methods, including fixture location and height. Where feasible, exterior lighting pole heights should not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. Pole heights should be the minimum necessary to achieve appropriate standards set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Externally illuminated signs, advertising displays, billboards, and building identification signs should use lighting fixtures which illuminate downward and be fully shielded. These externally illuminated signs shall meet with the light levels set forth in Section 17.27.030(B)(2). 
C.  By itself, low-pressure sodium lighting should not be used in outdoor light fixtures due to poor color rendition and the need by public safety personnel to identify color in nighttime environments. A combination of low-pressure sodium lighting and other type(s) of lighting, such as fluorescent light, may be used if color rendition can be maintained through such lighting combinations. 
D.  Outdoor light fixtures used to illuminate landscaping, flags, statues, or any other objects mounted on a pole, pedestal, or platform should use a very narrow cone of light for the purpose of confining the light to the object of interest and minimize spill-light and glare. In addition, the lighting of these features and other monuments should meet with the light levels set forth in Section 17.27.030(B)(10). 
E.  Light fixtures used for outdoor recreational facilities should be fully shielded except when shielding would cause impairment to the visibility required in the intended recreational activity. In such cases, partially shielded fixtures and directional lighting methods shall be utilized to limit light pollution, glare and light trespass to a reasonable level, as determined by the director, without diminishing the performance standards of the intended recreational activity. Illumination from recreational facility light fixtures shall be shielded to minimize glare extending toward roadways where impairment of the motorist vision might cause a hazard. The lighting of outdoor recreational facilities shall meet with the light levels set forth in Section 17.27.030(B)(7). Outdoor recreational facility lighting in designated scenic corridors should be avoided. 
F.  All exterior lights and illuminated signs should be designed, located, installed and directed in such a manner as to prevent objectionable light at (and glare across) the property lines and vision impairing glare at any location on or off the property. No permanently installed lighting should blink or flash. All lighting fixtures should be appropriate in scale, intensity, and height for the architectural design and building uses proposed. 
G.  Landscaping should be required in areas where plantings can reduce visible glare and enhance natural surroundings. 
H.  Lighting fixtures located along roadways and parking lots should be fitted with glare shields or be cut-off type fixtures. 
I.  The location of lighting fixtures along rural scenic corridor roadways should be consistent with adopted streetscape plans (where applicable) and shall be situated at intersections and corners to increase visibility of these sections of the roadway. 
J.  Lighting fixtures intended for security purposes should be equipped with motion sensors. 
K.  All design solutions requiring commercial light standards and poles over fifteen (15) feet in height should be redesigned to accommodate lower elevation poles. 
L.  Exterior lighting within scenic corridor overlay zoning district should be limited to lighting types and levels that are necessary for safety and security. 
M.  Exterior commercial lighting should have lighting controls such as photocells and other controls which l turn-off lighting during daylight hours. 
N.  New single-family residential projects should be encouraged to install dimmers on both interior and exterior lighting fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.27.030 - Lighting standards. 
The purpose of the following lighting standards is to provide staff and applicants guidance about appropriate lighting levels for a variety of land uses: 
A.  The standards herein can be measured using an illuminance meter (light meter) by city staff or an agent with training in lighting measurements. Measurements shall be taken immediately outside the cone of illuminance below a fixture. 
B.  Lighting design engineers shall use the following maximum thresholds in developing photometric plans for new developments. Some flexibility in final lighting design values should be permitted, but in general, the following values should be considered illumination limits: 
1.  Roadway Lighting. Lighting for roadways shall provide adequate illumination for safe and efficient vehicular travel. Roadway lighting fixtures shall either be equipped with glare shields or be a high cut-off type of fixture. Lighting of roadways categorized as scenic corridors or identified as wildlife corridors on Figure IV-1 in the General Plan shall be of a minimal level. Fixtures shall be shielded to prevent glare. The following standards should be considered the maximum average lighting values for roadways in these areas. The pedestrian intensity of use values cited below are ordinal scale measures (not quantified) and are intended only to be relative measures of intensity of use. No specific quantities (such as pedestrian counts) are associated with these ordinal measures. Applicability of standards to various pedestrian levels shall be made by the review authority on a case by case basis. 
Scenic or wildlife corridors and developments with few nighttime pedestrians: 
Footcandles on pavement 	0.6 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	4:1 
 
Developments with frequent moderately heavy nighttime pedestrian activity: 
Footcandles on pavement 	0.9 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	4:1 
 
Developments with heavy nighttime vehicular and pedestrian traffic: 
Footcandles on pavement 	1.3 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	4:1 
 
2.  Externally Lighted Roadway Signs. The lighting of roadway signs shall be limited to a level that allows motorists to quickly and easily recognize the sign type and message. The following standards are the maximum horizontal illuminance values for externally lighted roadways. 
Rural areas and scenic corridor areas without lighting or areas with very low light levels: 
Footcandles on sign 	20 
 
Areas with small commercial developments and lighted roadways: 
Footcandles on sign 	40 
 
Areas with high street lighting levels and brightly lighted signs: 
Footcandles on sign 	80 
 
3.  Parking Lot. The lighting for parking lots shall be to a level that provides for the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians. Parking lot lighting fixtures shall either be equipped with glare shields or be of a high cut-off type. Lighting fixture standard heights shall not be in excess of what is necessary to meet the recommended lighting levels. Lighting poles shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. Decorative standards consistent with neighborhood architecture and adopted design and streetscape plans shall be employed in lighting plans. The following standards are the maximum average lighting values for parking lots: 
Footcandles on parking surface 	0.2 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	20:1 
 
4.  Parking Garages. The following standards are considered maximum average lighting values for parking garages, except that the top level of parking garages should be no greater than is necessary to ensure pedestrian safety and visibility: 
Footcandles on parking surface 	1 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	10:1 
 
5.  Security Lighting. If security lighting is located in an area where it is not continuously required y, fixtures shall be equipped with motion sensors. The following standards are maximum average lighting values for security lighting in large open areas: 
Footcandles on secure area 	2 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	8:1 
 
6.  Pedestrian Sidewalks and Bikeways. The lighting for pedestrian sidewalks and bikeways shall be to a level that increases pathway visibility and the safety of pedestrians. The following standards are the maximum average lighting values for pedestrian sidewalks and bikeways in these areas. 
Scenic and wildlife corridors and developments with few nighttime pedestrians: 
Footcandles on pavement 	0.2 
 
Intermediate—Medium-sized residential and business developments with frequent moderately heavy nighttime pedestrian activity: 
Footcandles on pavement 	0.6 
 
Developments with heavy nighttime vehicular and pedestrian traffic: 
Footcandles on pavement 	1.0 
 
7.  Sports and Recreation Areas. The lighting of sports and recreation areas shall be to a level that allows for clear and accurate visibility of all elements of the activity. High uniformity and low glare shall permit adequate play visibility. Lighting fixtures within these areas shall be correctly aimed to provide maximum task illuminance while limiting glare and light trespass. These lighting fixtures shall be adequately shielded to prevent glare from extending into surrounding properties. Sports and recreation lighting shall be turned off by eleven p.m. Frequently used lighted recreational facilities should not be located in residential neighborhoods but should, whenever possible, be located in areas buffered from such neighborhoods by open space, institutional, industrial, or commercial uses. The following standards are considered the maximum average lighting values for sports and recreation area lighting. 
Baseball and softball: 
Footcandles on playing surface 	30 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	4:1 or less 
 
Basketball: 
Footcandles on playing surface 	20 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	4:1 or less 
 
Football and soccer: 
Footcandles on playing surface 	30 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	4:1 or less 
 
Roller hockey: 
Footcandles on playing surface 	30 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	4:1 or less 
 
Tennis: 
Footcandles on playing surface 	50 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	4:1 or less 
 
Volleyball: 
Footcandles on playing surface 	30 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	4:1 or less 
 
8.  Service/Gas Stations. The lighting of service/gas stations shall be to a level that provides customers with a safe and secure environment while limiting glare under canopy areas. Glare to adjacent roadways shall be reduced by either limiting the visibility of lighting fixtures through the use of shields or by reducing the illuminance to the levels set forth herein. The following standards are the maximum average lighting values for a service/gas station. 
Pump island area: 
Footcandles on pavement 	5.0 
 
Service areas: 
Footcandles on pavement 	2.0 
 
9.  Auto Dealerships. The lighting of car dealerships should provide lighting levels that evenly disperse light over display lots. Lighting programs for dealerships should be designed to attract customers to the vehicles without producing excessive glare to adjacent roadways and surroundings. Auto dealership display lighting shall be turned off (except for motion sensor security lighting) by eleven p.m. Fixtures located in inventory lots shall provide adequate levels for inspection of the vehicles while minimizing glare. Lighting levels for car dealerships shall be separated into three distinct categories: 
a.  Illumination for display should be concentrated around building frontage and sales entry areas. Display lighting shall be limited to no more than thirty (30) vehicles. Display areas should also be proportionate to facility size. 
b.  Inventory lots are designed for the storage of automobile sales inventory. These lots shall occupy no more than forty (40) percent of the total outdoor vehicle parking lot area. 
c.  Storage lots shall be designed to accommodate the remainder of a dealership's vehicle inventory (i.e., vehicles that are not within the display or inventory lots). Storage lots shall form over fifty (50) percent of the parking area for an automobile dealership. 
The following standards are the maximum average values for auto dealerships. 
Display/advertising area: 
Footcandles on pavement 	15—20 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	10:1 
 
Inventory and entrance/driveways: 
Footcandles on pavement 	5.0 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	10:1 
 
Storage lots: 
Footcandles on pavement 	2.0 
Uniform Ratio (maximum to minimum) 	5:1 
 
10.  Monuments (e.g., flags, statues, or other objects mounted on a pedestal, platform or pole). The monument lighting shall provide levels that sufficiently preserve the visibility of the physical characteristics of the monument. Lighting fixtures shall either be shielded or be of a cut-off type to prevent glare from intruding on the public right-of-way or adjacent properties. The following standards are considered the maximum average lighting values for lighting monuments: 
Footcandles on vertical target 	5 
 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.27.040 - Submission of plans and evidence of compliance. 
Submission Contents. The applicant for any project subject to this chapter shall submit (as part of the application for permit) evidence that the proposed project will comply with this Code. The submission shall contain but shall not be limited to the following: 
A.  Plans indicating the lighting location, and the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices to be installed; 
B.  Photographs or other renderings and photometric data of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices to be installed; and other descriptions which may include, manufacturer catalog cuts and drawings (including cross sections where required); 
C.  Photometric plan illustrating the model values produced by the designed lighting. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.27.050 - Exemptions. 
A.  All commercial outdoor light fixtures legally installed prior to November 20, 2002, prior to the effective date of this chapter, are exempt from this chapter. However any replacement of outdoor commercial light fixtures shall comply with this chapter. 
B.  All residential (single and multifamily) outdoor light fixtures legally installed prior to November 20, 2002, the effective date of this chapter, are exempt from of this chapter. Any replacement of outdoor light fixtures on residential properties shall not be required to comply with this chapter unless an application for a planning approval is requested consistent with Section 17.27.015. 
C.  All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of fossil fuels, such as kerosene lanterns or gas lamps. 
D.  Construction or emergency lighting. 
E.  Signs of the type constructed of translucent materials and wholly illuminated from within are exempt from the shielding requirement. 
F.  Holiday lighting. 
G.  Exterior lighting for a temporary activity with a temporary use permit approved by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.27.060 - Approved materials and methods of installation. 
This chapter is not intended to prevent the use of any design, material or method of installation not specifically proscribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.27.070 - Variances. 
A variance from the requirements of this chapter shall be in compliance with Section 17.62.080 of this development code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.27.080 - Appeals. 
Appeals shall be made pursuant to Chapter 17.74 et seq. and within the times set forth therein for the filing of such appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.27.090 - Enforcement. 
The director is hereby empowered and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.27.100 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Violation of any provision of this section shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to summary, administrative or judicial abatement of the nuisance by the city, and be subject to fines, penalties, fees and costs imposed by the city or the court pursuant to the summary or administrative abatement procedures contained in this Code or any other provision of law. 
B.  Enforcement and penalties shall be consistent with applicable sections of this Code. 
C.  Every day that any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.27.110 - Cumulative remedies. 
All remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative and may be pursued separately or in combination. Provisions of this chapter are to be supplementary and complementary to all of the city ordinances, the city code, and state law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.27.120 - Nonconforming outdoor lighting. 
The city recognizes that the eventual replacement of existing outdoor lighting fixtures that are not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter is as important as the prohibition of new outdoor lighting that would violate this chapter. 
A.  Continuation of Nonconforming Commercial Outdoor Lighting. A legally established commercial lighting fixture that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter may continue to be used except that the lighting shall not be: 
1.  Structurally altered to extend its useful life; 
2.  Expanded, moved, or relocated; or 
3.  Re-established after a business has been discontinued for ninety (90) days or more. 
B.  Continuation of Nonconforming Residential Outdoor Lighting. No property with a legally established residential (single and multifamily) lighting fixture will be required to comply with this chapter unless there is a new development application submitted for the property. New development application means any of the applications listed in Section 17.15.015. 
C.  Correction of Nonconformities Required. When an application is requested for a conditional use permit, site plan review or other development permit, the project site will be required to retrofit all exterior lighting in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.28 - PARKING AND LOADING 
 
17.28.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the off-street parking and loading standards of this chapter is to: 
A.  Provide sufficient parking facilities to meet the needs generated by the proposed use; 
B.  Provide accessible, attractive, secure, properly lighted, and well-maintained and screened off-street parking and loading facilities; 
C.  Reduce traffic congestion and hazards; 
D.  Encourage the use of alternative modes of transportation by providing for safe, adequate and convenient bicycle and carpool parking; 
E.  Protect neighborhoods from the effects of vehicular noise and traffic; 
F.  Ensure access and maneuverability for emergency vehicles; and 
G.  Provide loading and delivery facilities in proportion to the needs generated by the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.28.020 - Applicability. 
Every permanent land use (including a change of use), and every structure shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-297, § 1(Att. A), 5-23-2012)  
17.28.030 - General parking and loading regulations. 
A.  Maintenance of Required Parking and Loading Areas. All covered or uncovered off-street parking and loading facilities required by this chapter shall be permanently reserved for parking and loading purposes. All parking facilities, including curbs, directional markings, handicapped symbols, landscaping, pavement, signs, striping and wheel stops, shall be permanently maintained by the responsible person, as defined in Chapter 1.17, in good repair, free of litter and debris, potholes, obstructions and stored material. 
B.  Deferral of Parking Installation. For nonresidential developments of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of gross floor area, the director may approve deferral of the installation of one or more required off-street parking spaces to a future date. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the occupant(s) of the site will not need the required parking spaces and that the area temporarily occupied by landscaping or other aesthetic amenities can readily be used for the required parking spaces when needed. The director may impose reasonable conditions, including requiring a phasing plan for parking development and/or the recordation of an agreement providing that the landscaping or other amenity shall be removed by the applicant and the required off-street parking spaces shall be installed if they are needed to serve the use(s) on the site. 
C.  Residential Guest Parking. Required guest parking in residential zoning districts shall be designated and restricted for the use of guests. 
D.  Recreational Vehicle Parking—Residential Areas. 
1.  Storage. The storage of recreational vehicles and boats in residential zoning districts shall be allowed only outside of required setback areas, in compliance with Section 17.20.180(G), except as noted. All recreational vehicles that may be visible from the public view of the front, side, or street side areas of the site shall be screened by a combination of fencing, walls and/or screening landscaping as determined by the director. An encroachment into the side yard setback shall be permitted for storage of recreational vehicles provided that a five-foot emergency access path is maintained around the residence at all times. In no event shall the area devoted to recreational vehicle storage exceed four hundred (400) square feet of any property. A temporary use permit shall be required for storage of all recreational vehicles over six feet in height beyond seventy-two (72) hours. 
2.  Parking. No recreational vehicle shall park overnight [except] by permit, in which case the permit shall permit parking for a period of up to seventy-two (72) hours. Property owners shall be limited to a maximum of eight permits per calendar year unless otherwise authorized by the director. 
E.  Commercial Vehicle Parking—Residential Areas. No commercial vehicle or trailer, as defined in Vehicle Code Section 630, exceeding eight feet in height or twenty (20) feet in combined total length, when attached to another vehicle or trailer, shall park between the hours of six p.m. and six a.m. on private property or public rights-of-way within residential zoning districts. This prohibition shall not apply to construction sites during the construction process or to vehicles in the process of making deliveries or pickups. Additional requirements for the parking of commercial and oversize vehicles are provided by Chapter 10.12 and city resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-297, § 1(Att. A), 5-23-2012)  
17.28.040 - Number of parking spaces required. 
Each land use shall provide the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by this section, except where a greater number of spaces is required through conditional use permit conditions of approval. 
A.  Expansion of Structure or Change in Use. When a structure is enlarged or increased in capacity, or when a change in use requires more parking than the former use, additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided in compliance with this chapter. 
B.  Mixed Uses/Multiple Tenants. A site or facility proposed for multiple tenants or uses (e.g., a hotel with meeting halls, a building with ground-floor shops and second-floor offices or residential units.) shall provide the aggregate number of parking spaces required by this section for each separate use; except where shared parking is allowed in compliance with Section 17.28.050(B). 
C.  Parking Required by Development Agreements and Specific Plans. Parking requirements established by development agreements or specific plans supersede the provisions of this section. 
D.  Parking Requirements by Land Use. The minimum number of parking spaces shown in the tables within this chapter shall be provided for each use. 
1.  Additional Requirements. Additional spaces may be required by the review authority through conditional use permit conditions of approval, where applicable. 
2.  Uses not Listed. Land uses not specifically listed in the following table shall provide parking as required by the director. In determining appropriate off- street parking requirements, the director shall use the requirements of the following table as a general guide in determining the minimum number of off-street parking spaces necessary to avoid undue interference with the public's use of the streets. 
3.  Rounding of Quantities. Where the number of required parking spaces results in a fraction of 0.50 or higher, the requirements shall be rounded up to the next whole space. 
4.  When a parking study is utilized, as allowed in Table 3-11, to determine the required number of parking spaces, the parking study shall be prepared by a licensed traffic engineer and shall be subject to review and approval by the director and city engineer. 
Table 3-11 
Parking Requirements by Land Use 
Land Use 	Vehicle Spaces Required 	Bicycle Spaces 
Required 
Agriculture 
Kennels and animal boarding 	1 space for each employee, plus 1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Plant nurseries 	1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of indoor display area, plus 1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of outdoor display area. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Residential 
Multi-family and senior housing 	Studio unit- 1 covered space per unit 	1 space per unit 
	1 bedroom unit - 1.5 spaces per unit, 1 of which shall be covered 	
	2 bedrooms or more - 2 spaces per unit, plus 0.5 additional spaces for each bedroom over two. 1 of every 2 required spaces shall be covered. 	
	Guest parking - 1 space per 3 units 	1 space per 10 units 
Condominiums and small lot single family housing 	As required for multi-family housing. Each driveway with minimum dimensions of 20 ft. by 20 ft. outside of a public right-of-way or private street may be counted as a guest parking space. 	1 space per unit 
Emergency shelters 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 	None 
Mobilehome parks 	2 covered spaces (may be tandem) per unit, plus guest parking as required for multi-family 	None 
Buildings containing offices, services or recreational activity 	1 space for each employee 	
Residential care homes, seven or more clients 	0.5 spaces per bed; plus 1 space per employee, other than doctors, of the largest shift; plus 1 space per staff or regular visiting doctor or as determined by a parking study 	
Rooming and boarding houses 	1 space per room or 1 space per 2 beds, whichever is greater 	None 
Secondary housing units 	1 space 	None 
Single-family housing 	2 spaces within a garage 	None 
Transitional/ 
supportive housing 	Based on type of units, use applicable standard for dwellings listed above 	None 
Institutional 
  Educational 
Schools - public and private 		1 space for every 10 students. 
Elementary/junior high 	3 spaces for each classroom. 	  
High school 	7 spaces for each classroom; plus auditorium parking at a ratio of 1 space for each 5 fixed seats or 1 space for each 35 sq. ft. of auditorium floor area. 	  
University/college 	1 space for every 2 full time students. 	
Vocational/trade schools 	1 space for 1.5 students. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
  Medical Services 		
Veterinary clinics and animal hospital 	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Assisted living/congregate care facility 	.5 spaces per unit 
1 space per employee of the largest shift plus 1 space per regular visiting doctor or as determined by a parking study. 	
Convalescent care facility (with continuous skilled nursing care) 	1 space for each 3 beds 	
Hospital 	4 spaces for each patient bed. 	
Medical services 
clinics, medical/dental offices, labs including physical therapists and chiropractors. 		5% of vehicle spaces 
Under 20,000 sq. ft. 	1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	
20,000+ sq. ft. 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	
Pharmacies and drug stores 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	5% of vehicle spaces 
  Public 		
Libraries and museums and other cultural facilities 	1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	10% of vehicle spaces. 
Public facilities 	Parking study is required to determine the parking demand generated by the use. 
Religious 		
Churches and other places of worship 	1 space for each 4 fixed seats, or each 7 linear ft. of bench or pew seating or where no fixed seats are provided, 1 per 20 sq. ft. of assembly area. 	5% of vehicle spaces for places of worship 
Land Use Type 
Commercial 
Automobile repair 	5 spaces, plus 1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	None 
Facilities designed for customer to wait on-site during service 	2 spaces per service bay plus adequate queuing lanes. 	None 
Self-service vehicle washing 	2.5 spaces per washing stall, for queuing and drying. 	None 
Car wash - full service 	12 spaces, plus adequate queuing and drying area. 	None 
Service stations 	1 space for each 180 sq. ft. of gross floor area; plus 1 space for each service bay. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Motor vehicle and parts sales 	1 space for each 450 sq. ft. of gross floor area for showroom and office, plus 1 space for each 2,000 sq. ft. of outdoor display area, plus 1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area for vehicle repair, plus 1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area for the parts department. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Facilities 	  	  
Child day care center 	2 spaces for each employee, plus an adequate drop-off area as required by the director. 	10% of vehicle spaces. 
Large family day care home (9 to 14 children) 	1 for each employee 	
Eating/Drinking Places and Food Services 	  	  
Bar/cocktail lounge/night club 	1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area 	10% of vehicle spaces. 
Banquet hall 	1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area 	
Catering establishment 	1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area 	
Restaurant - counter service 	1 space for each 180 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	10% of vehicle spaces. 
Restaurants - table service 	1 space for each 2.5 seats or 1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area, whichever is greater. 	10% of vehicle spaces. 
Outdoor dining 	0 spaces for areas 250 sq. ft. or less in size 
1 space for each 250 square feet of floor area over 250 sq. ft. in size 	None 
Entertainment and Recreation 		
Athletic fields 	Parking study is required to determine the parking demand generated by the use. 
Arcade 	1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	10% of vehicle spaces. 
Auditoriums and other public assembly facilities 	Parking study is required to determine the parking demand generated by the use. 	
Bowling alley 	5 spaces per lane. 	
Dance halls 	1 space for each 50 sq. ft. of dance floor area. 	None 
Health and fitness Club 	1 space for each 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	10% of vehicle spaces. 
Golf courses and golf driving ranges 	1 space per tee; plus clubhouse spaces as required for restaurants, bars, indoor recreation/fitness centers, etc. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Motion picture theater 	1 space per every 3 seats 	5% of vehicle spaces 
Outdoor commercial recreation 	Parking study is required to determine the parking demand generated by the use. 
Pool and billiard rooms 	3 spaces per table. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Skate park 	Parking study is required to determine the parking demand generated by the use. 
Tennis/racquetball courts 	3 spaces per court, plus as required for incidental uses. 	10% of vehicle spaces. 
Theaters 	1 space for every 3 fixed seats. 	10% of vehicle spaces. 
Lodging 		
Bed and breakfast inn 	1 space per room or suite; or 1 space per 2 beds, whichever is greater 	None 
Hotels and motels 	1 space for each guest room, plus 1 space for each 10 guest rooms. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Offices, business, professional, medical 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	5% of vehicles spaces. 
Retail stores 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Furniture, furnishings, and home equipment stores 	1 space for each 600 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Garden supply/nursery 	1 space for each 400 sq. ft. of indoor display area, plus 1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of outdoor display area. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Food and Beverage Stores 		
Convenience store 
grocery 
store/supermarket 	1 space for each 150 sf. ft. of gross floor area. 	5% of vehicle spaces 
Warehouse retail stores 	1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	
Shopping centers 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area. Where restaurants exceed 10 percent of the total gross floor area, that portion in excess of 10 percent of the gross floor area shall be calculated at one parking space per 100 square feet or as determined by a parking study. 	
Studios for dance, art, music, photography, etc. 	1 space for each 2 students 	1 space for every 4 students. 
Business services (advertising agency, data processing services, photocopying, photography studio, and other similar uses.) 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Financial Services 		
Banks and financial services 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus 2 spaces per ATM. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Personal Services 		
Barber shop and beauty/nail salon 	2.5 spaces for each service chair. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Beauty/nail salons with and without massage therapy 	2.5 spaces for each service chair and 1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area devoted to massage therapy. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Cemeteries and mausoleums 	Parking study is required to determine the parking demand generated by the use. 
Day spa 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Laundry - commercial 	1 space for every 3 washing machines. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Fortunetelling 	1 space for every 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Public self storage 	1 space for each 5,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 2 spaces for any resident manager. 	None 
Repair services 	1 space per 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area 	None 
Land Use Type 
Industrial 	  	  
Light industrial, machinery manufacturing and manufacturing uses. 	1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 1 space for each vehicle operated in connection with each on-site use. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Recycling collection facilities 	If the facility is open to the public, an on-site parking area shall be provided for a minimum of 10 customers at any one time. Space shall be also provided for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park and deposit recyclable materials. One employee parking space shall be provided on-site for each commercial vehicle operated by the processing center. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Research and development 	1 space for each 333 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
Warehousing 	1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 1 space for each company vehicle parked on-site. 	5% of vehicle spaces. 
TEMPORARY AND INTERIM USES (Section 17.62.030) 
Temporary uses 	Determined by temporary use permit 	None 
 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-297, § 1(Att. A), 5-23-2012; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-2014; Ord. No. 2014-311, § 5(Exh. A) , 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2018-366 , § 2, 6-27-2018)  
17.28.050 - Reduction of off-street parking requirements. 
A.  General Parking Reduction. The review authority may grant up to a twenty-five (25) percent reduction in number of off-street parking spaces required by Section 17.28.040 in compliance with Section 17.62.060. The applicant shall provide evidence to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the director and the city engineer that any requested reduction is necessary for the efficient operation of the subject use and will not result in a parking deficiency. 
The review authority may also grant a reduction in off-street parking requirements in compliance with Section 17.62.060 for development projects: 
1.  That are located in close proximity to a public transit stop; 
2.  Where the applicant agrees to provide housing for low- and very low-income persons in compliance with Section 17.22.030; and/or 
3.  Where the applicant agrees to provide transportation demand management (TDM) programs that exceed the minimum requirements of this Code, the Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program, and state law. 
B.  Shared Parking Reduction. Nonresidential parking facilities may be shared if multiple uses cooperatively establish and operate the facilities and if these uses generate parking demands primarily during hours when the remaining uses are not in operation. (For example, if one use operates during evenings or week days only, or where patrons are likely to visit more than one business establishment on a single trip.) The applicant shall provide documentation (i.e., shared parking use analysis) to the satisfaction of the review authority, substantiating the reasons for the requested shared parking reduction. Shared parking may be approved only if: 
1.  A sufficient number of spaces are provided to meet the greater parking demand of the participating uses; 
2.  Evidence satisfactory to the review authority has been submitted by the parties operating the shared parking facility. The evidence shall describe the nature of the uses and the times when the uses operate so as to demonstrate the lack of potential conflict between them; and 
3.  Additional documents, covenants, deed restrictions or other agreements as may be deemed necessary by the review authority are executed and recorded with the county recorder's office to ensure that the required parking spaces provided are maintained and used as approved for the life of the nonresidential development. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.28.060 - Handicapped parking requirements. 
Parking areas shall include parking spaces accessible to the handicapped persons in compliance with this section. 
A.  Number of Spaces-Design Standards. Handicapped parking requirements are established by the state and are contained in the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Chapter 2-71, Section 2-7102, and in the California Vehicle Code, Section 22511.8. State law may be amended from time to time, so reference should be made directly to the California Code of Regulations for standards on the required number, dimensions, and location of handicapped parking spaces, signage and related facilities. The department will provide information on current requirements and space design upon request. 
B.  Reservation of Spaces Required. All handicapped accessible spaces required by this section shall be reserved by the property owner and tenant for use by the disabled throughout the life of the approved land use. 
C.  Upgrading of Markings Required. If amendments to state law change state standards for the marking, striping and signing of handicapped parking spaces, all handicapped spaces within the city shall be upgraded in compliance with the new state standards. This upgrading shall be completed by affected property owners within sixty (60) days of receiving written notification from the city regarding the new state standards. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.28.070 - Development standards for off-street parking. 
Off-street parking areas shall be provided on the subject site, outside of any public right-of-way, in compliance with this section and Section 17.28.110. 
A.  Access. 
1.  Driveway Location and Design. Site access driveways shall be located and designed in compliance with Section 17.28.080; 
2.  Internal Maneuvering Area. Parking areas shall provide suitable maneuvering room so that all vehicles may enter an abutting street in a forward direction. Single-family homes and duplexes are exempt from this requirement and the director may approve exceptions for other residential projects; and 
3.  Parking Space Location. No parking space shall be located so that a vehicle will maneuver within twenty (20) feet of a vehicular entrance measured from the property line. 
4.  Vehicle Turnaround/Backup Area. A vehicle turnaround space or backup area shall be provided at the end of all dead-end parking aisles which contain eight or more spaces. The turnaround space or backup area shall be sized to allow for a safe backing movement, and provide a minimum depth of five feet for the width of the aisle. See Figure 3-14. 
B.  Adjacent Site Access. Nonresidential development applicants should be encouraged to provide cross-access to adjacent nonresidential properties for convenience, safety and efficient circulation of motor vehicles. A mutual access agreement should be executed where cross-access is provided. 
C.  Parking Lot and Space Dimensions. 
1.  General Requirements. Parking stalls, aisles, bays and other parking lot features shall be designed and constructed with the minimum dimensions indicated in the following table, and as illustrated by Figures 3-12 and 3-14 set out at the end of this section. 
Table 3-12 
Parking Lot and Space Dimensions 
Minimum Parking Stall Dimensions 
	Width 	Length 
Standard Spaces 	9 feet 	18 feet 
Spaces located adjacent to columns, walls or other obstructions 	11 feet 	18 feet 
Parallel Spaces 	 9 feet 	24 feet 
 
Parking angle
(degrees) 	Minimum Stall depth	Minimum Aisle
width (travel
lane)	Minimum
Total bay
depth
One-Way Traffic and Single-Loaded Aisles 
30 	18 feet 	14 feet 	32 feet 
45 	19 feet 	14.5 feet 	33.5 feet 
60 	20 feet 	18 feet 	38 feet 
90 	18 feet 	24 feet 	42 feet 
One-Way Traffic and Double-Loaded Aisles 
30 	18 feet 	14 feet 	50 feet 
45 	19 feet 	14.5 feet 	52.5 feet 
60 	22 feet 	18 feet 	62 feet 
90 	20 feet 	24 feet 	64 feet 
Two-Way Traffic and Double-Loaded Aisles 
30 	18 feet 	24 feet 	60 feet 
45 	19 feet 	24 feet 	62 feet 
60 	20 feet 	24 feet 	64 feet 
90 	20 feet 	24 feet 	64 feet 
 
2.  Dimensions for Private Garages or Carports. The following minimum unobstructed inside dimensions shall be provided for private garages and carports: 
Table 3-13 
Dimensions for Private Garages and Carports 
Garage/ Carport Dimension 	Required Dimensions by Number of Parking Spaces Provided: 1 car 	Required Dimensions by Number of Parking Spaces Provided: 2 car 	Required Dimensions by Number of Parking Spaces Provided: 3 car 
Width 	10 ft. 	20 ft. 	30 ft. 
Depth 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 
Door/access width 	8 ft. 	16 ft. 	24 
 
D.  Drainage. All required off-street parking/loading areas shall be designed and constructed: 
1.  So that surface water will not drain over any sidewalk or adjacent site (drainage from a site to a street across a driveway may be approved), or adjacent parcels; 
2.  In compliance with Chapter 17.56 and the city's best management practices, adopted in compliance with the requirements of the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES); 
3.  To include facilities for the sub-surface filtering of oil and grease contaminants, in new or reconstructed nonresidential parking lots with five or more parking spaces. 
E.  Landscaping and Pervious Surface. Required parking area landscaping shall be provided as set forth in Chapter 17.26, and as shown on Figure 3-14 set out at the end of this section, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
F.  Lighting. Parking areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety in conformance with Chapter 17.27. Lighting standards shall be energy-efficient and in scale with the height and use of the on-site structure(s). Any illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed downward, away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. See Figure 3-13 set out at the end of this section. 
G.  On-Site Location Required. All parking spaces shall be located on the same parcel as the primary structure or use, unless approved otherwise by the director. The director may approve a portion or all of the required off-street spaces to be located on an adjacent parcel. This approval shall be based on accessibility to the primary structure or use, and the use and development of the neighboring parcel. 
The applicant shall provide evidence, to the satisfaction of the director, that a suitable long-term lease or other binding agreement can be executed and recorded which would guarantee that the parcel containing the primary structure or use has an irrevocable right to utilize the adjacent parcel for parking for the life of the approved use. 
H.  Screening. Commercial/industrial and public parking areas abutting residentially zoned parcels shall provide a six-foot high wood or decorative masonry wall at the property line adjacent to the residential zoning district, to properly screen the parking area(s), subject to approval by the director. The director may waive or modify this requirement to protect the views of adjacent residences. All decorative wall features shall occur on both sides of the wall. 
I.  Shopping Cart Storage. Parking facilities for commercial uses that offer shopping cars for use by patron (e.g. grocery stores) shall contain shopping cart storage areas when appropriate. The dimensions and locations of the storage areas shall be determined by the review authority. 
J.  Striping. Parking stalls shall be identified with double, four-inch wide stripes of paint on the parking lot surface, in compliance with Figure 3-15 set out at the end of this section. Parallel spaces may be marked with single lines. 
K.  Tandem and Valet Parking. Tandem parking shall not be permitted to satisfy off-street parking requirements, except within mobile home parks. Valet parking shall not be permitted to reduce off-street parking requirements, except within Old Town Calabasas, where authorized by conditional use permit approval. Valet parking operations on sites that meet off-street parking requirements shall be allowed in all commercial districts where authorized by a conditional use permit approval. 
L.  Wheel Stops/Curbing. Continuous concrete curbing at least six inches high and six inches wide shall be provided for all parking spaces located adjacent to walls, fences, property lines and structures. All parking lots shall have curbing around all parking areas and aisle planters in compliance with subsection (E) of this section. 
M.  Underground parking facilities shall conform to all the provisions of this chapter; provided however, that underground parking facilities may be located in the side, front and rear yards which are completely below the existing ground level of the development. No portion of such facility shall have less than seven feet inside vertical clearance, except doorways may be six feet eight inches. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.28.080 - Driveways and site access. 
Driveways providing ingress and egress to off-street parking spaces shall be designed, constructed and maintained as follows. 
A.  Number of Access Points. One driveway access point per parcel shall be permitted unless the city engineer determines, based on a development/circulation plan submitted by the applicant, or recommendations from the fire department, that more than one access is required to handle traffic volumes or specific designs, such as residential circular driveways. Additional access shall not be permitted if the city engineer determines it will be detrimental to the traffic flow and the safety of adjacent public streets. Whenever a property has access to more than one road, access shall generally be limited to the road with the lowest traffic volume, where the impact of a new access will be minimized. All access from private property to a public street shall require an encroachment permit. 
B.  Location of Access. 
1.  Distance from Street Intersections. No portion of a driveway access shall be permitted within curb returns. The edge of the access shall not be less than ten (10) feet from the end of curb returns for single-family residential developments. For all other developments, this distance shall not be less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. Where the lot size does not permit the access to be located one hundred fifty (150) feet from the end of curb return, the access shall be located the maximum distance possible from the end of the curb return. This distance does not include the three-foot transition or wing sections on each side of the driveway. 
2.  Driveway Spacing. Two or more driveway access points on a public street shall be separated as follows. 
a.  Single-Family Residential Development. Where two or more accesses serve adjacent single-family residential parcels, the minimum distance between the nearest points of the two accesses shall be at least twenty (20) feet, unless a shared, single driveway access is approved by the director. The twenty-foot separation does not include the three-foot transition or wing sections on each side of the driveway, and may be reduced by the director for a cul-de-sac street. 
b.  Multifamily and Nonresidential Development. Where two or more accesses serve the same or adjacent non-single-family residential development, the minimum distance between the centerline of accesses should be preferably at least two hundred (200) feet on streets with design speeds below thirty (30) mph and three hundred (300) feet on streets with design speeds above thirty (30) mph. 
c.  Corner and Double Frontage Lots. For corner and double frontage residential lots, one access on each frontage may be permitted if it is determined by the city engineer that two driveways are needed to provide safe access for traffic entering and leaving the lot because of site distance and geometric design considerations. 
3.  Driveway Alignments—Commercial Development. Where commercial lots are not large enough to allow accesses on opposite sides of the street to be aligned, the center of driveways not in alignment will normally be offset a minimum of one hundred fifty (350) feet on all collector roads, and three hundred (300) feet on all major and arterial roads. Greater distances may be required if needed for left-turn storage lanes. 
C.  Driveway Width and Length. 
1.  RS Zoning District. Driveways in the RS zoning district shall have direct access to a garage, and a minimum width of eighteen (18) feet within twenty (20) feet of the garage entrance, and the remaining portions of the driveway shall be a minimum width of twelve (12) feet. Maximum width shall be twenty-seven (27) feet for a double or triple garage. The minimum length of a single-family driveway shall be twenty (20) feet measured from the back of the sidewalk to the front of the garage, to permit vehicle parking in the driveway without blocking the sidewalk. Where access to a garage, carport, or open parking space is perpendicular (ninety (90) degrees) to the driveway, a minimum twenty-four-foot deep unobstructed back-out area shall be provided. 
2.  RM and Commercial Districts. Within RM and commercial zoning districts, driveways shall be a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet and a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet. The minimum length of a multifamily driveway serving an individual garage shall be eighteen (18) feet where a roll-up garage door is used, and twenty (20) feet where a non-roll-up door is used, to permit vehicle parking in the driveway without blocking the sidewalk or extending into a traffic lane. Curb return radii shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet where curb returns are deemed necessary by the city engineer. 
3.  Manufacturing/Industrial Uses. Accesses serving manufacturing/industrial uses shall be a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet in width and a maximum of forty (40) feet, with minimum curb return radius of twenty-five (25) feet, or as otherwise specified by the city engineer. 
4.  Hillside Properties. Driveways located on hillside properties shall meet the requirements of Section 17.20.150(E). 
D.  Access Grades. Residential and commercial driveways shall be designed with grades as shown in Figure 3-16 located at the end of this section, and in compliance with Section 17.20.150(E). Access grades for driveways to underground parking structures may be increased to a maximum of fifteen (15) percent or as approved by the review authority. 
E.  Clearance from Appurtenances. The nearest edge of any driveway curb cut shall be at least three feet from (i) the nearest property line (except where the review authority has approved a shared driveway between two parcels), and (ii) the centerline of a fire hydrant, utility pole, drop inlet, traffic signal installation, light standard, or any appurtenance. Street trees shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from the driveway access. 
F.  Sight Distance at Driveways. At least three hundred fifty (350) feet of clear sight distance shall be provided for all access onto local streets; four hundred fifty (450) for collector streets; five hundred fifty (550) feet for arterial streets, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
G.  Temporary Access. The director may grant temporary access to underdeveloped property prior to approval of all development permits required by this title, or completion of development, if access is needed for construction. Temporary accesses are subject to removal, relocation, or redesign after all permits are approved in the manner required by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.28.090 - Bicycle parking and support facilities. 
Bicycle parking facilities, showers and lockers shall be provided in compliance with this section. 
A.  Applicability. Bicycle parking spaces facilities are required for all commercial and industrial uses that have more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of floor area. These include buildings owned by the city and used for government purposes. The number of bicycle spaces required is determined by Section 17.28.040. 
B.  Bicycle Parking Design and Devices. Bicycle parking areas shall be designed and provided with devices for locking bicycles as follows. 
1.  Parking Equipment. Each bicycle parking space shall include a stationary parking device to adequately support the bicycle. At least half of the bicycle parking spaces shall include a stationary parking device that will securely lock the bicycle without a user-supplied cable or chain. Devices that hold the bicycle upright by wheel contact must hold at least one hundred eighty (180) degrees of wheel arc. 
2.  Parking Layout. 
a.  Aisles. Aisles providing access to bicycle parking spaces shall be at least five feet in width. 
b.  Spaces. Each bicycle space shall be a minimum of two feet in width and six feet in length, and have a minimum of six feet of overhead clearance. 
c.  Relationship to Building Entrances. Bicycle spaces shall be located no farther than the distance from a main entrance of the building to the nearest off-street motor vehicle parking space. 
d.  Relationship to Motor Vehicle Parking. Bicycle spaces shall be separated from automobile parking spaces or aisles by a wall, fence or curb, or by at least five feet of open area marked to prohibit motor vehicle parking. 
3.  Signs. Each automobile entrance to a parking facility shall be provided clearly legible signs indicating the availability and location of bicycle parking. 
C.  Required Shower Facilities. All new buildings and additions to existing buildings that result in a total floor area shall be required to provide showers and dressing areas for each gender as shown in the following table. 
Table 3-14 
Number of Required Shower Facilities 
Type of Land Use 	Number of Showers Required for Specified Building Floor Area: 1 Shower for Each Gender 	Number of Showers Required for Specified Building Floor Area: 1 Additional Shower for Each Gender 
Commercial - Office Uses (government, business, professional) 	50,000 to 149,999 sq. ft. 	Each 100,000 sq. ft. over 250,000 
Commercial - Retail Trade, Service Uses 	100,000 to 300,000 sq. ft. 	Each 200,000 sq. ft. over 300,000 
Industrial Uses 	50,000 sq. ft. or more 	N.A. 
 
D.  Required Locker Facilities. Land uses required by this section to provide bicycle parking spaces shall also provide one locker for each required bicycle parking space. Required lockers shall be located in relation to required showers and dressing areas to permit access to locker areas by either gender. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.28.100 - Loading space requirements. 
A.  Number of Loading Spaces Required. Unless modified by the director in compliance with Section 17.62.020, off-street freight and equipment loading spaces shall be provided for all nonresidential uses, except hotels and motels. The following minimum number of loading spaces shall be provided for each use: 
Table 3-15
Loading Space Requirements
Type of Land Use 	Gross Floor Area 	Loading Spaces Required 
Commercial, industrial, institutional, and service uses 	Less than 4,000 sq. ft. 	1 
	4,001 to 25,000 sq. ft. 	2 
	25,001+ sq .ft. 	2, plus additional as required by director 
Office uses 	Less than 25,000 sq. ft. 	1 
	25,001+ sq. ft. 	1, plus additional as required by director 
 
Requirements for uses not specifically listed shall be determined by the director based upon the requirements for comparable uses and upon the characteristics of the proposed use, in compliance with Section 17.28.040. 
B.  Development Standards for Off-Street Loading. Off-street loading areas shall be provided in the following manner: 
1.  Dimensions. Required freight and equipment loading spaces shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in width, twenty-five (25) feet in length, with fourteen (14) feet of vertical clearance. 
2.  Lighting. Loading areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be energy-efficient and in scale with the height and use of the structure(s). Any illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed away from adjoining parcels and public rights-of-way and shall conform to the requirements for security lighting in Section 17.27.030(5). 
3.  Location. Freight and equipment loading spaces shall be located and designed as follows: 
a.  Next to, or as close as possible to, the main structure, 
b.  Situated to ensure that the loading facility shall not be visible from any major public rights-of-way, 
c.  Situated to ensure that all loading and unloading takes place on-site, and in no case within adjacent public rights-of-way, or other traffic areas on-site, 
d.  Situated to ensure that all vehicular maneuvers occur on-site, and, 
e.  Situated to avoid adverse noise impacts upon neighboring residential properties, in compliance with city noise regulations. 
4.  Screening. All loading areas shall be screened from public view by walls and/or landscaping. Loading areas abutting residentially zoned parcels shall have a seven-foot high solid, architecturally treated decorative masonry wall, approved by the director, to properly screen the loading area(s). All decorative treatments shall occur on both sides of the wall. 
5.  Loading Doors and Gates. Loading bays and roll-up doors shall be located on the rear of the structure only. Bays and doors may be located on the side of a building away from a street frontage where it can be demonstrated that the bays, doors, and related trucks will be adequately screened from public view from any public right-of-way. 
6.  Striping. Loading areas shall be striped indicating the loading spaces and identifying the spaces for "loading only." The striping shall be permanently maintained by the property owner and tenant in a clear and visible manner at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.28.110 - Trip and travel demand reduction measures. 
A.  Purpose. This section provides requirements for new and reconstructed residential, commercial and manufacturing/industrial projects that are intended to reduce vehicle trips and travel demand. These provisions, together with the requirements of this chapter for bicycle parking and support facilities (Section 17.28.090), constitute the city's transportation demand ordinance, in compliance with the Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program (CMP) and state law. 
B.  Review of Transit Impacts. The processing of a land use permit or subdivision by the city for any project required to have an environmental impact report (EIR) in compliance with the City of Calabasas CEQA Guidelines shall include assessment of impacts on transit. Transit operators serving the city shall be sent a notice of preparation (NOP) for all contemplated EIRs. Operators shall be given the opportunity as part of the NOP to comment on the impacts of the project, to identify recommended transit service or capital improvements that may be required as a result of the project, and to recommend mitigation measures that will minimize automobile trips on the CMP network. Impacts and recommended mitigation measures identified by the transit operators shall be evaluated in the draft EIR. 
Phased projects, projects with development agreements, or projects requiring subsequent approvals, need not repeat this process as long as the director determines that no significant changes (e.g., land use changes, project intensifications, and site circulation system changes.) are made to the project. 
C.  Applicability of Development Standards. Specific trip and travel demand reduction measurements shall be incorporated into the design of residential and nonresidential projects as provided by this subsection. All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required shall be permanently maintained in good repair. 
1.  Residential Developments. Proposed residential developments with thirty (30) or more housing units shall provide the following, as part of the land use or subdivision approval process. 
a.  A ridesharing, public transportation, and bicycle information packet to be included with buyer move-in materials; 
b.  A transit stop and shelter, or other transit amenities as determined by the city; 
c.  Bicycle amenities such as bicycle storage areas and bicycle lanes, paths or routes as determined by the city; 
d.  An additional phone/fax/modem line in each housing unit to encourage telecommuting; and 
e.  Electric vehicle recharging facilities at each housing unit to encourage the use of electric vehicles. 
2.  Nonresidential Developments. Commercial, office and manufacturing/industrial uses shall provide the features set forth in Table 3-16, as part of the land use permit or subdivision approval process. The following subsection (D) of this section provides standards for each of the required features. 
Additions to buildings which existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance originally codified as Chapter 10.16 of this Code shall comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter. Existing floor area shall be exempt from these requirements. All calculations shall be based on gross floor area, in square feet. 
Table 3-16 
Trip and Travel Demand Reduction Measures 
Trip/Travel Demand 
Reduction Measures 	Measure Required Based on Project Floor Area (square feet): 10,000 to 24,000 	Measure Required Based on Project Floor Area (square feet): 25,000 to 49,999 	Measure Required Based on Project Floor Area (square feet): 50,000 to 99,999 	Measure Required Based on Project Floor Area (square feet): 100,000+ 
Electric vehicle recharging 			x 	x 
Enhanced access 				x 
Move-in materials 			x 	x 
Preferential parking 			x 	x 
Shower/locker facilities 			x 	x 
Transportation information center 		x 	x 	x 
Transit stop 	x 	x 	x 	
 
D.  Development Standards. Where specific trip and travel demand reduction measures are required by subsection (C) of this section, each required measure shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Electric Vehicle Recharging. Electric vehicle recharging facilities shall be provided to encourage the use of electric powered vehicles. 
2.  Enhanced Access. Access facilities shall be provided as follows: 
a.  A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver and board their passengers; 
b.  Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development; and 
c.  Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities onsite. 
3.  Move-in Materials. The property owner shall provide tenants ridesharing and public transportation information as part of occupancy move-in materials. 
4.  Preferential Parking. Preferential parking facilities shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Number and Location of Spaces. Not less than ten (10) percent of parking spaces reserved for employees shall be located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for carpool/vanpool vehicles, motorcycles, and electric and hybrid vehicles, without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. Spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles, in compliance with paragraph (4)(c) of this subsection. 
b.  Minimum Number of Spaces Required. At least one preferential space shall be provided for projects of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet to ninety-nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (99,999) square feet. Two spaces for projects of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more shall be for preferential parking vehicles. 
c.  Space Layout and Vertical Clearance. Vanpool vehicle spaces within a parking structure and parking space access routes shall be provided a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet, two inches. Adequate turning radii and space dimensions shall also be provided in vanpool areas. 
d.  Information on Space Availability. A statement that preferential parking spaces for employees are available and a description of the method for obtaining the spaces shall be posted at the building's required transportation information center. 
e.  Signage and Striping. Spaces shall be signed and striped as required by the director. 
f.  Permit Application Information. The preferential parking area shall be identified on a site plan submitted with a land use permit or building permit applications for a project, to the satisfaction of the director. 
5.  Shower/Locker Facilities. Shower and locker facilities shall be provided in compliance with Section 17.28.090. 
6.  Transit Stop. Transit stop improvements shall be provided, if city determines it to be necessary to mitigate project impacts. The city will consult with the local transit service providers in determining appropriate improvements. When the city requires an applicant to locate transit stops or plan building entrances, the applicant shall design entrances shall be d to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit stations and stops. 
7.  Transportation Information Center. A bulletin board, display case, or kiosk with transportation information shall be located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area shall include, but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving the site; 
b.  Telephone numbers for public transportation services, including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators; 
c.  Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations; 
d.  Bicycle route and facility information, including regional and local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information; and 
e.  A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site. 
  
  
  
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-2014)  
Chapter 17.30 - SIGNS* 
 
17.30.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform sign regulations that are intended to: 
B.  Support and promote viable businesses by allowing signage that provides adequate identification, is of high quality design, and appropriate scale and visibility; 
C.  Protect the general public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the community; 
D.  Reduce possible traffic and safety hazards to pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists through safe signage; 
E.  Promote signs that identify uses and premises without confusion; 
F.  Implement community design standards, consistent with the General Plan; 
G.  Promote the community's appearance by regulating the design, character, location, type, quality of materials, scale, color, illumination and maintenance of signs; 
H.  Eliminate visual blight and promote safety by reducing the amount of signage throughout the city within constitutional limitations; 
I.  Protect the character of residential neighborhoods; 
J.  Provide public notice to ensure participation in the democratic process; and 
K.  Protect the public safety by allowing signs that serve to direct traffic and to identify locations for the provisions of emergency services by visible street identification signs. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.30.020 - General provisions. 
A.  Signs shall only be erected or maintained in compliance with this chapter. The number and area of signs as outlined in this chapter are intended to be maximum standards, which do not necessarily ensure architectural compatibility. The review authority shall consider a sign's relationship to the overall appearance and scale of the site, buildings and the surrounding community, in addition to the standards of this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, display or alter or cause to be constructed, maintained, displayed or altered, a sign within the City of Calabasas except in conformance with this chapter. 
C.  If a new zoning district is created after the enactment of this chapter, the director shall have the authority to make determinations as to the applicability of appropriate sign regulations in compliance with Chapter 17.03 until this chapter is amended to govern the new zoning district. Any interpretation by the director may be appealed to the commission as provided by Chapter 17.74. 
D.  The city's sign design criteria (Section 17.30.060) will be used in the evaluation of sign permit applications to ensure that signs are well designed, compatible with their surrounding, and do not detract from the overall visual quality of the city. 
E.  Definitions for this chapter are provided in Chapter 17.90.020. 
F.  Noncommercial Sign. Noncommercial sign copy is allowed wherever commercial signage is permitted and such signs are subject to the same standards and total maximum allowances per site, building, or each design type specified in this chapter. An approval is required for a permanent noncommercial sign only when a permanent commercial sign has not been previously approved. For purposes of this chapter, all noncommercial speech messages shall be deemed to be "on-site" regardless of location. 
G.  Substitution of Noncommercial Message. Subject to the consent of the property owner, a noncommercial message of any type may be substituted for all or part of the commercial or noncommercial message on any sign allowed pursuant to this chapter. Design criteria which may apply to commercial signs shall not apply to noncommercial signs, including, the following: color, lettering style, and compatibility with other signs on the same parcel or other signs subject to a sign program. No special or additional approval is required to substitute a noncommercial message for any other message on an allowable sign, provided the sign structure is already approved or exempt from the approval requirement. When a noncommercial message is substituted for any other message, the sign is still subject to the same locational and structural regulations, such as size, height, illumination, maintenance, duration of display, building and electrical code requirements, as would apply if the sign were used to display a commercial message or some other noncommercial message. In the event of any perceived or actual conflict between the general provisions of this subsection and other specific provisions in this chapter, the provisions of this subsection shall prevail. 
H.  Substitution of Commercial Messages. The substitution of one commercial message for another commercial message is not automatically allowed. The substitution of a commercial message for a noncommercial message is also not automatically allowed. In addition, no off-site commercial messages may be substituted for on-site commercial messages. 
I.  Severability Clause. Should any provision of this chapter or a subsequent amendment thereto be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be either invalid, void or unenforceable, the remaining provisions of this title shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.30.030 - Exempt signs. 
The following signs shall not require approval nor shall the area of the signs be included in the maximum sign area permitted for any site or use: 
A.  Required Signs. Official notices required by law, a court, or other government agency. 
B.  Government Signs. Signs for traffic, safety, street identification, government services, emergency services, historical locations, interpretive signs, or city-sponsored events. 
C.  Educational and directional signs for the purposes of identifying a trail or other recreational amenities in the OS-DR zoning district. 
D.  Informational Signs. Signs less than four square feet that indicate the following: addresses, telephone numbers, emergency address and telephone numbers, hours and days of operation, credit information, and whether a business is open or closed. An unlit analog clock that is an integral part of a building's architecture shall also be considered an informational sign. 
E.  Window Signs. Temporary non-illuminated window signs advertising products for sale on the premises shall be allowed on the inside portion of the window or on the interior of the building within three feet of the window. No window shall have more than twenty (20) percent of its window area covered by these signs. This limitation shall also include products displayed on the interior of the premises immediately in front of the window when the name of the product is visible. 
F.  Noncommercial Flags. Noncommercial flags are exempt but only if they meet the following criteria: (i) a maximum vertical dimension of five feet; (ii) a maximum horizontal dimension of eight feet; (iii) a maximum cumulative square footage of all flags on a parcel of forty (40) ( feet (one side); (iv) a maximum height of pole of twenty (20) feet for one story buildings and twenty-five (25) feet for two story buildings; (v) a maximum number of poles per lot or parcel of one; and (vi) in no case shall a flag pole be higher than the height of the building. In residential zones, unless an administrative plan review is obtained, flags must be house mounted and may not be on freestanding poles. A pole mounted flag in the RS, RC, RR and OS zone may be permitted subject to an administrative plan review but shall be subject to criteria (i) through (v) herein. 
G.  Open House Signs. One temporary "open house" sign is exempt, provided it does not exceed three square feet in area on a property for sale, lease or rent. This sign shall only be posted when an owner or salesperson is present. A maximum of two off-site open house directional signs not exceeding three square feet in area shall be allowed and shall contain only the address of the property where the open house is being held and the name of the real estate agent or party holding the open house. Such signs shall be erected and removed on the day the open house is held. Such signs shall not be located on any public right-of-way. 
H.  Temporary Noncommercial Signs and Banners. Temporary signs and banners are permitted in all zones subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Two temporary freestanding signs per lot containing only noncommercial messages are permitted at all times. In addition, one temporary freestanding campaign sign shall be allowed for each political candidate or issue on each street frontage per lot. All campaign signs shall be removed within ten (10) days after the election for which they are intended. Each sign shall not exceed six square feet in sign area with a maximum height of four feet. Such signs are in addition to all other signage allowed in this chapter. 
2.  Such signs shall not be illuminated or posted on trees, fence posts or public utility poles, or located within any public right-of-way or on any publicly owned property and shall not be within the traffic safety visibility area required by Section 17.20.140(F). 
I.  Historical Site Plaques. Plaques or signs not exceeding six square feet designating a building or site as a historical structure or site may be displayed without a permit. 
J.  Construction Trade Signs. One on-site non-illuminated sign per street frontage advertising the various construction trades participating in the project is permitted on construction sites with a valid building permit. Such signs shall not exceed a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area and shall be removed prior to an issuance of a certificate of occupancy. No construction trade sign shall exceed six feet in height. 
K.  Temporary Real Estate Signs. 
1.  For developed property, non-illuminated real estate signs are allowed in compliance with California Civil Code Section 713 as follows: 
a.  In all residential and special purpose zones except OS-DR, a temporary real estate sign shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
i.  A maximum of one six square foot sign either wall or pole mounted on a single-family or duplex property. A pole mounted sign may have two faces. One on-site sign shall be permitted for each street frontage. Maximum sign height is six feet for pole mounted signs. 
ii.  A maximum of one twelve (12) square foot sign either wall or pole mounted on a multi-family property. Pole mounted signs may have two faces. One on-site sign shall be permitted for each street frontage. Maximum sign height is six feet for pole mounted signs. 
iii.  One eight square foot wall or pole mounted per lot on public facility, open space or recreation property. Pole mounted sign may have, two faces. Maximum sign height is six feet for pole mounted signs. 
iv.  The sign may only remain on the property until the property is sold or leased. For properties with an approved subdivision map, the sign may remain on the property until the last unit is sold, rented or leased for the first time after construction. 
b.  In commercial zones a temporary real estate sign shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
i.  One twenty-four (24) square foot wall sign for each occupancy. 
ii.  No lighting of sign allowed. 
iii.  Sign may not project above eave. 
iv.  The sign may only remain on the property until the property is sold or leased. 
2.  For undeveloped property with or without an approved subdivision map a temporary real estate sign shall be allowed subject to the following conditions: 
a.  One on-site sign shall be permitted for each street frontage. The sign area shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet. 
b.  The sign shall be non-illuminated. 
c.  Sign height shall not exceed eight feet above ground level. In those instances when the ground level is below the surface of the street, the sign height may be increased to a maximum of eight feet above the surface of the street. Zoning clearance (Section 17.62.090) and building permit approval shall be obtained for any sign of six feet or more in height. 
d.  Signs should not be placed on or near ridgelines so that they appear silhouetted against the sky when viewed from any point on a roadway designated as a scenic corridor. 
e.  In the case of a corner lot, the sign shall not obstruct the vision of motorists by being located within the traffic safety visibility area of the parcel, which shall consist of a triangular area formed by measuring thirty-five (35) feet from the intersection of the street property lines, and connecting the lines across the parcel. 
f.  For properties with an approved subdivision map, the sign may remain on the property until the last unit is sold, rented or leased for the first time after construction. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.30.040 - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are inconsistent with the purposes and standards of this chapter, and are therefore prohibited: 
A.  Abandoned signs that advertise or otherwise identify a business or activity which has been discontinued on the premises for a period of ninety (90) days or more; 
B.  Animated, moving, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving, digital screen or any other similar moving or simulated moving signs; 
C.  Bus stop bench signs or any copy painted on any portion of a bus stop bench; 
D.  Billboards and other off-site signs, except where allowed by Section 17.30.030; 
E.  Cabinet (can) signs with translucent plastic faces and internal illumination; 
F.  Inflatable signs, balloons, pennants, streamers and flags, except where allowed by Section 17.30.030; 
G.  Neon signs; 
H.  Permanent pole mounted signs except where allowed by Section 17.30.030; 
I.  Roof-mounted signs; 
J.  Signs on public property or in a public right-of-way, except as provided in Section 17.30.030(A) and (C); 
K.  Signs tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, poles (including utility and street name), stakes, electrical transformers or other accessory structures. Whenever a sign is so posted, the sign itself shall constitute prima facie evidence that the person or business identified on the sign authorized its placement; 
L.  Signs painted on fences or roofs; 
M.  Signs that simulate in color or design a traffic sign or signal, or which make use of words, symbols or characters in a manner to interfere with, mislead or confuse pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
N.  Temporary signs, including pedestal signs, "A" frame signs and sandwich boards, except as allowed by this chapter and the Old Town Master Plan; 
O.  Temporary Vehicle Mounted or Trailer-Mounted Signs. Signs on vehicles are allowed on vehicles, without sign permits, only when the copy or message (i) relates only to the business or establishment of which the vehicle itself is a part; (ii) pertains to the sale, rent, lease or hire of such vehicle; or (iii) is a noncommercial message. Vehicles displaying signs may not be parked for the primary purpose of commercial advertising. Vehicles may not be used as mounting or holding devices for commercial signs. This provision shall not apply to public transportation vehicles; and 
P.  Service station ancillary advertising signs located on the exterior of any structure or equipment. Such ancillary advertising signs include business card kiosks and other displays that advertise businesses, services, or products not located on the site. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.30.050 - Sign permits and program required. 
A.  Sign Permit. Signs shall only be constructed, displayed or altered with sign permit approval by the review authority. 
1.  Application Filing. Sign permit applications shall be filed on the forms provided by the department and shall include all information required therein. Sign permit application shall also be accompanied by the required filing fee. A nighttime photo simulation shall be included in all sign applications requesting freeway facing monument signs. 
2.  Review and Decision. A sign permit shall be approved or disapproved by the director or commission in compliance with subsection (F) of this section. The decision of the director is appealable to the commission and decisions by the commission are appealable to the council pursuant to Chapter 17.74. 
B.  Sign Program. A sign program shall be required for all new shopping centers with five or more tenants or remodels of existing shopping centers with five or more tenants where new tenant spaces are created or changes are proposed to the exterior of the building. A program shall also be required as deemed necessary by the director to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter 
A sign program shall consist of a description, including dimensions, materials, locations, and illustration of all signs proposed on the site. The sign program shall have a unifying design theme or style, as approved by the director. A separate sign permit shall be required for all signs constructed pursuant to an approved sign program. 
The purpose of a sign program is to integrate a project's signs into the architectural design of a subject site and to ensure visibility of all signs. A sign program also enables the city to ensure high quality in the design and display of multiple permanent signs and to encourage creativity and excellence in sign design. 
C.  Approval Authority. A sign program shall be subject to commission approval. The director may approve minor revisions to a sign program if the intent of the original approval is not affected. Revisions that would substantially deviate from the original approval shall require the approval of a new sign program. 
D.  If a shopping center has an approved sign program prior to the adoption of an amendment to this chapter it shall conform to the provisions of that approved sign program and not the amendment. 
E.  Modifications to On-Site Sign Regulations (Section 17.30.080). In order to provide for flexibility in sign design, the commission and/or director shall have the authority to approve a sign modification for any new or existing business to allow modifications to sign area, height, and location. The commission shall have the authority to modify the sign area and height (from the ground) of a sign by no more than fifteen (15) percent. The director shall have the authority to modify the sign area and height (from the ground) of a sign by no more than five percent. 
The review authority shall consider the following when it determines whether to grant a modification: sign visibility, compliance with design criteria, distance from intended audience, and relative size of the sign to existing signs. A modification shall not be based on the content of a sign. 
F.  Findings for Approval. The director and/or the commission may approve or modify a sign permit, sign program or modification application in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only if the following findings are made: 
1.  The proposed sign is permitted within the zoning district including any overlay zone and, except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter, and any other applicable standards. 
2.  The sign is in compliance with Section 17.30.060. 
  
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-2014; Ord. No. 2015-328, § 3(Exh. A) , 10-14-2015)  
17.30.060 - Sign design criteria. 
Each sign in the city shall comply with the applicable provisions of (i) any adopted sign program; (ii) the business park development urban design performance standards of Section 17.20.070; and (iii) the following requirements: 
A.  Relationship to Structures. Building wall and fascia signs shall be compatible with the predominant visual elements of the structure(s), including construction materials, color, or other design feature consistent with Section 17.30.050(E). Commercial centers, offices, industrial complexes, and other similar facilities shall be required to develop a sign program in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and shall provide a compatible visual design common in theme to all applicable structures and uses. 
B.  Relationship to Other Signs. Where there is more than one sign on a site or building, all permanent signs displaying a commercial message shall have designs that similarly treat or incorporate the following design elements: 
1.  Letter size and style of copy; 
2.  Shape of total sign and related components: 
a.  Type of construction materials, 
b.  Sign/letter color and style of copy, 
c.  Method used for supporting sign (i.e. wall or ground base), 
d.  Type of illumination, and 
e.  Location. 
C.  Sign Illumination. Illumination from or upon any sign shall be shaded, shielded, directed or reduced so as to minimize light spillage onto the public right-of-way or adjacent properties. Externally illuminated signs shall be lighted by screened or hidden light sources. 
D.  Materials and Colors. All permanent signs shall be constructed of durable materials, which are compatible in kind or appearance to the building supporting or identified by the sign. Such materials may include, but are not limited to ceramic tile, sand blasted, hand carved or routed wood, channel lettering, concrete, stucco or stone monument signs with recessed or raised lettering. Sign colors and materials should be selected to be compatible with the existing building designs and should contribute to legibility and design integrity. Monument signs shall be landscaped at the base and the design shall be complementary of the building architecture, color and materials. 
E.  Construction. Every sign including all parts, portions and materials thereof, shall be manufactured, assembled and erected in compliance with all applicable state, federal and city regulations including Title 15 of this Code. 
F.  Maintenance. Every sign including all parts, portions and materials thereof, shall be maintained and kept in good repair. The display surface of all signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted and free from rust, cracking, peeling, corrosion or other states of disrepair. All temporary signs, banners and balloons shall be constructed and mounted in such a manner that they shall not rip, shred, tear or blow away by exposure to normal weather conditions. Signs constructed of paper, cardboard or other non-permanent materials shall be in place no more than sixty (60) days. 
G.  Relationship to Streets/Public Rights-of-Way. Signs shall be designed and located to not obstruct any pedestrian, bicyclist, or driver's view of the public right-of-way. 
1.  No sign shall be located in or project into the present or future right-of-way of any public street unless specifically authorized by other provisions of this section. 
2.  No sign shall interfere with the sight distance of motorists and cyclists proceeding on or approaching adjacent streets, alleys, driveways, or parking area(s), or of pedestrians proceeding on or approaching adjacent sidewalks or pedestrian ways as determined by the city engineer. 
3.  No sign suspended over or projecting into the area above a driveway located on private property shall be situated at a height of less than fifteen (15) feet above the surface of the driveway. 
4.  No sign suspended over, or projecting into, the area above a pedestrian way shall be situated at a height of less than eight feet, six inches above the ground surface. 
H.  Screening. To minimize the visual mass and projection of the sign, all electrical transformer boxes and raceways shall be concealed from public right-of-way and adjacent properties. If a raceway cannot be mounted internally-behind a finished exterior wall, the exposed metal surfaces of the raceway shall be finished to match the background wall, or integrated into the overall design of the sign. All exposed conduit shall be concealed from public view. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2015-328, § 3(Exh. A), 10-14-2015)  
17.30.070 - Method of measuring of sign area and height. 
For the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter, the area and height of signs shall be measured as provided by this section. 
A.  Sign Area. Sign area shall be computed by drawing a line around the outer perimeter of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. The total area of the sign shall include all sign faces. See Figure 3-18. 
B.  Monument Sign Height and Area. Sign area shall be measured using the criteria described in Section 17.30.060(A) except area calculations shall not include architectural treatments and support structures that are separately regulated. One side of a double-faced (back to back) sign shall be included when calculating sign area. Sign height shall be measured as the vertical distance from grade adjacent to the base of the sign footing, to the top of the sign, including the support structure and any design elements. In no case shall an artificial grade be established for the sole purpose of elevating the grade adjacent to the base of the sign footing for purposes of sign measurement. See Figure 3-19. 
C.  Freeway Facing Monument Sign Additional Height and Area for Commercial Shopping Centers: The planning commission shall consider an application and may grant the allowance of additional height and area up to the maximum of sixteen (16) feet allowed when a) recommended by the Architectural Review Panel, and b) at least one (1) of the following circumstances is present: 
1.  The sign is obscured by a physical barrier, such as an existing structure or berm, reducing its visibility from a scenic corridor or public right-of-way; 
2.  The location of the sign is at a disadvantage for viewing due to its location at distance from a scenic corridor or right-of-way; 
3.  The sign seeks to identify multiple tenants, and the legibility of the tenant signage is enhanced by additional sign area; 
4.  The sign is located along the freeway corridor, where traveling speed reduces the opportunity to read the sign based on criteria such as reduced visibility, width of lot or other factor as noted above. 
  
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2015-328, § 3(Exh. A), 10-14-2015)  
17.30.080 - On-site sign regulations. 
The signs described in this section may be allowed only on the same site as the use being advertised or identified unless otherwise noted. 
A.  Signs Allowed by Permit in All Zoning Districts. The following signs are allowed in all zoning districts, subject to the regulations in this chapter and issuance of a sign permit or other permit as specified below: 
1.  Directional Signs. Signs necessary for public convenience and safety, not exceeding four square feet in size or three feet in height, containing information including "entrance," "exit," or directional arrows designed to be viewed by on-site pedestrians or motorists. 
2.  Temporary Banners. One temporary banner not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in size shall be permitted for special events if authorized by a temporary use permit. A temporary banner shall be allowed one time for not more than two weeks per year. Banner signs within commercial centers provided for under an adopted sign program shall not be considered temporary banners. Balloons shall be permitted for special events in conjunction with temporary banners if authorized by a temporary use permit. 
All temporary banners and balloons shall be constructed and mounted in such a manner that they shall not rip, shred, tear or blow away by exposure to normal weather conditions. These signs shall not be illuminated or posted on trees, fence posts or public utility poles, or located within any public right-of-way or on any publicly owned property and shall not be within the traffic safety visibility area required by Section 17.20.120(D). 
B.  Signs Allowed by Permit in Specific Zoning Districts. A permit shall be required for the installation of any sign within the zoning district listed in Tables 3-17 through 3-21. No permit shall be issued except for a sign in compliance with these tables. 
Subject to sign program approval, decorative and other supportive architectural graphics, including company logos, are allowed in a commercial zoning district in addition to permitted building-mounted signs. The graphics shall be clearly secondary to the main sign in terms of their size and the portion of wall area covered, and shall complement the building and main sign in color and style. The area of the graphics and any logo shall be counted as part of the total sign area allowed on the building. 
1.  Flag and Land Locked Commercial Lots. Subject to the limitations set forth in the following tables, one monument sign may be located in a private access easement adjacent to a public street to provide business identification and directional information for a parcel without street frontage when (i) a wall sign would not be easily seen from the public street; and (ii) there is sufficient area to accommodate a monument sign. The sign shall maintain an adequate separation from other monument signs in the vicinity and shall be placed to avoid undue concentration of monument signs as determined by the director. 
2.  Kiosks. Kiosks shall be allowed with the approval of a sign program subject to the following standards: 
a.  In multi-tenant projects of greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet with outdoor spaces of greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
b.  Located in a manner that allows for proper handicap access around the entire kiosk area. 
c.  Maximum height shall not exceed eight feet. 
d.  Maximum area of each kiosk shall not exceed forty (40) square feet. 
e.  Maximum number shall not exceed one for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of building area. 
f.  The sign area shall be in addition to the sign area allowed in the tables below. 
g.  Signs located in the kiosk shall only advertise businesses or services offered by the businesses located within the shopping center. No off-site advertising is allowed. Noncommercial sign copy is allowed wherever commercial signage is permitted. 
3.  Calabasas Road District. Monument signs shall be permitted along both sides of Calabasas Road from the east side of Mureau Road to the west side of Parkway Calabasas ("Calabasas Road district"). The maximum height of a monument sign in the Calabasas Road district shall be twenty (20)) feet in height with the sign area not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet. Notwithstanding the forgoing, the council, following review and consideration from the commission, may grant an exception allowing a monument sign up to twenty-five (25) feet in height and up to one hundred fifty (150) square feet in sign area, upon finding that increased height or sign area is necessary to allow the applicant visibility comparable to that enjoyed by a substantial number of other properties in the Calabasas Road district. A property which contains a nonconforming pole sign(s) shall not be authorized to construct a monument sign under this paragraph unless the applicant agrees to abate the pole sign(s) as a condition of this approval. 
1.  Signs permitted in RS, RM, RR, RC, and HM (Residential Single Family, Residential Multi-Family, Rural Residential, Rural Community and Hillside Mountainous) Zones. 
Table 3-17 
Permitted Signs in RS, RM, RR, RC, and HM Zoning Districts 
Sign Type 	Sign Class 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Sign Area 	Maximum Sign Height 	Location Requirements 	Lighting Allowed? 	Additional Requirements 
Wall or monument 	Single-family neighborhood identification 
and 
Multifamily or mobile home park identification 	1 of each sign type per street frontage 	5 sq. ft. per acre, not to exceed 30 sq. ft. per sign 	8 ft. monument 	10 ft. minimum front setback, 5 ft. side setback 	Yes 	Copy limited to name and address of project. 
							
	Institutional 	1 of each sign type per street frontage 	5 sq. ft. per acre, not to exceed 20 sq. ft. per sign 	8 ft. monument 	10 ft. minimum front setback, 5 ft. side setback 	Yes 	Name of institution and illuminated Directory only. Religious and educational facilities may have marquee sign consistent with monument sign requirements. 
 
 Note: Maximum sign area includes all monument and building mounted signs. All lighting must comply with the Lighting Ordinance. 
2.  Signs permitted in CL, CR, CMU, CO, CB (Commercial-Limited, Commercial-Retail, Commercial-Mixed Use, Commercial-Office and Commercial-Business Park) Zones: 
Table 3-18 
Permitted Signs in CL, CR, CMU, CO, and CB Zoning Districts 
Sign Type 	Sign Class 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Sign Area 	Maximum Sign Height 	Location Requirements 	Lighting Allowed 	Additional Requirements 
Monument 	Commercial center/complex 	1 per center or complex 2 for each center/complex with 2 access driveways and a minimum separation between signs of 150 ft. 	100 sq. ft. per face, 2 faces max. Sign copy limited to 50 sq. ft. with remaining square footage devoted to architectural support and design. 
150 sq. ft. max. in Calabasas Road district only, and only with approval of the council, per Section 17.30.080(B)(3) 	10 ft., except that 20 ft. maximum is permitted in Calabasas Road district only and up to 25 ft. with council approval, per Section 17.30.080(B)(3) 	Must be in landscaped area generally equal the area of the sign. Must not block views at corners and driveways. 	Interior or exterior. All lighting shall comply with Lighting Ordinance. 	Allowed to advertise the name of the center or complex and one major tenant. Multitenant signs may be allowed with an approved Sign Program. Consideration shall be given to the placement and compatibility with adjoining properties and signs. 
	Single purpose building 	1 per building 2 for each single purpose bldg. with 2 access driveways and a minimum separation between signs of 300 ft. 		10 ft., except that 20 ft. maximum is permitted in Calabasas Road district only 	Must be in landscaped area generally equal the area of the sign. Must not block views at corners and driveways. 	Interior or exterior. All lighting shall comply with Lighting Ordinance 	Allowed to advertise the name of the center or complex and one major tenant. Multitenant signs may be allowed with an approved Sign Program. Consideration shall be given to the placement and compatibility with adjoining properties and signs. 
Building Mounted 	Commercial office or business park 	1 per building 	0.5 sq. ft. per linear Shall not project foot of store front; 15 sq. ft. minimum and 80 sq. ft. maximum per sign. 	Shall not project above an eave or parapet, including the eaves of a mansard roof. 	Centered on wall or canopy over store front and proportional to building mass. 	Interior or exterior. All lighting shall comply with Lighting Ordinance. 	Letters to be individually mounted on the building. Sign area may not be accumulated on one lineal dimension of the building & shall not exceed the allowed area on any one dimension of the building. Businesses that sublease a minimum of 100 square feet within a major tenant located in a shopping center shall be allowed a 15 square foot sign. 
Building Mounted 	Retail - Tenant Identification 	1 per street frontage or 1 for each occupancy for multitenant building. 1 additional for each tenant space that faces on more than 1 street. Max. 2 signs per business 	0.5 sq. ft. per linear Shall not project foot of store front; 15 sq. ft. minimum and 80 sq. ft. maximum per sign. 	Shall not project above an eave or parapet, including the eaves of a mansard roof. 	Centered on wall or canopy over store front and proportional to building mass. 	Interior or exterior. All lighting shall comply with Lighting Ordinance. 	Letters to be individually mounted on the building. Sign area may not be accumulated on one lineal dimension of the building & shall not exceed the allowed area on any one dimension of the building. Businesses that sublease a minimum of 100 square feet within a major tenant located in a shopping center shall be allowed a 15 square foot sign. 
Building Mounted 	Retail - Tenant Identification 	1 additional sign allowed for secondary main public entrance located on the side of a building adjacent to public parking. Max. 2 signs per business 	1/2 the total signage allowed on the front may be located on the side entrance 				Letters to be individually mounted on the building 
Building Mounted, Freeway Facing 	Commercial office, retail or business park 	1 per single purpose building or 1 per commercial center or complex 1 additional for bldgs. Over 50,000 sq. ft. for a 2 nd tenant with at least 30% of floor area 	.5 sq. ft. per linear foot of building frontage with a maximum of 80 sq. ft. per sign 	Shall not project above an eave or parapet, including the eaves of a mansard roof. 	100 ft. separation between freeway facing signs an same building 	Non-illuminated only 	Sign copy limited to a single business name. Sign design to be consistent with design of building and other signs on site. Shall be consistent with Scenic Corridor Ordinance. 
Pedestrian 	Commercial office, retail or business park 	1 projecting sign per tenant 	3 sq. ft. per face. 2 faces max. 	Lower edge must be min. 8 ft. above finished grade. 	Perpendicular to building wall. Must be centered under canopy or eave. 	No 	May not project into street. Sign shall appear to be architectural and integral part of bldg. 
Window 	Commercial office, retail or business park 	1 per window 	3 sq. ft. 	None 	None 	No 	Sign copy limited to business identification. 
 
 Note: A commercial center or complex is defined as where a project shares similar landscape features, common access ways, reciprocal parking or architectural features. Multitenant sites shall have Sign Program, per Section 17.30.050. In street corridors with adopted design guidelines or Master Plans, signage shall be consistent with adopted plans. 
3.  Signs permitted in the CT (Commercial-Old Town) Zone: 
Table 3-19 
Permitted Signs in CT Zoning District 
Sign Type 	Sign Class 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Sign Area 	Maximum Sign Height 	Location Requirements 	Lighting Allowed 	Additional Requirements 
Monument 	Commercial center/complex 	1 per center or complex 2 for each center/complex with 2 access driveways and a minimum separation between signs of 300 ft. 	100 sq. ft. per face, 2 faces max. Sign copy limited to 50 sq. ft. with remaining square footage devoted to architectural support & design. 	8 ft. 	Must be in landscaped area generally equal the area of the sign. Must not block views at corners and driveways. 	Interior or exterior. All lighting shall comply with Lighting Ordinance. 	Allowed to advertise the name of the center or complex and one major tenant. Multitenant signs may be allowed with an approved Sign Program. Consideration shall be given to the placement and compatibility with adjoining properties and signs. 
Monument 	Single purpose building 	1 per building 2 for each single purpose bldg. with 2 access driveways and a minimum separation between signs of 300 ft. 	100 sq. ft. per face, 2 faces max. Sign copy limited to 50 sq. ft. with remaining square footage devoted to architectural support and design. 	8 ft. 	Must be in landscaped area generally equal the area of the sign. Must not block views at corners and driveways. 	Interior or exterior. All lighting shall comply with Lighting Ordinance. 	Allowed to advertise the name of the center or complex and one major tenant. Multitenant signs may be allowed with an approved Sign Program. Consideration shall be given to the placement and compatibility with adjoining properties and signs. During construction, on-site advertising of the construction trades participating in the project shall be allowed. 
Building Mounted 	Commercial office or business park 	1 per tenant 	10 sq. ft. max 	Shall not project above an eave or parapet, including the eaves of a mansard roof. 	Centered on wall or canopy over store front and proportional to building mass. 	Interior or exterior. All lighting shall comply with Lighting Ordinance. 	Letters to be individually mounted on the building. 
Building Mounted 	Retail - Tenant Identification 	1 per street frontage or 1 for each occupancy for multitenant building. 1 additional for each tenant space that faces on more than 1 street. Max. 2 signs per business 	10 sq. ft. max. 	Shall not project above an eave or parapet, including the eaves of a mansard roof. 	Centered on wall or canopy over store front and proportional to building mass. 	Interior or exterior. All lighting shall comply with Lighting Ordinance. 	Letters to be individually mounted on the building. Sign area may not be accumulated on one lineal dimension of the building and shall not exceed the allowed area on any one dimension of the building. 
Building Mounted 	Retail - Tenant Identification 	1 additional sign allowed for secondary main public entrance located on the side of a building adjacent to a public parking. Max. 2 signs per business 	1/2 the total signage allowed on the front may be located on the side entrance. 	Shall not project above an eave or parapet, including the eaves of a mansard roof. 	Centered on wall or canopy over store front and proportional to building mass. 	Interior or exterior. All lighting shall comply with Lighting Ordinance. 	Letters to be individually mounted on the building. 
Building Mounted, Freeway Facing 	Commercial office, retail or business park 	1 per single purpose building or 1 per commercial center or complex. 1 additional for bldgs. Over 50,000 sq. ft. for a 2 nd tenant with at least 30% of floor area 	0.5 sq. ft. per linear foot of frontage; 15 sq. ft. min. and 80 sq. ft. max. per sign 	Shall not project above an eave or parapet, including the eaves of a mansard roof. 	100 ft. separation between freeway facing signs on same building 	Non-illuminated only 	Sign copy limited to a single business name. Sign design to be consistent with design of building and other signs on site. Shall be consistent with Scenic Corridor Ordinance. 
Pedestrian 	Commercial office, retail or business park 	1 projecting sign per tenant 	3 sq. ft. per face. 2 faces max. 	Lower edge must be min. 8 ft. above finished grade. 	Perpendicular to building wall. Must be centered under canopy or eave. 	No 	May not project into street. Sign shall appear to be architectural and integral part of bldg. 
Window 	Commercial office, retail or business park 	1 per window 	3 sq. ft. 	None 	None 	No 	Sign copy limited to business identification. 
Portable 
A-Frame 	Retail - Tenant Identification 	1 per business 	7 sq. ft. 	3 ft. 	Must be placed within 5 feet of retail storefront 	No 	Sign may only be displayed during hours of operation 
 
 Note: A commercial center or complex is defined as where a project shares similar landscape features, common access ways, reciprocal parking or architectural features. Multitenant sites shall have Sign Program, per Section 17.30.050. In street corridors with adopted design guidelines or Master Plans, signage shall be consistent with adopted plans. 
4.  Signs permitted in PF, OS, and REC (Public-Facilities, Open Space and Recreation) Zones: 
Table 3-20 
Permitted Signs in PF, OS and REC Zoning Districts 
Zoning District 	Sign Type 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Sign Area 	Maximum Sign Height 	Location Requirements 	Lighting Allowed? 	Additional Requirements 
PF 	Building-mounted or monument (public site) 	1 per lot 	5 sq. ft. per acre up to 100 sq. ft. max. 25 sq. ft. min. 	8 ft. for monument, eave height for wall-mounted 	None 	Yes 	Public sites include public utilities, schools, police and fire stations, etc. 
	Building-mounted or monument (private site) 	1 per lot 	5 sq. ft. per acre up to 100 sq. ft. max. 25 sq. ft. min. 	8 ft. for monument, eave height for wall-mounted 	10 ft. from any property line for monument sign 	No 	Private sites include day care centers, recreational uses, and private schools. 
	Building identification 	1 per building 	10 sq. ft. 	Height of eave 	Flat on wall 	No 	Copy should identify name and address of facility. 
	Directional or imperative 	No limit 	6 sq. ft. per face, 2 faces max. 	15 ft. 	None 	Interior only 	
OS, REC, OS-DR 	Building-mounted or monument (public site) 	1 per street or parking lot frontage 	5 sq. ft. per acre up to 100 sq. ft. max. 25 sq. ft. min. 	8 ft. monument, eave height for wall-mounted 	None 	Yes 	Copy limited to name and address of facility, or as approved by director. 
	Building-mounted or monument (private site) 	1 per lot 	5 sq. ft. per acre up to 100 sq. ft. max. 25 sq. ft. min. 	8 ft. monument, eave height for wall-mounted 	10 ft. from any property line for any monument sign 	No 	Copy limited to name and address of facility, or as approved by director. 
 
5.  Specific land use signs shall be allowed in addition to other permitted signs authorized by this chapter: 
Table 3-21 
Permitted Signs for Specific Land Uses 
Sign Class 	Sign Type 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Sign Area 	Maximum Sign Height 	Location Requirements 	Lighting Allowed? 	Additional Requirements 
Drive-through restaurant 	Menu board 	1 per building 	30 sq. ft. 	6 ft. 	Shall be screened from street and shall not block views at corners and driveways. 	Yes, during hours of operation. All lighting shall comply with Lighting Ordinance. 	Light shall not negatively impact adjacent residential properties. 
Service Station 	Special service signs 	1 per service 	10% of building face; 25 sq. ft. maximum 	Shall not project above an eave or parapet, including the eaves of a mansard roof. 	Flat on wall 	Yes 	Copy limited to special service use (e.g., car wash, mini-mart, repair services). 
	Price signs 	1 each for self- and full-service 	20 sq. ft. total, or as required by State law 	Shall not project above an eave or parapet, including the eaves of a mansard roof. 	Flat on wall or canopy 	No 	Copy limited to fuel grades and related prices. 
	Directional signs 	1 per pump island, 4 per station max. 	2 sq. ft. per sign face 	Four (4) feet from ground to top of sign 	Flat on wall or canopy 	No 	Copy limited to directions such as self-serve, full-serve, air water, cashier etc. 
Auto Dealership* *The aggregate of all building mounted signs shall not exceed 1 sq. ft. per linear foot of building frontage 	Special service signs 	1 per service 	10% of building face; 25 sq. ft. maximum 	Shall not project above an eave or parapet, including the eaves of a mansard roof. 	Flat on wall 	Yes. Interior or exterior. All lighting shall comply with Lighting Ordinance. 	Copy limited to special service use (e.g. Service, Parts, etc.). 
	Directional signs 	4 per site maximum 	2 sq. ft. per sign face 	Four (4) feet from ground to top of sign 		No 	Copy limited to directions to special service uses such as service, parts, etc. 
	Franchise signs 	1 per each franchise 	80 sq. ft. maximum 	Shall not project above an eave or parapet, including the eaves of a mansard roof. 	Flat on wall 	Yes 	Copy limited to name of franchise (e.g. Mercedes, Volvo, etc.). 
Commercial Shopping Center (5 or more tenants) 	Freeway Facing Monument Sign 	1 maximum per each center 	100 sq. ft. with additional area up to 200 sf possible per 17.30.070 C. 	10 ft. with additional height up to 16 ft. maximum possible per 17.30.070 C. 	Must be in landscaped area generally equal the area of the sign. Must not block views at corners and driveways. 	Yes, halo-style only 	Shopping center screening shall meet the requirements of 17.18.040 - Scenic corridor (-SC) overlay zone and 17.20.120 - Freeway corridor development. 
	Gateway Sign 	1 per access driveway and a minimum separation between monument or Gateway signs of 150 ft. 	100 sq. ft. with additional area up to 200 sq. ft. possible per 17.30.070 C. 	10 ft. maximum 	Must be in landscaped area generally equal the area of the sign. Must not block views at corners and driveways. 	Yes 	Allowed to advertise the name of the center or complex and tenants. Gateway signs may be allowed with an approved Sign Program. Consideration shall be given to the placement and compatibility with adjoining properties and signs. 
	Directional Signs (Tenant Identification only) 	2 per shopping centers with 5 to 10 tenants and 3 per shopping centers with more than 10 tenants. 	4 sq. ft. per sign face 	6 ft. maximum 	Located within shopping center only. 	No 	Allowed to advertise the name of tenants located in the center or complex only. Signs shall only incorporate two color schemes in design and all signs within center or complex shall have the same color scheme. 
 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-2014; Ord. No. 2015-328, § 3(Exh. A), 10-14-2015)  
17.30.090 - Nonconforming signs. 
This section recognizes that the eventual elimination of existing signs (on-site and off-site) that are not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter is as important as the prohibition of new signs that would violate these regulations. 
A.  Continuation of Nonconforming Sign. A legally established sign that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter may continue to be used in compliance with Section 17.30.100, except that the sign shall not be: 
1.  Structurally altered to extend its useful life; 
2.  Expanded, moved, or relocated; 
3.  Re-established after a business has been discontinued for ninety (90) days or more; or 
4.  Re-established after damage or destruction of more than fifty (50) percent of the value of the physical structure of the sign, as determined by the director. 
B.  Sign Copy Changes. The sign copy and sign faces of a nonconforming sign may be changed upon obtaining a sign permit provided that the change does not include a structural change in the display. 
C.  Correction of Nonconformities Required. Approval of any structures on a site or a change in the land use on a site shall require that all nonconforming signs on the site be brought into conformity with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.30.100 - Nonconforming sign abatement. 
A.  Time Limits. A nonconforming sign shall comply with this chapter within the period of time prescribed in subsection (B) of this section. 
B.  Amortization Schedule. 
Table 3-22 
Nonconforming Sign Amortization Schedule 
Nonconforming Classification 	Period for removal or modification 
Billboards 	Life of sign, unless removal is required as part of a project because the project cannot be built without removing the display or as required by Section 17.30.090. 
Pole signs over 25 feet in height 	15 years from the adoption of this Code 
Roof signs 	15 years from the adoption of this Code 
Animated, moving or flashing signs 	15 years from the adoption of this Code 
All other nonconforming signs 	Life of sign or as required by Section 17.30.090. 
 
C.  Notice of Abatement. Upon the expiration of the amortization period set forth in subsection B of this section, the director may abate a nonconforming sign. The director shall first send a written notice of abatement by certified mail, return receipt requested to owners of the businesses advertised on the signs and the owners of the property on which the sign is located as shown in the current assessor's records. The date of service shall be the date the director places the notice in a U.S. Postal Service mail receptacle. A notice of abatement shall state the following: 
1.  A description of the nonconformity; applicable amortization schedule; 
2.  A statement that the amortization period has expired; date of expiration; 
3.  That an appeal may only be filed with respect to the director's determination regarding the applicable amortization period. 
4.  That an appeal must be filed thirty (30) days from the date of service of the notice. 
D.  Appeal. The owners of the businesses advertised on the sign and the owners of the property on which the sign is located may appeal the director's determination regarding the applicable amortization period or request a time extension, on a form provided by the director and accompanied by any required fee in compliance with Section 17.60.040, within thirty (30) days of the date of service of the notice. 
1.  Hearings. Within sixty (60) days after receipt of an appeal, the commission shall hold a public hearing and shall forward a recommendation to the council as to whether the nonconformity should be abated as indicated in the notice, or whether a time extension should be granted in compliance with subsection (D)(2) of this section. 
a.  Notice of Hearing. Notice of the commission and council hearings shall be provided in the same manner as provided by Chapter 17.78. Both the owner of the business advertised on the sign and the owner of the property on which the sign is located shall be given notice of the hearing. 
b.  Conduct of Hearing. The commission shall receive written and oral testimony at the hearing relating to the term of abatement. During the hearing, the owner shall be permitted to call witnesses and be represented by counsel. 
c.  Commission Recommendation. At the close of the hearing, the commission shall make a recommendation to the council regarding an appeal. The burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that he or she is entitled to a longer abatement period than that contained in the notice of abatement. If the appellant is requesting a time extension, the commission may grant or deny the appeal in compliance with subsection (D)(2) of this section. 
d.  Council Hearing. The council shall hold a hearing with notice given in compliance with subsection (D)(1) of this section and render a decision regarding an appeal. 
2.  Extension of Time. The council may grant an extension of the time for abatement of a nonconforming sign where it can be demonstrated that an unreasonable hardship would otherwise be imposed on the appellant. The council shall base its decision on any competent evidence presented, including the following: 
a.  The nature of the sign and the use it advertises; 
b.  The amount of the owner's investment in the sign; 
c.  The detriment, if any, caused to the neighborhood by continuance of the nonconforming sign beyond the amortization period; 
d.  The amount of time needed to amortize the investment in the sign; and, 
e.  Any available depreciation information from the owner's latest federal income tax return, or other applicable documentation. 
3.  Decision and Order. The council's decision and the findings in support of the decision shall be in the form of a written order and shall be served upon the appellant personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, within ten (10) days after the decision is rendered. The order shall be binding upon the appellant, the owners of the business advertised on the sign, the owners of the property on which the sign is located, and the owners' successors, heirs and assignees. If the council grants a time extension, the council may require reasonable modifications or alterations to the sign for the purpose of improving the sign's appearance or compliance with this development code, the Municipal Code or state law. 
4.  Recordation of Order. Within thirty (30) days after the hearing, notice of the decision and order of the council shall be recorded with the Los Angeles County recorder's office. 
E.  Applicability of Section. 
1.  This section applies only to legal nonconforming signs. 
2.  Nothing herein prevents the earlier removal of a legal nonconforming sign pursuant to Section 17.30.110. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.30.110 - Removal of illegally installed or unsafe signs. 
A.  Unsafe Signs. Any sign that presents an immediate danger to the public health or safety may be removed by the city without prior notice. Alternatively, the director may issue a notice of violation and give the permit holder, property owner, or person in possession and control of the property fifteen (15) days to cure the violation. The date of service shall be the date the director places the notice in a U.S. Postal Service mail receptacle. In the case of an unsafe sign removed by the city, the costs of such removal and storage shall be borne by the permit holder, property owner, or person in possession and control of the property, as applicable and may be collected by the city in the same manner as it collects any other debt or obligation. No unsafe sign that has been removed and stored by the city shall be released until the costs of removal and storage have been paid. If an unsafe sign remains uncured for a period of thirty (30) days after service of the notice, the city may remove the sign and dispose of it. 
B.  Illegal Signs. Any illegal sign shall be removed or brought into conformity by the permit holder, property owner, or person in possession and control of the property following written notice from the director as specified in Chapter 17.80. The director's order may be appealed to the council in the manner provided in Chapter 17.80. 
C.  Abandoned Signs. A sign that advertises or otherwise identifies a business or activity which has been discontinued on the premises for a period of ninety (90) days shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premise. 
D.  Penalties. Illegal signs shall be subject to the remedies established in Municipal Code Chapter 17.80. 
E.  Removal of Illegal Signs in the Public Right-of-Way. The director may cause the immediate removal of any sign within the public right-of-way or on property that is otherwise abandoned that has been placed there without first complying with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.32 - OAK TREE REGULATIONS 
 
17.32.010 - Oak trees, oak tree permit. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The City of Calabasas lies within a unique area of Los Angeles County, the beauty and welfare of which is greatly enhanced by the presence of large numbers of oak trees and scrub oak habitat areas. Past development of the area resulted in removal of a great number of these trees and diminished resource habitat areas. Further destruction of these finite resources would detrimentally affect the ecosystem and aesthetics of the city. 
2.  It is the policy of the city to preserve and enhance its ecosystem, one element being its inventory of oak trees and scrub oak habitat, due in part to their contribution to the hardwood canopy and wildlife habitat. Other identified benefits of oak trees and scrub oak habitat to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Calabasas include, but are not limited to, erosion control, solar benefits, dust control, visual enjoyment, energy reduction, property values and the sense of community and place created by the surrounding vistas. 
3.  The preservation program outlined in this section contributes to the historical and environmental value of these trees to the community. Accordingly, the spirit and intent of this section are meant to have an equal parity to its articulated contents. 
B.  Oak Tree and Scrub Oak Habitat Preservation. 
1.  Any person or entity that owns, controls or has custody or possession of any real property within the city shall maintain all oak trees and scrub oak habitat located thereon in a state of good health pursuant to the most current "Oak Tree Preservation and Protection Guidelines" (Guidelines) adopted by council Resolution 91-36, which can be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
2.  In an effort to further the goals and intent of this section, the city shall establish an oak tree preservation program. The objectives of this program shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Reforestation of sites inside or outside of a project area that will not be subject to future development; 
b.  Replacement of existing oak woodlands and scrub oak habitat previously removed for development; 
c.  Public acquisition of or establishment of permanent conservation easements on otherwise developable lands; 
d.  Public environmental education regarding reforestation and habitat preservation; 
e.  Support for nonprofit organizations and other governmental agencies for the acquisition, preservation and reforestation of oak woodlands and other suitable wildlife habitat areas. 
3.  All cash fees, fines, forfeitures and mitigations, apart from permit processing fees, shall be placed within a fund for the oak tree and scrub oak habitat preservation program. 
C.  Oak Tree Permit Requirements and Exemptions. 
1.  Requirements. 
a.  No person shall alter any oak tree or scrub oak habitat on any real property within the city, unless a valid oak tree permit is issued pursuant to the provisions of this section and the guidelines. 
b.  Any other permit issued for the purpose of development of any public or private property shall also comply with this section. 
2.  Exemptions. A permit is not required to cut or remove an oak tree or alter scrub oak habitat under the following circumstances: 
a.  If the oak tree is less than two inches in diameter, unless the tree is within a scrub oak habitat or was planted as mitigation for a prior removal; 
b.  If an oak tree or scrub oak habitat is damaged by thunderstorms, windstorms, floods, earthquakes, fires, or other natural disaster or incident and verified by city staff; 
c.  Replacement or repair of existing utility lines or structures, while performing emergency or routine maintenance activities that may impact oak trees or scrub oak habitat, and which are necessary to maintain the facilities or other property of a public utility. The utility shall notify the city of any action taken that impacts oak trees or scrub oak habitat as soon as reasonably possible. 
3.  Minor Oak Tree Permit. A minor oak tree permit shall be required to remove or alter oak trees, under the following circumstances: 
a.  When an oak tree is less than six inches in diameter, as confirmed by city staff, and has any portion of its trunk located within forty (40) feet of an existing primary structure, unless the tree was planted as mitigation for a prior removal. Oak trees located within a public right-of-way, however, are not exempted by this subsection; 
b.  Pruning of oak trees or vegetation on scrub oak habitat for fuel modification to meet city requirements. Official agency documentation must be provided to the city and verified by city staff prior to commencing work; 
c.  Routine maintenance action needed to maintain the continued good health of an oak tree, limited to removal of deadwood, insect control spraying, fertilization, cabling, mulching and watering; 
d.  Routine maintenance actions needed to assure safe clearance for pedestrians, vehicles or structures; 
e.  Replacement, modification or repair of existing improvements within the protected zone of an oak tree, as long as the tree is not impacted by the action. 
4.  Utility Projects. New construction, modification or replacement of existing facilities, excluding the replacement or repair of utility lines and structures as discussed in subsection (C)(2)(c) of this section, shall be governed by the provisions of this section. Utilities shall be responsible for damage to oak trees. Utilities shall be required to notify the city five working days prior to any maintenance activity that might affect an oak tree or scrub oak habitat. As an alternative to individual prior notifications for each maintenance activity, the utility may submit an annual notification of maintenance activities to the city. This notification shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  List of facilities; 
b.  Schedule of work; 
c.  Extent of maintenance activities; 
d.  List of oak trees and/or scrub oak habitat that might be affected. 
Utilities may take emergency action with respect to oak trees without giving advance notice when immediate action is required in order to protect the public or the utility's employees, prevent damage or destruction of facilities and property, or to effect expeditious reinstatement of service following an interruption. The utility shall notify the city of such action taken as soon as reasonably possible. 
D.  Permit Processing. The applicant shall furnish all necessary information required by the guidelines and pay the appropriate filing fee to the city. 
1.  An application shall be completed and submitted to city staff for review and approval. 
2.  The comments from the city staff shall be forwarded to the community development director for review and approval. The director may approve permits for the following types of activity: 
a.  Removal of up to three living oak trees, less than six inches in diameter each, and not greater than twelve (12) inches in diameter aggregate. This limit shall be on a cumulative basis for the parcel. Following such removals, a notice shall be recorded regarding the subject property, requiring that any subsequent removal of oak trees from the subject site be approved by the planning commission, as appropriate; 
b.  Removal of any number of dead and/or hazardous oak trees or portions of oak trees or scrub oak habitat of any size, which is required due to health and safety concerns, or a public emergency, as determined by the director and the city arborist; 
c.  Pruning for clearance from existing structures or above roadways, sidewalks, trails or other transportation corridors, comprising not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the live foliage for each oak tree; 
d.  Minor encroachments into a protected zone of an oak tree including, but not limited to, fence installations or minor improvements that may impact up to ten (10) percent of the total area included within the protected zone; 
e.  Replacement or repair of existing improvements located within the protected zone of an oak tree, as long as the impacts to the tree do not increase. 
3.  The recommendation of the director shall be forwarded to the planning commission for consideration and disposition for the following types of activity: 
a.  Removal of any number of oak trees (beyond that allowed by subsection (D)(2)(a) or (D)(2)(b) of this section) or any amount of scrub oak habitat, excluding any living heritage oak; 
b.  Pruning comprising more than twenty-five (25) percent of the live foliage for an individual oak tree; 
c.  Encroachments impacting more than ten (10) percent of the total area included within the protected zone of an oak tree; 
d.  Impacts to any oak tree of special or significant community interest or exceptional, aesthetic, environmental or historical value. Such tree shall have been previously designated as having special or significant value by a specific action of the planning commission or council. 
4.  The recommendation of the planning commission shall be forwarded to the council for consideration and disposition for the following levels of activity: 
a.  Any oak tree permit for a project that involves the removal of any living heritage oak; 
b.  Any oak tree permit for a project that requires a separate development project approval from the council. 
E.  Permit Findings. An oak tree permit may be approved by the city based upon at least one of the following findings: 
1.  The request to remove an oak tree or scrub oak habitat is warranted to enable reasonable and conforming use of the subject property, which would otherwise be prevented by the presence of the oak tree or scrub oak habitat. Reasonable use of the property shall be determined in accordance with the guidelines. 
2.  The request to alter or encroach within the protected zone of an oak tree or scrub oak habitat is warranted to enable reasonable and conforming use of the property, which would otherwise be prevented by the presence of the oak tree or scrub oak habitat. In addition, such alterations and encroachments can be performed without significant long-term adverse impacts to the oak tree or scrub oak habitat. Reasonable use of the property shall be determined in accordance with the guidelines. 
3.  The condition or location of the oak tree or scrub oak habitat requires altering to maintain or aid its health, balance or structure. 
4.  The condition of the oak tree or scrub oak habitat warrants its removal due to disease, dangerous condition, proximity to existing structures, high pedestrian traffic areas, such as parking lots and pedestrian walkways when such conditions may be unsafe or cannot be controlled or remedied through reasonable preservation and/or prevention procedures and practices. 
5.  Removal or altering of the oak tree(s) will have minimal impact on the total hardwood canopy with special emphasis on associated tree growth and their natural regeneration, wildlife habitat and heritage oak trees. 
F.  Required Oak Tree Report. The applicant shall submit an oak tree report, prepared by a city-qualified arborist. The exact information and format of the information required is described in the guidelines. 
1.  An inventory of the individual oak trees and scrub oak habitat areas associated with the project; 
2.  An oak tree location map indicating the current topography and proposed grading plan, the tag number, exact trunk location, dripline, and protected zone of each oak tree within the project area, as well as the outline of proximate scrub oak habitat areas; 
3.  All proposed site development activities including, but not limited to, excavation for foundations, utility corridors and construction access routes; 
4.  Analysis of the potential impacts of the proposed development activities upon the oak trees and scrub oak habitat; 
5.  A mitigation program for the proposed impacts. 
G.  Permit Conditions. A gain or loss in oak tree inventory on the site shall be described in terms of species, total inches of diameter aggregate gain or loss, and the magnitude of the impacts. A gain or loss of scrub oak habitat shall be described in terms of acres of habitat coverage and the magnitude of the impacts. Conditions may be imposed on an oak tree permit by the city, including but not limited to any combination of the following: 
1.  A cash fee paid to the oak tree mitigation fund, which shall include maintenance and monitoring costs. The determination of the dollar value, cost or loss shall be calculated in accordance with the most current mitigation schedule established by the council. The council shall review and approve such fees at least once every three years. The city may accept appropriate dedication of land in lieu of cash; 
2.  One inch of oak tree diameter shall be planted for each inch of tree removed. Scrub oak habitat shall be replaced on a land area basis. Locations appropriate for new replacement plantings may be proposed by the applicant and approved by the city arborist prior to the granting of a permit based upon the potential for long-term viability; 
3.  Replacement or placement of additional oak trees, scrub oak habitat, associated hardwood canopy, land or wildlife habitat to proportionally offset the impacts associated with the loss of oak trees, scrub oak habitat, limbs, roots or potential long-term adverse impacts due to alterations or encroachment within the protected zone. Locations appropriate to such new plantings may be proposed by the applicant and must be approved by city staff prior to the granting of a permit based upon the potential for long-term viability; 
4.  Relocation of oak trees over ten (10) inches in diameter shall not be considered as mitigation. 
5.  Restrictions on construction activities within the protected zone of oak trees or within scrub oak habitat areas; 
6.  Remedial maintenance programs to improve the health of existing oak trees and scrub oak habitat areas; 
7.  Monitoring. Monitoring shall be conducted during all grading and construction activities at intervals warranted by the site conditions and level of activity. The monitoring program shall consist of quantitative and qualitative observations useful in identifying stress-related responses of oak trees and scrub oak habitat. Monitoring activities shall be performed in accordance with the procedures adopted in the guidelines. 
a.  Duration of and Responsibility for Monitoring. As noted above, monitoring shall be maintained during grading and construction activities; furthermore, following construction, annual monitoring shall be performed for a minimum of five years as warranted by site conditions, to ensure continued health of the trees and habitat areas. A city-qualified arborist shall conduct all monitoring. Costs shall be borne by the applicant. Restitution or remediation shall be required, should a project fail to comply with the desired establishment goals. 
b.  Use of Monitoring Information. Information provided by monitoring shall be used in establishing realistic mitigation measures and to ensure the future of oak resources throughout the city. 
c.  Establishment Goals. Criteria for evaluating the success of oak tree and scrub oak habitat preservation and establishing associated vegetation shall be specified in the permit conditions. Remediation shall be required as necessary to enable a site to meet the establishment criteria; 
8.  Registration. All replacement oak trees and scrub oak habitat areas shall be registered with the city in accordance with the guidelines; 
9.  Maintenance. All oak trees and scrub oak habitat areas shall be maintained in accordance with the guidelines; 
10.  Bond. The city may require adequate security to ensure performance, correct construction procedures, reforestation, monitoring and maintenance, in an amount to be determined by the city; 
11.  Recordation. As deemed necessary by the city or as set forth in this section, conditions of approval for an oak tree permit shall be recorded. The specific wording of the recorded permit shall be subject to the approval of the director. 
H.  Non-liability of City. Nothing in this section or within the guidelines shall be deemed to impose any liability for damages or a duty of care and maintenance upon the city or upon any of its officers or employees. 
I.  Other Laws and Authorities. The granting of an oak tree permit by the city shall not be construed as a permit to ignore any other law or authority. Among the laws that should be considered are the following at the California state level: 
1.  California Department of Fish and Game Code laws prohibit the destruction of a tree that contains a nest of certain birds. 
2.  State law includes the California Environmental Quality Act, which addresses tree removals. 
3.  The California Department of Forestry published the Integrated Hardwood Range Management Program, which has specific guidelines for oak rangeland. 
J.  Violation—Penalty. 
1.  Any person or entity that violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, may be punished as set forth in this Code. 
2.  Any person or entity that violates this section shall be required to obtain a retroactive oak tree permit and to comply with any mitigation measures specified therein. 
3.  Violation of this section and the guidelines during any construction shall result in an immediate stop-work order issued by the city, and work may not continue until permits are obtained and proper mitigation is completed. 
4.  Removal of an oak tree or scrub oak habitat may also result in a building or improvement moratorium being placed on the property for a period not to exceed ten (10) years and will apply to any subsequent owner of the property until the term is completed. A notice of noncompliance may also be recorded on the property. 
(Ord. 2006-222 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2005-210 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2001-166 § 3, 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-297, § 1(Att. A), 5-23-2012)  
Chapter 17.34 - GREEN DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
 
17.34.010 - Standards. 
A.  The city will use the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design rating system, referred to herein as Calabasas-LEED, to assess the environmental sensitivity of new structures in the city that is subject to this chapter. The Calabasas-LEED system is the United States Green Building Council's LEED Rating System Version 2.0, or current version adopted by the city. 
B.  The development of all structures subject to this chapter shall be required to achieve the equivalent of the following Calabasas-LEED rating prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy: structures up to five thousand (5,000) square feet must achieve at least a "Certified" rating and structures above five thousand (5,000) square feet must achieve at least a "Silver" rating. 
C.  The development of all structures subject to this chapter shall comply with all other applicable California laws and regulations. Such compliance shall not be qualified by any standard in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.34.020 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter shall apply to the establishment, construction or replacement of privately-owned and city-owned, non-residential structures over five hundred (500) square feet. 
B.  Each applicant seeking approval of the development of a structure subject to this chapter shall submit a Calabasas-LEED application to the city, together with a fee in an amount established by resolution of the council to cover the cost of the city's review of the application. 
C.  The director shall implement this chapter, and determine whether the development of a structure meets the applicable Calabasas-LEED standard and no permit, approval or other entitlement under this title, nor any certificate of occupancy under Chapter 15.04 of this Code, may issue until such a determination is made. The director shall implement the Calabasas-LEED rating system so that nothing required therein shall alter any energy consumption or insulation standards established by the state of California or any of its agencies or commissions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.34.030 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to additions to existing structures of less than five hundred (500) square feet and remodels of existing structures which do not involve the creation of more than five hundred (500) square feet of new, useable interior space. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.36 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION ORDINANCE 
 
17.36.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the historic preservation ordinance of the City of Calabasas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.020 - Purpose. 
The council declares that the recognition, preservation, protection and reuse of historic resources are required in the interests of the health, prosperity, safety, social and cultural enrichment, general welfare and economic well-being of the people of Calabasas. The designation and preservation of historic resources and districts, and the regulation of signs, alterations, additions, repairs, removal, demolition or new construction to perpetuate the historic character of historic resources and districts, is declared to be a public purpose of the city. 
Therefore, the purposes of this chapter include the following: 
A.  Safeguarding Calabasas' heritage by protecting resources that reflect elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, architectural and archaeological history; 
B.  Promoting public understanding, appreciation and involvement in the city's unique heritage; 
C.  Fostering civic pride in notable accomplishments of the past; 
D.  Deterring demolition, misuse or neglect of historic resources, landmarks, districts, contributing resources, and potential historic resources, landmarks or districts, which represent important links to Calabasas' or California's past; 
E.  Promoting conservation, preservation, protection and enhancement of historic resources and potential historic resources; 
F.  Protecting and enhancing the city's attractiveness to residents and visitors, and supporting economic development; 
G.  Restoring and improving the city's visual and aesthetic character; 
H.  Promoting the use of historic resources, especially for the education, appreciation and general welfare of the people of Calabasas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.030 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all historical resources within the City of Calabasas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.040 - Historic contexts and historical resource surveys. 
The city shall develop, from time to time, historic contexts and historic resource surveys. Historic contexts and historic resource surveys can serve many purposes, including providing the basis to identify and evaluate properties that have the potential to be considered eligible historical resources, as identified in Section 17.36.050. For the purposes of this chapter, historic contexts and historical resource surveys are explained below to provide greater knowledge of the role they serve in an historic preservation program. 
A.  Historical Context. An historic context provides the background and the basis for evaluating properties to determine their historical significance. An historic context is an organizational framework for historic preservation. The historic context organizes information based on a cultural theme and its geographical and chronological limits. Contexts describe the significant broad patterns of development in an area that may be represented by historic properties. The development of historic contexts is the foundation for decisions about identification, evaluation, registration and treatment of historic properties. An historic context provides an understanding of the relationship of individual properties to other similar properties, which in turn allows decisions about the identification, evaluation, registration and treatment of historic properties to be made reliably. Information about historic properties representing aspects of history, architecture, archeology, engineering and culture must be collected and organized to define these relationships. 
B.  Historical Resource Surveys. Surveys are performed to identify properties that have the potential to become eligible historical resources as well as areas and neighborhoods that, due to the concentration of potential historical resources, have the potential to be historic districts. Surveys are conducted at two different levels: reconnaissance and intensive. Properties surveyed at the reconnaissance level in accordance with the standards set forth by the California Office of Historic Preservation are identified but not evaluated for historic significance. Intensive-level surveys identify and evaluate properties for historic significance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.050 - Eligibility and designation criteria. 
A.  Eligibility. 
1.  Any property surveyed at the intensive level in accordance with the standards set forth by the California Office of Historic Preservation, and determined by the historic preservation commission to meet the designation criteria for historic landmarks set forth in this section, is considered an eligible historical resource. 
2.  Any cultural landscape surveyed at the intensive level in accordance with the standards set forth by the California Office of Historic Preservation, and determined by the commission to meet the designation criteria for historic landscapes set forth in this section, is considered an eligible historical landscape. 
3.  Any area or neighborhood surveyed at the intensive level in accordance with the standards set forth by the California Office of Historic Preservation, and determined by the commission to meet the designation criteria for historic districts set forth in this section, is considered an eligible historic district. 
B.  Historic Landmarks. Any eligible historical resource may be designated an historic landmark by the council pursuant to Section 17.36.080, if it meets the criteria for listing in the National Register of Historic Places or the California Register of Historical Resources, or it meets one of the following criteria: 
1.  Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of Calabasas' history; 
2.  Is associated with the lives of persons important to Calabasas' history; 
3.  Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, region or method of construction; represents the work of a master; or possesses high artistic values; 
4.  Has yielded, or has the potential to yield, information important to the prehistory or history of the local area, California or the nation. 
C.  Historic Districts. Any eligible historic district may be designated as an historic district by the council pursuant to Section 17.36.080, if the neighborhood meets the criteria for listing in the National Register of Historic Places or the California Register of Historical Resources, or the neighborhood meets one of the following criteria: 
1.  Is a contiguous area possessing a concentration of eligible historic resources or thematically related grouping of structures which contribute to each other and are unified by plan, style, or physical development; and (b) embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, region, or method of construction, represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic values. 
2.  Reflects significant geographical patterns, including those associated with different areas of settlement and growth; particular transportation modes; or distinctive examples of a park landscape, site design, or community planning. 
3.  Is associated with, or the contributing resources are unified by, events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of Calabasas' history. 
4.  Its contributing resources are associated with the lives of persons important to Calabasas' history. 
D.  Historic Landscapes. Any eligible historical landscape may be designated as an historic landscape pursuant to Section 17.36.080, if the landscape meets the criteria for listing in the National Register of Historic Places or the California Register of Historical Resources, or the neighborhood meets one of the following criteria: 
1.  Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of Calabasas' history; 
2.  Is associated with the lives of persons important to Calabasas' history; 
3.  Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, region or method of construction; represents the work of a master; or possesses high artistic values; 
4.  Has yielded, or has the potential to yield, information important to the prehistory or history of the local area, California or the nation. 
E.  Automatic Designation. Any property listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the California Register of Historical Resources is a local historic landmark. Any cultural landscape listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the California Register of Historical Resources is a local historic landscape. Any neighborhood or area listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the California Register of Historical Resources is a local historic district. Any property identified as a contributing structure to a district listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the California Register of Historical Resources is a contributing structure in the local historic district. 
F.  Considerations in Evaluating Properties—Integrity. In addition to having significance, a resource must have integrity for the time period in which it is significant. The period of significance is the date or span of time within which significant events transpired, or significant individuals made their important contributions. Integrity is the authenticity of a historical resource's physical identity as evidenced by the survival of characteristics or historic fabric that existed during the resource's period of significance. Only after significance has been established should the issue of integrity be addressed. The following factors should be considered when evaluating properties for integrity. 
1.  Design. Any alterations to the property should not have adversely affected the character-defining features of the property. Alterations to a resource or changes in its use over time may have historical, cultural, or architectural significance. 
2.  Setting. Changes in the immediate surroundings of the property (buildings, land use, topography, etc.) should not have adversely affected the character of the property. 
3.  Materials and Workmanship. Any original materials should be retained or, if they have been removed or altered, replacements have been made, that are compatible with the original materials. 
4.  Location. The relationship between the property and its location is an important part of integrity. The place where the property was built and where historic events occurred is often important to understanding why the property was created or why something happened. The location of an historic property, complemented by its setting, is particularly important in recapturing the sense of historic events and persons. Except in a few cases, the relationship between a structure and its historic associations is destroyed if the structure is moved. 
5.  Feeling. Feeling is a property's expression of the aesthetic or historic sense of a particular period of time. It results from the presence of physical features that, taken together, convey the property's historic character. 
6.  Association. Association is the direct link between an important historic event or person and a historic property. A property retains association if it is the place where the event or activity occurred and is sufficiently intact to convey that relationship to an observer. Like feeling, association requires the presence of physical features that convey a property's historic character. For example, a Revolutionary War battlefield the natural and manmade elements of which have remained intact since the 18 th century retains its quality of association with the battle. 
Because feeling and association are subjective criteria, their retention alone is never sufficient to support eligibility. Historical resources must retain enough of their historic character or appearance to be recognizable as historical resources and to convey the reasons for their significance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.060 - Calabasas register of historic places. 
City of Calabasas resolutions designating historic landmarks, landscapes, and districts shall comprise the Calabasas Local Register of Historical Resources. The Calabasas historical preservation officer shall maintain the local register and ensure it lists the resources automatically designated pursuant to Section 17.36.050(E) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.070 - Requirements for archaeological resources. 
The following studies are required for any project that has the potential to affect archaeological resources. All reports will be prepared in accordance with federal and state guidelines, and by persons who meet the Secretary of the Interior's professional qualification standards. 
A.  Phase I Archaeological Assessment. A phase I archaeological assessment is required for any property listed or located within a historical resources sensitivity area as identified in the City of Calabasas General Plan. 
B.  Exceptions to a Phase I Study. Exceptions to the phase I study requirement can be made by the city's historic preservation officer in any of the following situations: 
1.  Prior archaeological or historic studies have been performed and no significant deposits have been found; 
2.  Building additions and modifications will not exceed five percent of the existing building footprint square footage; 
3.  Interior remodeling or exterior facade renovation is proposed; 
4.  In other circumstances that, in the city historic preservation officer's judgment, warrant an exemption from the phase I study requirement. Exemption decisions should be coordinated as part of planning staff review of a project. Exemptions shall not be permitted for phase I, II, or III studies on any parcel where archaeological deposits or historic structures meeting CEQA definitions of significance are met. 
C.  Phase II Study—Archaeological Significance Evaluations. A phase II study is required if archival or physical evidence on the surface of a location proposed for development indicates that historic or prehistoric archaeological resources or important historical resources may be present. Any phase II (subsurface) archaeological test excavations shall be designed and implemented by trained historic and/or prehistoric archaeologists. The phase II requirements are mandatory where any significant cultural resource is identified as a result of phase I evaluation. 
A phase II study shall also determine the probable area and vertical extent of archaeological remains and determine whether the deposits are intact and meet CEQA eligibility requirements pursuant to CEQA guidelines. In the cases of historic structures, the phase II study shall identify the significance of the structure and any potential mitigation plan which may reduce impacts to the structure. The phase II report shall include a plan for mitigation complying with Appendix K of the CEQA guidelines if significant deposits or historic buildings or sites are encountered. 
D.  Phase III Data Recovery and Mitigation Program. A phase III data recovery and mitigation program shall be required when any archaeological resources are determined to be eligible historical resources under this chapter or CEQA guidelines. Any impacts to a significant historic or prehistoric archaeological site or standing structure shall be mitigated through a phase III (subsurface testing or architectural documentation) data recovery program. Financial limitations on phase III programs shall conform with Appendix K of the CEQA guidelines unless construction is undertaken with federal funds, in which case mitigation funding shall comply with and be limited by federal standards and guidelines. If feasible, construction impacts to significant archaeological deposits shall be minimized through the use of less destructive footing construction technology (post-tensioned slabs, pier footings, etc.). All studies must include mitigation measures to reduce the impact of the proposed project on the archaeological resources. These studies must be completed as part of a certificate of appropriateness application. 
E.  Public Records Act. The City of Calabasas will treat all archeological site information, including reports with specific site locations, as confidential information. However, since many nonsensitive properties (such as rock walls, ditches, Victorian buildings, etc.) have been recorded in archeological site records, a review of the individual site record should be accomplished to determine whether a specific property's location and information should be withheld under any given circumstance. This information will be kept on file with the City of Calabasas' community development department. The city historic preservation officer, in consultation with the historic preservation commission, will develop a policy regarding access to such records. Any policy should be consistent with state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.080 - Designation procedures. 
A.  Applications for Nomination. 
1.  Any person or group, including the city, may request the designation of an historical resource as an historic landmark, landscape or district by submitting an application to the city historic preservation officer. 
2.  All applications shall include the following: 
a.  Documentation indicating how the nominated resource satisfies the designation criteria; 
b.  Any other information determined to be necessary for review of the proposed work; 
c.  Required fees. 
B.  Initial Application Review. All applications filed with the CHPO as required by this title shall be initially processed as follows: 
1.  Completeness Review. Within thirty (30) days of filing, the CPHO shall review all applications for completeness and accuracy before they are accepted as complete. 
2.  Notification of Applicant and Property Owner. The applicant shall be informed by letter that the application is either complete and has been accepted for processing; or, that the application is incomplete and that additional information, specified in the letter, must be provided. When an application is incomplete, the time used by the applicant to submit the required additional information shall not be considered part of the time within which the determination of completeness must occur. The time available to an applicant for submittal of additional information is limited by subsection (B)(3) of this section. 
3.  Appeal of Determination. Where the CPHO has determined that an application is incomplete, and the applicant believes that the application is complete and/or that the information requested by the CPHO is not required, the applicant may appeal the determination in compliance with Chapter 17.74. 
4.  Expiration of Application. If a pending application is not completed by the applicant (i.e., not accepted as complete by the CPHO) within six months after its first filing, the application shall expire and be deemed withdrawn. A new application may then be filed in compliance with this chapter. 
C.  Historic Preservation Commission. The historic preservation commission shall evaluate each application for landmark, landscape or district nomination, in accordance with the criteria established in Section 17.36.050, at a public hearing, and shall decide by majority vote whether to approve any nomination and forward it to the council with a recommendation for historic designation. 
1.  The secretary of the commission shall set the time and place for such hearings, which may be continued from time to time. 
2.  The secretary shall give the applicant(s) and property owner(s) notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearings in writing. The secretary shall also publish a notice of commission hearings according to the noticing requirements in Chapter 17.78. Notwithstanding the requirements of Chapter 17.78, notice shall not be required for all owners of real property within five hundred (500) feet of the subject site. The secretary may also give such additional notice as deemed desirable and practicable. 
3.  Following the hearing, the historic preservation commission shall recommend by resolution that the council approve or reject the nomination. If the commission votes to nominate the historic resource for landmark, landscape or district designation, the secretary shall forward the nomination to the council with a written recommendation for designation. 
4.  Within ten (10) days of the commission's decision, the secretary shall mail notice thereof to the applicant(s) and owner(s) of record of the property proposed for nomination. 
D.  Council. The council has sole authority to designate an historic resource as an historic landmark, landscape or historic district. 
1.  Within ten (10) days of the historic preservation commission's nomination, the secretary shall send a copy of the historic landmark or district nomination to the city clerk. The city clerk or his/her designee shall set a public hearing at which the council shall consider the commission's recommendation. 
2.  The secretary shall give the applicant(s) and property owner(s) notice of the council hearing time and place at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date, together with a copy of the commission's written recommendation to the council, according to the noticing procedures contained in Chapter 17.78. Notwithstanding the requirements of Chapter 17.78, notice shall not be required for all owners of real property within five hundred (500) feet of the subject site. 
3.  Following the hearing, the council shall adopt or reject the historic designation or, at its discretion, continue consideration of the matter, or refer the proposed designation to the commission for further review within a period of time the council sets. 
4.  Designation of an historic resource as an historic landmark, landscape or district shall be by resolution and shall reference the specific criteria and/or findings on which the historic designation is based. 
5.  Within ten (10) days of the council's decision, the city clerk shall mail notice thereof to the applicant(s) and owner(s) of record of the nominated property. 
6.  All buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks or as part of an historic district pursuant to this chapter shall be so recorded by the city in the office of the Los Angeles County recorder. The recorded document shall contain the name of the owner or owners; a legal description of the property; the date and substance of the designation; a statement explaining that alteration; relocation or demolition are restricted; and a reference to this section authorizing the recordation. 
E.  Permits. No building, alteration, demolition, or removal permits for any historical resource shall be issued while a nomination of that resource for designation as an historic landmark or for designation of an historic district to which the resource contributes is pending. 
F.  Removal. The historic preservation commission shall not recommend that a resource be removed from the local register unless it is discovered that the information relied on by the commission and the council in making the original designation was erroneous or false; or that circumstances wholly beyond the owner's control have rendered the resources ineligible for designation based on the criteria listed in Section 17.36.050, and it would be infeasible to restore the resource. A resource cannot be removed from the local register merely because the value of the resource has been degraded by neglect. 
G.  Owner Objection to Designation. No property shall be designated an historic landmark if the owner objects to the designation, unless the council makes the findings listed in subsection (H) below. No area will be designated an historic district if a majority of the property owners of the contributing properties to the proposed district object, unless the council makes the findings listed in subsection (H) below. For historic landscapes, if the landscape is located on a single property, the property shall not be designated as an historic landscape if the property owner objects, unless the council makes the findings listed in subsection (H) below. If the landscape is contained on multiple properties, the properties shall not be designated as an historic landscape if a majority of the property owners object, unless the council makes the findings listed in subsection (H) below. 
H.  Council Override of Owner's Objection to Designation. The council may, by a four-fifths vote, designate an historic landmark, historic district, or historic landscape over the objection of the owner(s) as described above in subsection (G) of this section, if all of the following findings are made: 
1.  The landmark, district, or landscape meets the criteria for designation under Section 17.36.050 of this Code; 
2.  The landmark, district, or landscape is an especially valuable historic resource as compared to other designated resources in and near the city; 
3.  The social benefit of designating the landmark, district or landscape can be shown by clear and convincing evidence to outweigh the private burden of designation, and designation would not damage the owner of the property unreasonably in comparison to the benefits conferred on the community. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.090 - Alterations to historical resources (certificates of appropriateness). 
A certificate of appropriateness process is established to ensure that any alteration to an historical resource is in keeping with the historic character of the resource. 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  A certificate of appropriateness is required for any of the following: 
a.  Alteration, addition, restoration, rehabilitation, remodeling, demolition or relocation of an historical resource, including interior improvements, when the historic preservation commission has determined that interior features of the historic resource are significant features. Approval of such work shall be required even if no other permits are required by this Code or other law. 
b.  Any work, including alterations, additions, restorations, rehabilitations, remodeling, or demolition to the exterior of any noncontributing structure in an historic district. Reasonable efforts shall be made to make such exterior alternations compatible with the historic district, and in no event shall alteration of the exterior of a noncontributing structure increase the dissimilarity of the structure and its historic context. 
c.  Infill development within an historic district. 
d.  Any work, including alterations, additions, restorations, rehabilitations, remodeling, or demolition to any historic landscape. 
e.  Development projects that may impact archaeological resources. 
2.  No permit shall be issued for work on an historical resource until a certificate of appropriateness or waiver has been issued in accordance with this section. 
3.  Once a certificate of appropriateness has been issued, the city historic preservation officer may inspect the work to ensure that it complies with the approved certificate of appropriateness. 
B.  Initial Staff Review. 
1.  The city historic preservation officer shall review all proposed work on any historical resource to determine if a certificate of appropriateness is required. 
2.  If the CPHO determines the proposed work is consistent with the guidelines set forth in Section 17.36.120(H), a waiver shall be issued. 
3.  If the CPHO determines the proposed work is not consistent with the guidelines set forth in Section 17.36.120(H), a certificate of appropriateness shall be required. 
4.  Determinations by the CPHO pursuant to this subsection shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date an application is deemed complete. 
C.  Applications. 
1.  All applications shall be filed with the city historic preservation officer. The applicant is encouraged to confer with the CPHO before submittal of the application. 
2.  All applications shall include the following: 
a.  Plans and specifications showing the existing and proposed exterior appearances; 
b.  Materials and colors to be used on the exterior of the resource; 
c.  Relationship of the proposed work to the surrounding environment, if necessary; 
d.  For new construction in historic districts, relationship to the existing scale, massing, architectural style, site and streetscape, landscaping and signage; 
e.  Any other information the CHPO reasonably determines to be necessary for review of the proposed work; 
f.  Required fees. 
D.  Procedures. Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be processed in accordance with the procedures listed in Chapter 17.60. 
E.  Findings of Fact. One of the following findings shall be required for the approval of a certificate of appropriateness: 
1.  The proposed alteration, restoration, relocation or construction, in whole or in part, will not do any of the following: 
a.  Detrimentally change, destroy, or adversely affect any significant architectural feature of the resource; 
b.  Detrimentally change, destroy, or adversely affect the historic character or value of the resource; 
c.  Be incompatible with the exterior features of other improvements within the district; 
d.  Adversely affect or detract from the character of the district. 
2.  The applicant has obtained a certificate of economic hardship, in accordance with Section 17.36.100. 
F.  Infill Development. 
1.  New structures constructed within an historic district shall be designed to be compatible with the architectural style, features and historic character of the district. 
2.  New buildings shall be compatible with the original style of the contributing resources within an historic district. The design of the new building shall incorporate the following considerations: 
a.  The design shall incorporate the design features and details of contributing buildings/structures; 
b.  The height, width, and length of the new building/structure shall be consistent with the original characteristics of the contributing structures; 
c.  The exterior materials and treatment shall be similar to the contributing structures. 
G.  Waivers. When alterations, restorations, rehabilitations, remodeling and additions to historical resources are accomplished in substantial accord with the guidelines set forth in this section, as determined by the city historic preservation officer, a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission is not required prior to issuance of a building permit in the following cases: 
1.  Minor Alterations. The CHPO may deem that certain alterations to historical resources are "minor." Those alterations may include but are not limited to the following, if no change in appearance occurs or the proposed change restores period features: 
a.  Roofing; 
b.  Foundation; 
c.  Chimney; 
d.  Construction, demolition or alteration of side, rear and front yard fences; 
e.  Landscaping, unless the property is designated as an historic landscape or the historic landmark or district designation specifically identifies the landscape, layout, features, or elements as having particular historical, architectural, or cultural merit; 
f.  Wall or monument signs. 
2.  Additions and Accessory Structures. A waiver may be issued for the construction of accessory structures or small additions to historical resources not visible from a public right-of-way, if the new construction is accomplished in substantial accord with the design guidelines set forth in this section. New construction where a waiver can be issued may include, but is not limited to, the following, if the construction is consistent with the design guidelines: 
a.  Additions under five hundred (500) square feet; 
b.  Accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.100 - Certificates of economic hardship. 
A certificate of economic hardship process is established to ensure that denial of a certificate of appropriateness does not impose undue hardship on the owner of a historical resource. 
A.  General Requirements. No action shall be taken to demolish or otherwise alter an historical resource for a period of fourteen (14) days following the issuance of a certificate of economic hardship. 
B.  Applications. 
1.  All applications shall be filed with the city historic preservation officer. The applicant is encouraged to confer with the CPHO before submittal of the application. 
2.  An application for a certificate of economic hardship shall include the following information. Private financial information shall be maintained in confidence by the city. 
a.  Cost estimates for the proposed construction, addition, alteration, demolition or relocation, and an estimate of additional costs that would be incurred to comply with the recommendations of the historic preservation commission for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. 
b.  A rehabilitation report from a licensed engineer or architect with expertise in rehabilitation, as to the structural soundness of any structures on the property and their suitability for rehabilitation. 
c.  The estimated market value of the property in its current condition. 
d.  The estimated market value of the property after completion of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition, or relocation. 
e.  The estimated market value of the property after any condition recommended by the commission. 
f.  In the case of demolition; the estimated market value of the property after renovation of the existing property for continued use. 
g.  In the case of demolition; an estimate from an architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser or other real estate professional with experience in rehabilitation, as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure on the property. 
h.  For income-producing properties, information on annual gross income, operating and maintenance expenses, tax deductions for depreciation and annual cash flow after debt service, current property value appraisals, assessed property valuations, and real estate taxes. 
i.  The remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the property and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years. 
j.  All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing, or ownership of the property. 
k.  The amount paid for the property if purchased within the previous thirty-six (36) months; the date of purchase; and the party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, if any, between the owner of record or applicant and the person from whom the property was purchased, and any terms of financing between the seller and buyer. 
l.  Any listing of the property for sale or rent, including the prices asked and offers received, if any occurred within the previous two years. 
m.  Any other information considered necessary by the commission to determine whether or not the property does or may yield a reasonable return to the owners. 
n.  Required fees. 
C.  Procedures. Applications for a certificate of economic hardship shall be processed in accordance with the procedures listed in Chapter 17.60. 
D.  Findings of Fact. One or more of the following findings are required for the approval of a certificate of economic hardship. 
1.  Denial of the application will diminish the value of the subject property, so as to leave substantially no value or otherwise work a taking of the property under the U.S. or State Constitution. 
2.  Sale or rental of the property is impractical, when compared to the cost of holding such property for uses permitted in the zone. 
3.  An adaptive reuse study has been conducted and found that lawful use of the property is impractical. 
4.  Rental at a reasonable rate of return is not feasible. 
5.  Denial of the certificate of appropriateness would damage the owner of the property unreasonably, in comparison to the benefits conferred on the community. 
6.  All other means involving city-sponsored incentives, such as transfer of development rights, tax abatements, financial assistance, building code modifications, changes in the zoning ordinance, loans, grants and reimbursements, have been explored to relieve the asserted economic hardship. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.110 - Conservation plan. 
A conservation plan process is established to expedite review of certificates of appropriateness for proposed work on multiple historical resources in a project area. 
A.  Contents. A conservation plan should identify the proposed work to be completed within the plan area, any work requiring further review, the structures covered by the plan, and other information reasonably required by the city historic preservation officer to facilitate review of the proposed plan. 
B.  Procedures. A conservation plan shall be evaluated under the procedures and standards established by this chapter for a certificate of appropriateness. 
C.  Amendments. Conservation plans may be amended with the approval of the council, upon a recommendation by the historic preservation commission. 
D.  Findings of Fact. Approval of a conservation plan shall require findings that the proposed alterations, restorations, relocations or construction within the plan area will not, in whole or in part, do any of the following: 
1.  Detrimentally change, destroy, or adversely affect any significant architectural feature of historical resources; 
2.  Detrimentally change, destroy, or adversely affect the historic character or value of historical resources; 
3.  Be incompatible with the exterior features of other improvements within the plan area; 
4.  Adversely affect or detract from the character of the plan area. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.120 - Demolition of historic structures (certificates of appropriateness). 
A certificate of appropriateness process is established for demolitions to ensure that any demolition of an historic resource complies with the requirements of this chapter and CEQA guidelines to mitigate the impacts of demolition. 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  A certificate of appropriateness is required for any demolition, in whole or in part, of an historical resource. 
2.  No permit shall be issued for demolition of an historic resource until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
3.  Once a certificate of appropriateness has been issued the city historic preservation officer shall, from time to time, inspect the work to ensure compliance with the approved certificate. 
B.  Applications. 
1.  All applications shall be filed with the CHPO. The applicant is encouraged to confer with the CHPO before submitting the application. 
2.  All applications shall include the following information: 
a.  Plans and specifications showing the proposed exterior appearance of the project site following demolition, and any proposed new construction; 
b.  Materials and colors to be used on the exterior of structures on the site following the proposed demolition; 
c.  Relationship of the proposed work to the surrounding environment, if necessary; 
d.  Relationship of proposed new construction to the existing scale, massing, architectural style, site and streetscape, landscaping and signage in an historic district; 
e.  Any other information the CHPO reasonably determines to be necessary for review of the proposed work; 
f.  Required fees. 
C.  Procedures. Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 17.60. 
D.  Review for Significance. Properties determined to be potential historical resources, but not yet designated as landmarks or contributing resources to an historic district, shall be evaluated for significance in conjunction with any application for demolition. The city historic preservation officer shall review the property for significance and determine its eligibility for listing on the National Register of Historic Places, the California Register of Historical Resources, or local designation in conjunction with the certificate of appropriateness. The review may include, but is not limited to, a historical resources survey at the intensive level in accordance with standards set forth by the office of historic preservation. The historic preservation commission shall make any determination of significance, subject to appeal to the council pursuant to Chapter 17.74. 
E.  Findings of Fact. One of the following findings shall be made prior to approval of a demolition application. 
1.  The proposed demolition, in whole or in part, is necessary because of both of the following: 
a.  All efforts to restore, rehabilitate, and/or relocate the resource have been exhausted; 
b.  Restoration or rehabilitation is not practical because the extensive alterations required would render the resource not worthy of preservation. 
2.  The applicant has obtained a certificate of economic hardship in accordance with Section 17.36.100. 
F.  Mitigation Measures. Prior to the issuance of a permit to demolish an historic resource in accordance with this section, the following mitigation measures must be completed. 
1.  Documentation. Each historic structure shall be documented to provide a record of the buildings. Plans shall include, but are not limited to, a site plan; floor plans; elevations; and detailed drawings of character-defining features such as moldings, stairs, etc. Photographs shall include the structure's exterior and interior, and include relevant character-defining features such as moldings, light fixtures, trim patterns, etc. 
2.  Replacement Structures. 
a.  A certificate of appropriateness shall not be issued for the demolition, in whole or in part, of an historical resource, until the city historic preservation officer or the commission has approved a site plan for (a) replacement structure(s). 
b.  No permit shall be issued for the demolition, in whole or in part, of an historical resource, until a permit has been issued for (a) replacement structure(s), unless demolition is required in conformance with Section 17.36.230. 
3.  Salvaged Features and Artifacts. In an effort to preserve features and artifacts from historic structures, a determination whether items within or appurtenant to the building should be salvaged shall be made by the city historic preservation officer, who may consult the Calabasas Historical Society prior to the issuance of the demolition permit. 
G.  Waiver of Replacement Structure Requirement. The historic preservation commission, upon the recommendation of the city historic preservation officer, may waive the requirement for replacement structures if the ultimate project proposed for the site of the demolition provides an exceptional benefit to the community. 
1.  Findings. The following findings must be made to waive the replacement structure requirement. 
a.  The demolition is necessary to allow for the acquisition and assembly of land for a future housing project. 
b.  The future project will provide exceptional benefits to the city with respect to employment, fiscal, social, housing and economic needs of the community; or will provide new public facilities which are needed by the city (i.e., off-site improvements, parks, open space, recreation, or other community facilities, not including parking lots). 
2.  Conditions of Approval. When the historic preservation commission approves a waiver of the replacement structure requirement, the following conditions shall be applied to the approval. 
a.  Any new project on the site shall follow the process for a certificate of appropriateness for a historic landmark or district. 
b.  Any new project on the site shall follow the infill guidelines listed in Section 17.36.090(F), to ensure compatibility with the surrounding area or neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.130 - Time extensions for certificates of appropriateness. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall lapse and become void twelve (12) months after the date of approval, unless a building permit (if required) has been issued, work authorized by the certificate of appropriateness has commenced prior to such expiration date, and said work is diligently pursued to completion. Upon request of the property owner and a showing of delays due to no fault of the applicant, or a showing of reasonable diligence by the applicant, the city historic preservation officer director may extend a certificate of appropriateness for an additional period of twelve (12) months. The CHPO may approve, approve with conditions, or deny any request for extension. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.140 - Revocation of certificates of appropriateness and economic hardship. 
A.  A certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic hardship may be revoked or modified following notice to the applicant and property owner and a hearing pursuant to Chapter 17.78, upon a finding by the historic preservation commission that the applicant or property owner is responsible for any of the following: 
1.  Noncompliance with any terms or conditions of the certificate; 
2.  Noncompliance with any provision in this chapter; 
3.  Fraud or misrepresentation in the obtaining of the certificate. 
B.  Procedures. Revocation proceedings pursuant to subsection A. of this section may be initiated by a dated writing signed by the secretary of the historic preservation commission, who shall give notice of the potential revocation to the applicant and the property owner by certified mail. Upon receipt of such notice, the applicant and property owner, and their agents and contractors, shall cease all work pursuant to the certificate until a final determination by the historic preservation commission can be made, unless the secretary provides written authorization for specified work to secure the project site and protect historic resources pending a historic preservation commission decision. 
1.  A proposal to revoke a certificate shall be scheduled for the next historic preservation commission meeting, allowing for public noticing pursuant to Chapter 17.78. 
2.  The historic preservation commission shall determine whether or not to revoke the certificate within sixty (60) days of initiation of the proceedings. 
3.  The applicant shall be notified of the historic preservation commission's decision by mail within ten (10) days. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.150 - The Mills Act. 
A Mills Act contract process is established to provide economic incentives for the preservation of a designated historic landmark or contributing structure within a designated historic district. 
A.  General Requirements. All designated historic landmarks, contributing structures in designated historic districts, and properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the California Register of Historical Resources, are eligible for Mills Act contracts, pursuant to the provisions of Article 12, Sections 50280 through 50289, Chapter 1, Part 1, Title 5, of the California Government Code. 
B.  Required Provisions of a Mills Act Contract. All Mills Act contracts shall comply with Section 50281 of the California Government Code, which include, but are not limited to, the following provisions: 
1.  The term of the contract shall be for a minimum of ten (10) years. 
2.  The applicant and property owner shall be required to comply during the term of the contract with the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties with guidelines for preserving, rehabilitating, restoring and reconstructing historic buildings, as well as the State Historic Building Code. 
3.  The city shall be authorized to conduct periodic inspections to determine the applicant's and property owner's compliance with the contract. 
4.  The contract shall be binding upon, and inure to the benefit of, all successors in interest to the owner and the applicant. 
5.  The contract shall require written notice to the state office of historic preservation within six months of execution of the contract. 
C.  Applications. All applications shall be filed with the community development department. The applicant is encouraged to confer with the department before submittal of the application. All applications shall include the following: 
1.  A copy of the latest grant deed for the property; 
2.  A rehabilitation plan/maintenance list of the work to be completed within the ten-year contract period, including cost estimates and the year in which the work will be completed; 
3.  A financial analysis form showing current property taxes and estimated taxes for the property under a Mills Act contract; 
4.  Required fees. 
D.  Procedures. Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 17.60. 
E.  Recordation. The approved contract shall be recorded with the county recorder within twenty (20) days of approval. 
F.  Nonrenewal. A Mills Act contract shall be a perpetual, ten-year contract that automatically renews annually unless and until either party gives written notice to the other that the contract will not be renewed upon the expiration of its current term. 
G.  Cancellation. A Mills Act contract may be cancelled or modified if the historic preservation commission finds, after written notice to the applicant and the property owner, and a hearing pursuant to Chapter 17.78, either of the following conditions. 
1.  The owner or applicant is responsible for any of the following: 
a.  Noncompliance with any terms or conditions of the contract; 
b.  Noncompliance with any provision in this chapter; 
c.  Misrepresentation or fraud used in the process of obtaining the contract. 
2.  The historic resource has been subject to either of the following: 
a.  Destroyed by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity, or the public enemy; 
b.  Taken by eminent domain. 
H.  Cancellation Procedures. Cancellation proceedings may be initiated by any member of the historic preservation commission. 
1.  Once notice of possible cancellation has been given under subsection (G) of this section, the proposed cancellation shall be scheduled for the next historic preservation commission meeting, allowing for public noticing requirements in conformance with Chapter 17.78. 
2.  The historic preservation commission shall make a recommendation to the council, which the commission's secretary shall transmit to the council and to the applicant and property owner by certified mail. 
3.  The council, within sixty (60) days of initiation of the proceedings, shall cancel or continue the contract. 
4.  The historic preservation commission's secretary shall notify the applicant and the property owner of the council's decision by certified mail within ten (10) days. 
I.  Cancellation Fee. If a Mills Act contract is cancelled pursuant to subsection (G)(1) of this section, the property owner shall be liable to the city for a cancellation fee equal to twelve and one-half (12½) percent of the current fair market value of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.160 - Historic rehabilitation financing program. 
The Marks Historic Rehabilitation Act of 1976 was established by the state of California to allow cities and counties to provide long-term, low-interest loans to finance the preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation of historical resources. The City of Calabasas establishes a historic rehabilitation financing program, in accordance with and subject to, the provisions of the Marks Historic Rehabilitation Act. 
A.  Rehabilitation Area. This area shall consist of all properties within the city. 
B.  Eligible Structures. Any property eligible for funding under this program must be located within a rehabilitation area as defined in subsection (A) of this section, and must be a designated local historic landmark or landscape, a contributing structure to a designated local historic district, or listed or determined eligible for listing on the California Register of Historical Resources or the National Register of Historic Places. 
C.  Rehabilitation Requirements. Any property rehabilitated with funding from this program must meet the following requirements. 
1.  Rehabilitation Standards. Any rehabilitation must use the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with guidelines for preserving, rehabilitating, restoring, and reconstructing historic buildings, as well as any local preservation and design guidelines adopted by the city. 
2.  Maintenance. Any property rehabilitated with funding from this program must be maintained in good condition for a period of at least ten (10) years from the completion of the rehabilitation. 
D.  Advisory Board. The council will establish an advisory board pursuant to and in accord with state law, if and when an application for funding under this section is received by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.170 - Incentives for historic preservation. 
The following section is provided to allow for incentives to be used to support the preservation, maintenance and appropriate rehabilitation of the city's designated historical resources. 
A.  Eligible Properties. Preservation incentives shall be made available to owners of any of the following types of properties: 
1.  Properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places; 
2.  Properties listed on the California Register of Historical Resources; 
3.  Properties designated as local historic landmarks or landscapes; 
4.  Properties that are contributing structures in designated local historic districts. 
B.  Eligible Projects. The following types of projects are eligible for preservation incentives. Any project listed below must comply with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties and be approved by the historic preservation commission: 
1.  Restoration or exterior rehabilitation that includes the restoration, repair or replacement, in kind, of significant architectural features; 
2.  Re-roofing with similar material, or repair and replacement of roofing, where the roof is a significant architectural feature; 
3.  Relocation to another site; 
4.  Restoration of designated interior spaces; 
5.  Seismic reinforcement or structural rehabilitation; 
6.  Replacement of building systems that will further the preservation of the historical resource; 
7.  Additions shall be eligible for development incentives only. 
C.  Incentives. The following incentives may be used for eligible projects as listed in subsections (A) and (B) of this section: 
1.  Economic and Financial Incentives. The following incentives may be applied to a project approved by the historic preservation commission, and subject to approval by the city manager: 
a.  Approval of a Mills Act contract pursuant to Section 17.36.150; 
b.  Approval of funding through the historic rehabilitation financing program, as prescribed in Section 17.36.160; 
c.  Grants or loans through other city funding sources, including housing funds; 
d.  Preservation easements; 
e.  Reduction or elimination of building plan-check or permit fees; 
f.  Reduction or elimination of development-impact fees; 
g.  Reduction or elimination of any other applicable city fees; 
h.  Federal Rehabilitation Tax Credits (applied through the California Office of Historic Preservation). 
2.  Development Incentives. 
a.  State Historic Building Code. 
b.  Parking Variances. For single-family residences, the zoning requirement for two parking spaces within an enclosed garage when adding floor area shall be waived, if an existing one-car garage contributes to the significance of the property and/or district and is in good condition or, if deteriorated, will be returned to good condition as part of work to add new living space to the residence. 
c.  Setback Reduction. Reductions in required setbacks or height requirements may be granted when a reduction allows for the restoration of a character-defining feature, or allows for character-defining features to be replicated in additions to historic structures. In no case shall a reduction in a setback be granted when the reduction will cause an adverse affect to the property or cause an adverse affect to the character of the neighborhood or district. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.180 - State Historic Building Code. 
The California State Historic Building Code (SHBC) provides alternative building regulations for the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration, or relocation of structures surveyed and identified as historical resources. The SHBC shall be used in evaluating any building permit for work affecting an historical resource. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.190 - Preservation easements. 
Preservation easements on the facades of buildings designated as historical resources may be acquired by the city, or on the city's behalf, by a nonprofit group designated by the city through purchase, donation, or condemnation pursuant to California Civil Code Section 815. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.210 - Duty to keep in good repair. 
In addition to any duty of maintenance established by another provision of this Code or other applicable law, the owner or other person in possession of an historical resource has a duty to keep in good repair all of the exterior features of said resource, and all interior features thereof which, if not maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior features of said resource to deteriorate, decay, become damaged or fall into a state of disrepair. 
A.  All historical resources shall be preserved against such decay and be kept free from structural defects through the prompt repair of any of the following: 
1.  Facades which may fall and injure a member of the public or property; 
2.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations, defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports, and deteriorated walls or other vertical structural supports; 
3.  Members of ceilings, roofs and roof supports or other horizontal members which age, split or buckle; 
4.  Deteriorated or insufficient waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors; 
5.  Defective or insufficient weather protection for exterior walls, including lack of paint or weathering due to lack of paint, or other protective covering; 
6.  Any fault or defect in the building, which renders it not watertight or otherwise structurally unsafe. 
B.  A certificate of appropriateness shall not be issued for the demolition of an historical resource because of the failure of the owner to comply with this section. 
C.  It shall be the duty of the city's building officials to enforce this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.220 - Ordinary maintenance and repair. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any property covered by this chapter that does not involve a change in design, material, or external appearance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.230 - Unsafe or dangerous conditions. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the construction, alteration, restoration, demolition or relocation of any historical resource, when such action is required for public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition which cannot be rectified through the use of the California State Historic Building Code. 
The community development department shall, upon the assessment and recommendation of the city's building official, certify that such a condition exists and inform the historical preservation commission of that determination. Upon such certification, a certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for work within the scope of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.240 - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Any person who violates a requirement of this chapter, fails to obey an order issued by the historic preservation commission, or fails to comply with a condition of approval for any certificate or permit issued under this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to Section 1.16.020(A) of this Code. 
B.  Any alteration or demolition of an historical resource in violation of this chapter is expressly declared to be a nuisance and shall be abated by restoring or reconstructing the property to its original condition prior to the violation. Any person or entity who demolishes, or substantially alters or causes substantial alteration or demolition of, a structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for a civil penalty pursuant to subsection (D) of this section and/or Chapter 1.17, as well as any other criminal or civil remedies authorized by this Code or other law. 
C.  Alteration or demolition of an historical resource in violation of this chapter shall authorize the city to issue a temporary moratorium for the development of the subject property for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) months from the date the city becomes aware of the alteration or demolition. The purpose of the moratorium is to provide the city an opportunity to study and determine appropriate mitigation measures for the alteration or removal of the historic structure, and to ensure measures are incorporated into any future development plans and approvals for the subject property. Mitigation measures as determined by the city historic preservation officer shall be imposed as conditions of any subsequent permit for development of the subject property. 
D.  In the case of demolition, the civil penalty authorized by subsection (B) of this section shall be equal to one-half the assessed value of the historical resource prior to the demolition. In the case of alteration, the civil penalty authorized by subsection (B) of this section shall be equal to one-half the cost of restoration of the altered portion of the historical resource. Building and construction permits and/or a certificate of occupancy may not be issued for additional work on the property (other than work pursuant to Section 17.36.230) until the penalty has been paid in full to the city. 
E.  In addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity, the city attorney may maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain a violation, or cause, where possible, the complete or partial restoration, reconstruction or replacement of any structure demolished, partially demolished, altered or partially altered in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.36.250 - Historic preservation guidelines. 
In order to ensure that Calabasas' historic buildings are preserved for future generations, the historic preservation commission may recommend guidelines for adoption by the council to assist owners in the preservation, rehabilitation, protection and maintenance of historic buildings. Any guidelines shall be consistent with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with guidelines for preserving, rehabilitating, restoring and reconstructing historic buildings. 
A.  Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties. Any proposed work on an historical resource should follow the intent of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with guidelines for preserving, rehabilitating, restoring and reconstructing historic buildings. These standards were developed by the federal government to set up very broad, general philosophical principles regarding work done to historic properties. Any proposed work should follow these general principles while meeting any guidelines adopted by the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.38 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION 
 
17.38.010 - Purpose. 
In accordance with federal and state law, it is the policy of the city to provide disabled persons reasonable accommodations as necessary to ensure equal access to their dwelling unit and/or place of business. The purpose of this section is to provide a clear and defined process for disabled persons to make reasonable accommodation requests from existing standards in the city's development code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.38.020 - Application—General. 
Any disabled person, or his or her representative, may request a reasonable accommodation from the application of a land use or zoning regulation, policy, practice or procedure when necessary to afford such persons equal opportunity to use and enjoy their dwelling unit or place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.38.030 - Application—Contents. 
A.  Application. A disabled person or his/her representative who desires to request a reasonable accommodation may file an application with the department. A reasonable accommodation may be approved only for the benefit of one or more individuals with a disability. An application for a reasonable accommodation from a land use or zoning regulation, policy, or practice shall be made on a form provided by the department. No fee will be required for a request for reasonable accommodation, but if the project requires another discretionary permit and environmental review, then the prescribed fee shall be paid for that discretionary permit and environmental review. 
B.  If a project for which a reasonable accommodation request is made requires another discretionary approval, then the applicant may file the reasonable accommodation request together with the application for the other discretionary approval. The processing procedures of the non-reasonable accommodation discretionary approval shall govern the joint processing of both the reasonable accommodation request and the non-reasonable accommodation discretionary permit. 
C.  Application Contents. In addition to the materials required under other applicable provisions of this Code, the applicant is required to submit the following information with the application: 
1.  The applicant's name, address, and telephone number. 
2.  If not the applicant, the identity of the disabled person(s), and the applicant's relation to the disabled person(s). 
3.  Identification and description of the disability which is the basis for the request for reasonable accommodation. The applicant shall include current written certification of the disability and a description of the disability's effects on the individual's medical, physical or mental limitations. 
4.  The specific exception or modification to this development code, or other land use or development regulation, policy, or practice requested by the applicant. 
5.  Documentation that the specific exception or modification requested by the applicant is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy his or her residence or business. Where appropriate, the applicant shall include a summary of any alternatives to the reasonable accommodation 
6.  Copies of memoranda, correspondence, pictures, plans, or background information reasonably necessary for the review authority to reach a decision regarding the need for reasonable accommodation. 
7.  Other supportive information deemed necessary by the city to facilitate proper consideration of the request so long as any request for additional information complies with state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.38.040 - Criteria for granting accommodations. 
A reasonable accommodation request will be reviewed in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  Findings. The written decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be based on the following findings, all of which are required for approval: 
1.  The requested accommodation is requested by or on behalf of one or more individuals with a disability protected by federal or state law. 
2.  The requested accommodation is necessary to provide accommodation is requested by or on behalf of one or more individuals with a disability protected by federal or state law. 
3.  The requested accommodation is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy their dwelling or business. 
4.  The requested accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden to the city. 
5.  The requested accommodation will not result in a fundamental alteration of a neighborhood's character or will not substantially undermine any express purpose of the General Plan or any applicable specific plan. 
6.  The requested accommodation will not, under the specific facts of a case, result in a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals or substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
In making these findings, the review authority may approve alternative reasonable accommodations which provide an equivalent level of use and enjoyment. 
B.  Conditions. Any modifications granted for an individual with a disability may, at the discretion of the review authority, be considered as a personal accommodation for the individual applicant and may, at the determination of the review authority, not run with the land. The conditions of approval may, where deemed appropriate, provide for any or all of the following: 
1.  Inspection of the affected property periodically, as specified in the conditions, to verify compliance with this chapter and with any applicable conditions of approval. 
2.  Prior to any transfer of interest in the property, notice to the transferee of the existence of the modification, and the requirement that the transferee apply for a new modification as necessary. Once such transfer takes effect, the originally approved modification shall have no further validity. 
3.  Other necessary conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.38.050 - Review Authority. 
A.  Director's Review. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the director, if no discretionary approval is sought other than the request for reasonable accommodation. 
The director shall issue a written decision on a request for reasonable accommodation within forty-five (45) days of the date of the application and may either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with the required findings set forth in Section 17.38.040. 
If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the director may request further information from the applicant consistent with fair housing laws, specifying in detail the information that is required. In the event that a request for additional information is made, the forty-five-day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the request. 
B.  Concurrent Review. A request for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by the authority reviewing the discretionary land use application. The written determination on whether to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation shall be made by the review authority in compliance with the applicable review procedure for the discretionary review. The written determination to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation shall be made in accordance with Section 17.38.040 of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.38.060 - Discontinuance. 
Unless the review authority determines a reasonable accommodation runs with the land, a reasonable accommodation shall lapse if the rights granted by it are discontinued for one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days. If the person initially occupying a residence or business vacate, the reasonable accommodation shall remain in effect only if the director determines that (i) the modification is physically integrated into a structure and cannot easily be removed or altered to comply with the Municipal Code; (ii) its removal would constitute an unreasonable financial burden; and (iii) the accommodation is necessary to give another disabled individual an equal opportunity to enjoy the dwelling or business. The director may request the applicant or his or her successor-in-interest to the property to provide documentation that subsequent occupants are persons with disabilities. Failure to provide such documentation within ten (10) days of the date of a request by the director shall constitute grounds for discontinuance by the city of a previously approved reasonable accommodation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Article IV. - Subdivisions  
Chapter 17.40 - SUBDIVISION MAP APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
17.40.010 - Title and purpose of article. 
This article is and may be cited as the City of Calabasas subdivision ordinance. The regulations in this article are intended to supplement and implement the California Subdivision Map Act, Sections 66410 et seq. of the California Government Code (hereafter referred to as the Map Act). This article is not intended to replace the Map Act, and must be used in conjunction with it in application preparation, and the review, approval and construction of proposed subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.40.020 - Applicability and exemptions. 
A.  Tentative, and Final or Parcel Map Required. Except as otherwise provided by subsection (B) of this section, any subdivision of land in the city shall require the filing and approval of a tentative map in compliance with Chapter 17.41 and: 
1.  Parcel map: A parcel map (Sections 17.42.100 and following) for a subdivision creating four or fewer parcels, with or without a designated remainder in compliance with Chapter 1, Article 2 of the Map Act; or 
2.  Final map: A final map (Sections 17.42.200 and following) for a subdivision of five or more parcels. 
B.  Exemptions—No Subdivision Approval Required. In compliance with Article 1, Chapter 1 of the Map Act, the following subdivisions do not require the filing or approval of tentative, parcel or final maps. 
1.  Agricultural Leases. Leases of agricultural land for the cultivation of food or fiber, or the grazing or pasturing of livestock. 
2.  Cellular Antenna Facilities. The leasing or licensing of a portion of a parcel, or the granting of an easement, development plan, or similar right on a portion of a parcel, to a telephone corporation as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 234, exclusively for the placement and operation of cellular radio transmission facilities, including but not limited to antenna support structures, microwave dishes, structures to house cellular communications transmission equipment, power sources, and other incidental equipment. 
3.  Cemeteries. Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code. 
4.  Commercial/Industrial Financing or Leases. The financing or leasing of: 
a.  Offices, stores or similar spaces within commercial or industrial buildings; existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel; or 
b.  Any parcel or portion of a parcel, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on the same site when Article II of this development code requires a site plan review or conditional use permit for the project. 
5.  Condominium Conversions. The conversion of: 
a.  A community apartment project or a stock cooperative to condominiums, if the conversion satisfies the requirements of Map Act Sections 66412(g) or 66412(h), respectively; or 
b.  Certain mobilehome parks to condominiums as provided by Map Act Section 66428(b). 
6.  Lot Line Adjustments. A lot line adjustment between four or fewer adjoining parcels processed in compliance with Chapter 17.44. 
7.  Mineral Leases. Mineral, oil or gas leases. 
8.  Public Agency or Utility Conveyances. Any conveyance of land, including a fee interest, an easement, or a license, to a governmental agency, public entity, public utility or a subsidiary of a public utility for rights-of-way. 
9.  Small, Removable Commercial Buildings. Subdivisions of four parcels or less for the construction of removable commercial buildings having a floor area of less than one hundred (100) square feet. 
10.  Residential Financing or Leases. The financing or leasing of: apartments, or similar spaces within apartment buildings, mobilehome parks or trailer parks; or "granny" units or secondary housing units in compliance with Government Code Sections 65852.1 or 65852.2, respectively. 
11.  Separate Assessments. Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  Appeals. Any determination or action in compliance with this article may be appealed in compliance with Chapter 17.74. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.40.030 - Review authority. 
The authority to review and approve tentative maps, parcel and final maps, lot line adjustments, and certificates and conditional certificates of compliance in compliance with this article, is determined by section 17.60.020 and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.40.040 - Exceptions. 
An exception to any of the provisions of this article may be requested by a subdivider in compliance with this section. An exception shall not be used to waive or modify provisions of the Map Act. 
A.  Application. An application for an exception shall be submitted on forms provided by the department together with the required filing fee. The application shall include a description of each standard and requirement for which an exception is requested, together with the reasons why the subdivider believes the exception is justified. 
B.  Filing and Processing. A request for an exception may be filed with the tentative map application to which it applies, or after approval of the tentative map. An exception shall be processed and acted upon in the same manner as the tentative map, concurrently with the tentative map if the exception request was filed at the same time. An exception shall not be considered as tentative map approval and shall not extend the time limits for expiration of the map established by Section 17.41.310. 
C.  Approval of Exception. The commission or council shall not grant an exception unless all the following findings are first made: 
1.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the proposed subdivision, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings; 
2.  The exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions are not due to any action of the subdivider subsequent to the enactment of this development code; 
3.  The exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the vicinity and zoning district and denied to the proposed subdivision; 
4.  Granting the exception will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare nor injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located; and 
5.  The exception will not affect the consistency of the proposed subdivision with the General Plan or any applicable specific plan. 
6.  In granting an exception, the review authority shall impose substantially the same regulations applicable to a tentative map for which the exception is requested and shall impose whatever conditions it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, general welfare and convenience. The review authority shall also require the mitigation of any environmental impacts in compliance with CEQA. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.40.050 - Notice of judicial challenge. 
At least thirty (30) days prior to filing any judicial action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul the decision of the commission or council concerning a tentative, parcel or final map, or any of the proceedings, acts or determinations taken, done or made prior to the decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality or validity of any condition attached thereto, written notice shall be served upon the council detailing the nature of the conduct or action intended to be challenged. This section is not intended to extend or toll in any way the statute of limitations provided in Map Act Section 66499.37. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.41 - TENTATIVE MAP FILING AND PROCESSING 
 
17.41.010 - Tentative map preparation—Application contents. 
Tentative map submittals shall include the application forms, and all information and other materials prepared as required by the tentative map preparation and contents instruction list, provided by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.41.020 - Tentative map filing—Initial processing. 
Tentative map applications shall be submitted to the department for processing, be reviewed for completeness and accuracy, referred to affected agencies, reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and evaluated in a staff report in compliance with Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.41.030 - Development review committee evaluation. 
After completion of the initial processing in compliance with Chapter 17.60, the development review committee shall: 
A.  Review and evaluate each tentative map as to its compliance and consistency with applicable provisions of this development code, the General Plan, applicable specific plan, and the Map Act; and 
B.  Determine the extent to which the proposed subdivision complies with the findings in Section 17.41.100, and recommend to the commission the approval, approval with specified conditions, or disapproval of the tentative map application. 
The applicant shall be provided a copy of the staff report before a meeting of the development review committee to consider a tentative map. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.41.040 - Commission review and decision. 
After review of a tentative map application by the development review committee (Section 17.41.030), the commission shall be responsible for the following: 
A.  Conduct a public hearing on a proposed tentative map, and shall consider the recommendations of the development review committee, and any agency providing comments on the tentative map in compliance with Section 17.60.050(B). The public hearing shall be scheduled and notice provided in compliance with Section 17.41.060; and 
B  Review and evaluate each tentative map as to its compliance and consistency with applicable provisions of this development code, the General Plan, applicable specific plan, and the Map Act. The commission's evaluation shall be based on a staff report (Section 17.60.070) and information provided by an initial study or environmental impact report (Section 17.60.060), and any public testimony and evidence received during the public hearing. 
C.  In compliance with Government Code Section 66452.1, approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative map within fifty (50) days after certification of an environmental impact report or adoption of a negative declaration on the tentative map. This fifty-day time limit may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the commission. 
Approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall be granted only after the commission has first made all findings required by Section 17.41.100. The commission may impose conditions of approval in compliance with Section 17.41.110. 
The director shall report the action of the commission to the council. If the tentative map is conditionally approved, the report shall specify the conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.41.050 - Tentative map public hearings. 
When a public hearing is required by this development code for a tentative map or an appeal of a tentative map decision, the hearing shall be scheduled and conducted in compliance with this section, in addition to public notice being provided in compliance with Chapter 17.78. 
A.  Scheduling of Hearing-Decision. A public hearing on a tentative map or appeal shall be scheduled, and a decision shall be reached, within the following time limits. 
1.  Tentative Map. 
a.  Hearing. A hearing on a tentative map by the commission shall be scheduled pursuant to Section 17.41.040(C). 
b.  Decision on Map. The commission shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map within the time limits set forth in 17.41.040 C. 
2.  Appeals. A hearing on an appeal (Chapter 17.74) shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days after the filing of the appeal, and the council shall reach its decision on the appeal within ten (10) days of the conclusion of the hearing. If there is no regular meeting date within thirty (30) days, the appeal hearing shall be conducted at a special meeting or other meeting as early as possible as after proper notice. 
3.  Distribution of Staff Report. The staff report on the tentative map shall be mailed to the subdivider (and each tenant of the subject property, in the case of a condominium conversion (Section 17.44.310)) at least ten (10) days before any hearing or action on the tentative map by the commission or council. 
4.  Notice of a hearing shall be given to any owner of a mineral right who has recorded a notice of intent to preserve the mineral right pursuant to Section 883.230 of the Civil Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.41.100 - Findings for tentative map approval or disapproval. 
In order to approve a tentative map and conditions of approval, or to disapprove a tentative map, the commission shall first make the findings required by this section. In determining whether to approve a tentative map, the city shall apply only those ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the date the department determined that the application was complete in compliance with Section 17.60.050 except where the city has initiated General Plan, specific plan or development code changes, and provided public notice as required by Map Act Section 66474.2. 
A.  Required Findings for Approval. The review authority may approve a tentative map only when it shall first find that the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement: 
1.  Is consistent with the General Plan, and any applicable specific plan, and 
2.  That none of the findings for disapproval in subsection (D) of this section can be made. The findings shall apply to each proposed parcel as well as the entire subdivision, including any parcel identified as a designated remainder in compliance with Map Act Section 66424.6. 
B.  Supplemental Findings. In addition to the findings required for approval of a tentative map by subsection (A) of this section, the following findings are also required when they are applicable to the specific subdivision proposal: 
1.  It is in the interest of the public health and safety, and it is necessary as a prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area, to require the construction of road improvements within a specified time after recordation of the parcel map, where road improvements are required (see Section 17.46.020); 
2.  Any findings required by Sections 17.44.310 for condominium conversions. 
C.  Findings for Waiver of Parcel Map. If waiver of a parcel map has been requested with the tentative map application, the review authority shall determine whether the findings required by Section 17.42.110 can also be made. 
D.  Findings Requiring Disapproval. A tentative map shall be denied if the review authority makes any of the following findings: 
1.  The proposed subdivision including design and improvements is not consistent with the General Plan or any applicable specific plan; 
2.  The site is not physically suitable for the type or density of the proposed development; 
3.  The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
4.  The design of the subdivision or type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
5.  The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. This finding may not be made if the review authority finds that alternate easements for access or use will be provided, and that they will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This finding shall apply only to easements of record, or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is hereby granted to the review authority to determine that the public at large has acquired easements of access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision; 
6.  The discharge of sewage from the proposed subdivision into the community sewer system would result in violation of existing requirements prescribed by this Municipal Code or the California Regional Water Quality Control Board; or 
7.  The proposed subdivision is not consistent with all applicable provisions of this development code, the Municipal Code, or the Map Act. 
E.  Findings that may Justify Disapproval. A tentative map may be denied if the commission or council (as applicable) makes any of the following findings: 
1.  The tentative map is not in conformity with accepted planning or engineering standards; 
2.  The environmental, public services or facilities costs to city taxpayers outweigh the advantages created by the proposed subdivision; 
3.  The proposed development is not compatible with the character of the neighborhood; 
4.  The proposed development is in an area not desirable for the intensive use proposed; or 
5.  A preliminary soils report or geological hazard report indicates adverse soil or geological conditions and the subdivider has failed to provide sufficient information to the satisfaction of the city engineer, commission or council that the conditions can be corrected in the plan for the development. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.41.110 - Conditions of approval. 
Along with the approval of a tentative map, the adoption of conditions of approval shall occur in compliance with this section, provided that all conditions shall be consistent with the requirements of the Map Act. 
A.  Mandatory Conditions. The review authority shall adopt conditions of approval that will: 
1.  Require that parcels, easements or rights-of-way be provided for streets, water supply and distribution systems, sewage disposal systems, storm drainage facilities, solid waste disposal, and public utilities providing electric, gas and communications services, as may be required to properly serve the subdivision. Easements for public utilities shall be limited to those needed to provide service to present and future development; 
2.  Mitigate or eliminate environmental problems identified through the environmental review process, or require redesign of the subdivision as a prerequisite to the approval of the tentative map; 
3.  Carry out the specific requirements of Chapters 17.46 and 17.48 of this development code; 
4.  Secure compliance with the requirements of this development code and the General Plan; and 
5.  Require that any designated remainder parcels not be subsequently sold unless a certificate or conditional certificate of compliance (Sections 17.44.200 and 17.44.210, respectively) is obtained before recordation of a final or parcel map, or is further subdivided in compliance with this development code. 
B.  Optional Conditions. The review authority may also require as conditions of approval: 
1.  The waiver of direct access rights to any existing or proposed streets; 
2.  The dedication of additional land for bicycle paths, local transit facilities, (including bus turnouts, benches, and shelters), sunlight easements, and school sites, in compliance with Map Act Chapter 4, Article 3; 
3.  The reservation of sites for public facilities, including fire stations, libraries, and other public uses in compliance with Map Act Chapter 4, Article 4; 
4.  Time limits or phasing schedules for the completion of conditions of approval, when deemed appropriate; and/or 
5.  Any other conditions deemed necessary by the review authority to achieve compatibility between the proposed subdivision, its immediate surroundings, and the community, or to achieve consistency with the General Plan, the Municipal Code or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.41.120 - Effective date of tentative map approval. 
The approval of a tentative map shall become effective for the purposes of pursuing recordation, including compliance with conditions of approval, 
On the eleventh day after the decision on a subdivision by the commission unless an appeal to the decision is filed before that time, as set forth in Chapter 17.74. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.41.130 - Changes to approved tentative map or conditions. 
A subdivider may request changes to an approved tentative map or its conditions of approval before recordation of a parcel or final map in compliance with this section. Changes to a parcel or final map after recordation are subject to Section 17.42.420. 
A.  Limitation on Allowed Changes. Changes to a tentative map that may be requested by a subdivider in compliance with this section include major adjustments to the location of proposed lot lines and improvements, and reductions in the number of approved lots (but no increase in the number of approved lots), and any changes to the conditions of approval, consistent with the findings required by subsection (D) of this section. Other changes shall require the filing and processing of a new tentative map. 
B.  Application for Changes. The subdivider shall file an application and filing fee with the department, using the forms furnished by the department, together with the following additional information: 
1.  A statement identifying the tentative map number, the features of the map or particular conditions to be changed and the changes requested, the reasons why the changes are requested, and any facts that justify the changes; and 
2.  Any additional information deemed appropriate by the department. 
C.  Processing. Proposed changes to a tentative map or conditions of approval shall be processed in the same manner as the original tentative map, except as otherwise provided by this section. 
D.  Findings for Approval. The review authority shall not modify the approved tentative map or conditions of approval unless it shall first find that the change is necessary because of one or more of the following circumstances, and that all of the applicable findings for approval required by Section 17.41.100(A) and (B) can still be made: 
1.  There was a material mistake of fact in the deliberations leading to the original approval; 
2.  There has been a change of circumstances related to the original approval; and 
3.  A serious and unforeseen hardship has occurred, not due to any action of the applicant subsequent to the enactment of this development code. 
E.  Effect of Changes on Time Limits. Approved changes to a tentative map or conditions of approval shall not be considered as approval of a new tentative map, and shall not extend the time limits provided by Section 17.41.310. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.41.140 - Completion of subdivision process. 
A.  Compliance with Conditions—Improvement Plans. After approval of a tentative map pursuant to this chapter, the subdivider shall proceed to fulfill the conditions of approval within any time limits specified by the conditions and the expiration of the map and, where applicable, shall prepare, file and receive approval of improvement plans pursuant to Chapter 17.48 before constructing any required improvements. 
B.  Parcel or Final Map Preparation, Filing and Recordation. 
1.  A parcel map for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels shall be prepared, filed, processed and recorded as set forth in Chapter 17.42 to complete the subdivision, unless a parcel map has been waived in compliance with Section 17.42.110. 
2.  A final map for a subdivision of five or more parcels shall be prepared, filed, processed and recorded as set forth in Chapter 17.42 to complete the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.41.200 - Vesting tentative map. 
This section establishes procedures to implement the vesting tentative map requirements of state law, Sections 66498.1 et seq. of the Map Act. 
A.  Applicability. Whenever this development code requires that a tentative map be filed, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, provided that the vesting tentative map is prepared, filed and processed in compliance with this section. 
1.  A vesting tentative map may be filed for either residential, commercial or industrial developments. 
2.  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by this section, the filing of a vesting tentative map is not a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction; however, nothing in this section shall be construed to eliminate the need for a subdivider to obtain subdivision approval in compliance with the other applicable provisions of this development code or the Municipal Code. 
B.  Procedures for Processing a Vesting Tentative Map. A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and, shall be processed in the same manner as set forth by this chapter as a tentative map, except as follows. 
1.  Application Content. The vesting tentative map shall include the following information in addition to that required by Section 17.41.010: 
a.  Title. The vesting tentative map shall be prepared with the words "vesting tentative map" printed conspicuously on its face; and 
b.  Intended Development. The vesting tentative map application shall include accurately drawn, preliminary floor plans and architectural elevations for all buildings and structures intended to be constructed on the property after subdivision. 
2.  Findings for Approval. The approval of a vesting tentative map shall not be granted unless the review authority first determines that the intended development of the subdivision is consistent with the zoning regulations applicable to the property at the time of filing, in addition to all other findings required for tentative map approval by Section 17.41.100. 
C.  Expiration of Vesting Tentative Map. An approved vesting tentative map shall be subject to the same time limits for expiration as are established for tentative maps by Sections 17.41.300 et seq. 
D.  Changes to Approved Map or Conditions. The subdivider may apply for an amendment to the vesting tentative map or conditions of approval at any time before the expiration of the vesting tentative map. An amendment request shall be considered and processed as a new application, in compliance with this section. 
E.  Development Rights Vested. 
1.  The approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development of the subdivided lots in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards (excluding fees) described in Section 66474.2 of the Map Act. 
2.  If Map Act Section 66474.2 is repealed, approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the map is approved. 
3.  Subsequent land use permits, building permits, extensions of time or other entitlements filed on parcels created by the subdivision may be conditioned or denied if: 
a.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate area in a condition dangerous to health or safety; or 
b.  The condition or disapproval is required in order to comply with state or federal law. 
4.  Fees charged for building or land use permits, filed after the approval of a vesting tentative map shall be as required at the time the subsequent permit applications are filed, including any related utility or development impact fees (e.g., sewer/water hookup fees, traffic mitigation fees). Application contents shall be as required by ordinance requirements in effect at the time the subsequent application is filed. 
F.  Duration of Vested Rights. The development rights vested by this section shall expire if a parcel map or final map is not approved before the expiration of the vesting tentative map in compliance with Sections 17.41.300 et seq. If the parcel or final map is approved and recorded, the development rights shall be vested for the following periods of time. 
1.  An initial time period of twenty-four (24) months from the date of recordation of the parcel or final map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. 
2.  The initial twenty-four (24) months shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if processing exceeds thirty (30) days from the date the application is accepted for processing as complete. 
3.  The subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial twenty-four (24) months expires. Application for an extension shall be submitted to the department and shall be accompanied by the required fee. The council shall approve or deny any request for extension. 
4.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (F)(1) and (F)(2) above, the vested rights shall continue until the expiration of the building permit, or any extension of that permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.41.300 - Tentative map time limits. 
An approved tentative map shall be subject to the time limits for expiration and procedures for extension in compliance with Sections 17.41.310 through 17.41.330. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.41.310 - Expiration of approved tentative map. 
The expiration date of a tentative map is determined by Map Act Sections 66452.6, 66452.11 and 66463.5. An approved tentative map or vesting tentative map is valid for twenty-four (24) months after its effective date (Section 17.41.120). At the end of that time, the approval shall expire and become void unless: 
A.  A parcel or final map, and related bonds and improvement agreements, have been filed with the city engineer in compliance with Chapter 17.42; or 
B.  An extension of time has occurred in compliance with Section 17.41.320. 
A tentative map approval shall be deemed to have expired if a parcel or final map has not been recorded within the time limits established by this section or within an extension of time approved in compliance with Section 17.41.320. Expiration of an approved tentative map or vesting tentative map shall terminate all proceedings. The application shall not be reactivated unless a new subdivision application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.41.320 - Extensions of time for tentative maps. 
When a subdivision has not been completed through the recording of a parcel or final map within the time limits set by Section 17.41.310, time extensions may be granted in compliance with this section. Extension requests shall be in writing and shall be filed with the department on or before the date of expiration of the approval or previous extension, together with the required filing fee. 
A.  Tentative Maps. The commission may grant a maximum of three, one-year extensions to the initial time limit only after finding that: 
1.  There have been no changes to the provisions of the General Plan, any specific plan, or this development code applicable to the project since the approval of the tentative map; 
2.  There have been no changes in the character of the site or its surroundings that affect how the policies of the General Plan or other standards of this development code apply to the project; and 
3.  There have been no changes to the capacities of community resources, including but not limited to water supply, sewage treatment or disposal facilities, roads or schools so that there is no longer sufficient remaining capacity to serve the project. 
B.  Tentative Maps with Multiple Final Maps. Where a subdivider is required to expend more on improvements than the amount, including any annual increase, specified in Map Act Section 66452.6 and multiple final maps are filed covering portions of a single approved tentative map, each filing of a final map shall extend the expiration of the tentative map by an additional thirty-six (36) months from the date of its expiration, or the date of the previously filed final map, whichever is later. Provided that the total of all extensions shall not extend the approval of the tentative map more than ten (10) years from its approval. 
C.  Vesting Tentative Maps. The commission may grant a maximum of three, one-year extensions to the initial time limit pursuant subsection (A) of this section. Any rights conferred by Section 17.41.200 shall expire if a final map is not approved and recorded before the expiration of the vesting tentative map. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.41.330 - Applications deemed approved. 
Any subdivision application deemed approved in compliance with Section 65956 of the Government Code or Map Act Sections 66452 et seq., shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this development code, which shall be satisfied by the subdivider before any building permits or other land use entitlements are issued. Parcel or final maps filed for record after the automatic approval of the tentative map therefore shall remain subject to all the mandatory requirements of this development code and the Map Act, including but not limited to Map Act Sections 66473, 66473.5 and 66474. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.42 - PARCEL MAPS AND FINAL MAPS 
 
17.42.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes requirements for the preparation, filing, approval and recordation of parcel and final maps, consistent with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.42.100 - Parcel maps. 
As required by Sections 17.40.020 and 17.41.140 a parcel map shall be filed and approved to complete the subdivision process for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels, except when the requirement for a parcel map is waived as set forth in Section 17.42.110. A parcel map shall be prepared, filed and processed as set forth in Sections 17.42.120 through 17.42.140. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.42.110 - Waiver of parcel maps. 
A subdivider may request waiver of a parcel map, and the commission may grant the waiver in compliance with this section. 
A.  When Waiver is Allowed. Waiver of a parcel map may be requested by a subdivider and granted by the commission for a subdivision that results in the creation of only two parcels, and the boundaries of the original parcel have been previously surveyed and a map recorded and are certain as to location. 
B.  Application Processing and Approval. A request for waiver of parcel map shall be submitted with the tentative map application, together with the required filing fee. The waiver request shall be processed and acted upon concurrently with the tentative map application. The commission may grant a requested waiver if: 
1.  The proposed tentative map satisfies all findings required for approval by Section 17.41.100; and 
2.  The proposed subdivision complies with all applicable requirements of the Map Act and this development code as to lot area, improvement and design, drainage, flood control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability and environmental protection. 
C.  Expiration of Waiver. An approved waiver of parcel map shall be subject to the same time limits and opportunities for extension of time as the accompanying tentative map, in compliance with Sections 17.41.310 and 17.41.320 and subsection (D) of this section. 
D.  Completion of Subdivision. A subdivision for which a parcel map has been waived shall be completed by the subdivider satisfying all conditions of approval, and by then filing and obtaining approval of a certificate of completion in compliance with this section. 
1.  Preparation and Filing of Certificate. The subdivider shall submit an application for a certificate of completion to the city engineer for review and approval, including the following information: 
a.  A diagram or exhibit illustrating the configuration and dimensions of the parcels described in the legal descriptions submitted with the certificate of completion; 
b.  A statement signed by the subdivider under penalty of perjury that no change in the ownership of the subject property has occurred since the submittal of the title report with the tentative map application. If a change in ownership has occurred, the sub divider shall submit a new title report issued within sixty (60) days before the filing of the certificate of completion application; 
c.  A statement by a registered civil engineer, licensed land surveyor, or title company verifying that any required access easements extend to a publicly maintained road; 
d.  A certificate of completion in the form required by the city engineer, prepared for recording, including: 
i.  A list of all requirements imposed as conditions of approval of the tentative map, including but not limited to any requirements for the construction of offsite and onsite improvements, 
ii.  A statement signed by the owner under penalty of perjury attesting that all of the conditions of approval of the tentative map have been met or provided for under the terms of an acceptable subdivision agreement secured by appropriate surety as prescribed by the Map Act, and 
iii.  A legal description of each parcel created in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map, prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor; 
e.  Any required recordation fees. 
2.  Review and Approval of Certificate. The city engineer shall review, approve or disapprove, and complete the processing of a certificate of completion by examining the materials submitted and performing other investigations as necessary to ensure that: 
a.  All record title owners have consented to the subdivision; 
b.  The certificate of completion accurately describes the conditions of approval, and that the conditions of approval have been satisfactorily completed; and 
c.  The legal descriptions on the certificate are accurate, and are in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map. 
d.  If the city engineer is satisfied that the certificate of completion and materials submitted with it comply with the above requirements, the city engineer shall place an endorsed approval upon the face of the certificate and shall file it with the county recorder. Upon recording, the subdivision shall be deemed completed, and the parcels created by the subdivision may be conveyed or otherwise transferred. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.42.120 - Parcel map—Form and content. 
A parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified, registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the state of California. Parcel map submittals shall include the application forms, and all information and other materials prepared as required by the parcel and final map preparation and contents instruction list, provided by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.42.130 - Parcel map—Filing and processing. 
A.  Filing with the City Engineer. The parcel map, together with all data, information and materials required by Section 17.42.120 shall be submitted to the city engineer. The parcel map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of this development code and the Map Act. 
B.  Review of Parcel Map. The city engineer shall: 
1.  Determine whether all applicable provisions of this development code and the Map Act have been complied with, that the map is technically correct, and that it is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map; and 
2.  Obtain verification from the department that the parcel map conforms to the approved tentative map and that any conditions of approval for which that office is responsible have been completed. 
If the parcel map does not conform as required above, the subdivider shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary changes and resubmit the parcel map, together with all required data. The fifty-day time limit shall not include any time needed by the subdivider to make any necessary changes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.42.140 - Parcel map approval. 
After determining that the parcel map is in compliance and is technically correct in compliance with Section 17.42.130, the city engineer shall approve the parcel map and forward the map to the county recorder for filing in compliance with Section 66450 of the Map Act, except as follows. 
A.  Map with Dedications. If a dedication or offer of dedication is required on the parcel map, the city engineer shall forward the parcel map to the council. The map shall then be placed on the council consent agenda for final acceptance. After action by the council, the city engineer shall transmit the parcel map to the county recorder for filing. 
B.  Map with Incomplete Improvements. If improvements required by this development code, conditions of approval or by law have not been completed, the map shall not be approved by the city engineer unless the council first authorizes deferred completion of the improvements by approving an agreement with the subdivider for posting security to guarantee the improvements, in compliance with Section 17.48.040. 
C.  Effect of Recorded Map. When a properly endorsed parcel map has been filed for record, the subdivision shall be deemed complete, and the new parcels may be conveyed or otherwise transferred. The recordation of the map shall have the effect of eliminating any lot lines that existed within the boundaries of the subdivision before approval of the tentative map. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.42.200 - Final maps. 
As required by Section 17.40.020, a final map shall be filed and approved to complete the subdivision process for a subdivision of five or more parcels. A final map shall be prepared, filed and processed as set forth in Sections 17.42.210 through 17.42.230. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.42.210 - Final map—Form and content. 
A final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the state of California. Final map submittals shall include all information and other materials prepared as required by the parcel and final map preparation and contents instruction list, provided by the department. A final map submittal shall also include a digital copy of the final map, prepared using computer software and standards specified by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.42.220 - Final map—Filing and processing. 
A.  Filing with City Engineer. The final map, together with all data, information and materials required by Section 17.42.210 shall be submitted to the city engineer. The final map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of this development code and the Map Act. 
B.  Review of Final Map. The city engineer shall review the final map and all accompanying materials, and shall: 
1.  Determine whether all applicable provisions of this development code and the Map Act have been complied with, that the map is technically correct, and that it is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map; and 
2.  Obtain verification from the department that the final map conforms to the approved tentative map and that any conditions of approval for which that office is responsible have been completed. 
If the final map does not conform as required above, the subdivider shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary changes and resubmit the parcel map, together with all required data. 
C.  Multiple Final Maps. The subdivider may file multiple final maps on the approved tentative map if the subdivider either included a statement of intention with the tentative map or, if after the filing of the tentative map, the director approved the request. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.42.230 - Final map approval. 
After determining that the final map is technically correct and in compliance with Section 17.42.210, the city engineer shall execute the city engineer's certificate on the map in compliance with Map Act Section 66442, and forward the final map to the council for action. 
A.  Review and Approval by Council. The council shall approve or disapprove the final map at its next regular meeting after the city clerk receives the map. 
1.  Criteria for Approval. The council shall approve the final map if it conforms to all the requirements of the Map Act, all provisions of this development code that were applicable at the time that the tentative map was approved, and is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map. 
2.  Waiver of Errors. The council may approve a final map that fails to meet any of the requirements of this development code or the Map Act applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map, when the council finds that the failure of the map is a technical or inadvertent error which, in the determination of the council does not materially affect the validity of the map. 
3.  Approval by Inaction. If the council does not approve or disapprove the map within the prescribed time or any authorized extension, and the map conforms to all applicable requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved, and the city clerk shall certify its approval on the map. 
B.  Map with Dedications. If a dedication or offer of dedication is required on the final map, the council shall accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject with or without prejudice any or all offers of dedication, at the same time as it takes action to approve the final map. 
C.  Map with Incomplete Improvements. If improvements required by this development code, conditions of approval or by law have not been completed at the time of approval of the final map, the council shall require the subdivider to enter into an agreement with the city as specified in Map Act Section 66462, and Section 17.48.040 as a condition precedent to the approval of the final map. 
D.  Transmittal to Recorder. After action by the council, and after the required signatures and seals have been affixed, the city clerk shall transmit the final map to the county recorder for filing, in compliance with Section 17.42.400. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.42.300 - Supplemental information sheets. 
In addition to the information required to be included in parcel maps and final maps (Sections 17.42.120 and 17.42.210, respectively), additional information may be required to be submitted and recorded simultaneously with a final map as required by this section. 
A.  Preparation and Form. The additional information required by this section shall be presented in the form of additional map sheets, unless the director determines that the type of information required would be more clearly and understandably presented in the form of a report or other document. The additional map sheet or sheets shall be prepared in the same manner and in substantially the same form as required for parcel maps by Section 17.42.120. 
B.  Content of Information Sheets. Supplemental information sheets shall contain the following statements and information: 
1.  Title. A title, including the number assigned to the accompanying parcel or final map by the city engineer, the words "Supplemental Information Sheet;" 
2.  Explanatory Statement. A statement following the title that the supplemental information sheet is recorded along with the subject parcel or final map, and that the additional information being recorded with the parcel or final map is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of filing, and is not intended to affect record title interest; 
3.  Location Map. A location map, at a scale not to exceed one inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet. The map shall indicate the location of the subdivision within the city; 
4.  Areas Subject to Flooding. Identification of all lands within the subdivision subject to periodic inundation by water; 
5.  Soils or Geologic Hazards Reports. When a soils report or geological hazard report has been prepared, the existence of the report shall be noted on the information sheet, together with the date of the report and the name of the engineer making the report; and 
6.  Information Required by Conditions of Approval. Any information required by the reviewing authority to be included on the supplemental information sheet(s) because of its importance to potential successors in interest to the property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.42.400 - Recordation of maps. 
A.  At the time of filing of a parcel or final map with the county recorder, the subdivider shall present to the county recorder evidence that, at the time of filing the map, the parties consenting to the filing are all parties having vested fee interest in the property being subdivided and are parties required to sign the certificate described in Map Act Section 66436. 
B.  The county recorder will review and act upon parcel and final maps filed with that office in the manner set forth in Article 6, Chapter 3 of the Map Act and other applicable provisions of state law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.42.410 - Effect of recorded map. 
When a properly endorsed final map has been filed for record, the subdivision or reversion to acreage shall be deemed complete, and the new parcels may be conveyed or otherwise transferred. The recordation of the map shall have the effect of eliminating any lot lines that existed within the boundaries of the subdivision before approval of the tentative map. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.42.420 - Amendments to recorded maps. 
A recorded parcel or final map shall be modified to correct errors in the recorded map or to change characteristics of the approved subdivision only as set forth in this section. 
A.  Corrections. In the event that errors in a parcel or final map are discovered after recordation, or that other corrections are necessary, the corrections may be accomplished by either the filing of a certificate of correction or an amending map, in compliance with Article 7, Chapter 3 of the Map Act. For the purposes of this section, "errors" include errors in course or distance (but not changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the parcel or final map), omission of any course or distance, errors in legal descriptions, or any other map error or omission as approved by the city engineer that does not affect any property right, including but not limited to lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent record maps. Other corrections may include indicating monuments set by engineers or surveyors other than the one that was responsible for setting monuments, or showing the proper character or location of any monument that was incorrectly shown, or that has been changed. 
B.  Changes to Approved Subdivision. In the event that a subdivider wishes to change the characteristics of an approved subdivision, including but not limited to the number or configuration of parcels, location of streets or easements, or the nature of required improvements, the construction of which has been deferred through the approval of an agreement in compliance with Section 17.48.040, a new tentative and parcel or final map shall be filed and approved as required by Section 17.40.020. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.44 - ADJUSTMENTS, MERGERS, CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE AND CONDOMINIUMS 
 
17.44.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes requirements for special-purpose procedures related to subdivisions, including lot line adjustments, lot mergers, certificates of compliance, conditional certificates of compliance, condominiums and condominium conversions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.44.100 - Lot line adjustment. 
A.  In compliance with Map Act Section 66412(d), the lot line adjustment procedure is for the purpose of relocating lot lines between two or more existing adjacent parcels, where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel and where no more parcels are created than originally existed. A lot line adjustment shall be processed in compliance with Sections 17.44.110 through 17.44.130. 
B.  Lots combined by encumbrances or encroachments of existing structures shall be considered a single original parcel for purposes of an adjustment in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.44.110 - Adjustment application and processing. 
A lot line adjustment application shall be prepared, filed and processed in compliance with this section. 
A.  Application Content. A lot line adjustment application shall include all information and other materials prepared as required by the lot line adjustment preparation and contents instruction list, provided by the department. 
B.  Processing. 
1.  Lot line adjustment applications shall be submitted to the department and shall be processed according to the procedures specified by Chapter 17.60. 
2.  The director shall schedule the lot line adjustment for review by the development review committee. The committee shall review the proposed adjustment for compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and will recommend that the director approve or disapprove the proposed adjustment in compliance with Section 17.44.120. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.44.120 - Approval or disapproval of adjustment. 
The director may approve, conditionally approve or deny the lot line adjustment as set forth in this section. Decisions made by the director may be appealed to the commission as set forth in Chapter 17.74. 
A.  The director shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 17.78 (Public Hearings) for lot line adjustments involving land area of more than five acres in size or parcels with an average slope of twenty (20) percent or more. 
B.  Required Findings. The director shall deny a proposed lot line adjustment if it finds any of the following: 
1.  The lot line adjustment does not maintain a position with respect to General Plan or specific plan consistency, parcel design, minimum lot area, environmental quality, and other standards as specified in this development code and other applicable Municipal Code and state law provisions relating to real property divisions, which is equal to or better than the position of the existing lots before adjustment; 
2.  The adjustment will have the effect of creating a greater number of parcels than are buildable in compliance with applicable provisions of this development code than exist before adjustment; 
3.  Any parcel resulting from the adjustment will conflict with any applicable regulations of this development code; or 
4.  The adjustment will result in an increase in the number of nonconforming parcels. 
An adjustment for which any of the above findings are made may instead be resubmitted as a subdivision in compliance with Section 17.40.020. 
C.  Conditions of Approval. In approving a lot line adjustment, the director shall adopt conditions as necessary to conform to the requirements of this development code or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.44.130 - Completion of adjustment. 
Within twenty-four (24) months after approval of a lot line adjustment, the adjustment process shall be completed as set forth in this section through the recordation of a deed or record of survey, after all conditions of approval have been satisfied. 
A.  Completion by Deed. A lot line adjustment shall not be considered legally completed until either a grant deed or a quit claim deed signed by the record owners has been recorded. The applicant shall submit deeds to the city engineer for review and approval as set forth in subsection C. of this section before recordation of the grant deed or quit claim deed. The legal descriptions provided in the deeds shall be prepared by a qualified registered civil engineer, or a licensed land surveyor licensed or registered in California. 
B.  Completion by Record of Survey. If required by Section 8762 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code, a lot line adjustment shall not be considered legally completed until a record of survey has been checked by the city engineer and sent to the county recorder for recordation. Where not required, a lot line adjustment may also be completed by record of survey in compliance with this subsection at the option of the applicant. 
C.  Review and Approval by City Engineer. The city engineer shall: 
1.  Examine the deeds to ensure that all record title owners have consented to the adjustment; 
2.  Verify that all conditions of approval have been satisfactorily completed and that the deeds are in substantial compliance with the lot line adjustment as approved by the development review committee; 
3.  If satisfied that the deeds comply with the above requirements, place an endorsed approval upon the deeds; and 
4.  After approval of the legal descriptions, assemble the deeds and return them to the applicant for recordation. 
D.  Expiration. The approval of a lot line adjustment shall expire and become void if the adjustment has not been completed as required by this section within twenty-four (24) months of approval. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.44.140 - Lot mergers. 
In compliance with Government Code Section 66451.10 et seq. this section provides a procedure for owner-initiated merger of contiguous parcels in common ownership. The procedure set forth in this section shall not apply when an entire subdivision is being reverted to acreage. This procedure cannot modify or eliminate improvements required as a condition of a subdivision approval. Any voluntary merger that does not satisfy all the requirements of this section can be processed by a reversion to acreage or other appropriate procedure as determined by the city engineer. 
A.  Requirements for Merger. The requirements of a voluntary merger pursuant to this section shall be limited to the following: 
1.  The parcels to be merged shall be existing legal lots that are contiguous to one another and are under common ownership. 
2.  Except as hereinafter provided, a parcel map shall be required and shall be recorded on approval of the merger. The director, in his or her sole discretion, shall have the authority to allow the recording of a "Certificate of Lot Merger," in a form acceptable to him or her, in lieu of a parcel map. 
3.  No building permit shall be issued for any addition to, rebuild or repair of any building or structure that crosses a property line until a lot merger (or lot line adjustment, if applicable) has been completed. Projects limited to interior remodeling, including electrical, plumbing or mechanical work, or combinations thereof, shall be exempt from this requirement. In addition, required ancillary improvements (new or existing) serving the building or structure, including septic systems and required parking facilities, must be entirely on the same lot as the structure for such building permit to be issued. 
B.  Merger Application and Processing. A lot merger application shall be prepared, filed and processed in compliance with this section. 
1.  Application. The applicant shall submit a completed application form prescribed by the department, the required processing fee as determined by resolution of the council, a tentative map, and any other information deemed necessary by the city engineer in order to process the application. 
2.  Processing. 
a.  Lot merger applications shall be submitted to the department and shall be processed according to the procedures specified by Chapter 17.60. 
b.  The director shall schedule the lot merger for review by the development review committee. The committee shall review the proposed merger for compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and will recommend that the director approve or disapprove the proposed merger in compliance with Section 17.44.145. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.44.145 - Approval or disapproval of merger. 
The director may approve, conditionally approve or deny the lot merger as set forth in this section. Decisions made by the director may be appealed to the commission as set forth in Chapter 17.74. 
A.  Required Findings. 
1.  The lot merger is consistent with the Subdivision Map Act provisions. 
2.  The lots to be merged at the time of merger are under common ownership. 
3.  The lots as merged will not be deprived of legal access as a result of the merger and access to the adjoining lots will not be restricted by the merger. 
4.  Lot mergers may only be approved provided that dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the merger are unnecessary for present or future public use. 
5.  Lot mergers may only be approved provided that dedications or offers of dedication which are necessary for present or future public use are reserved in the merger. 
B.  Conditions of Approval. In approving a lot merger, the director shall adopt conditions as necessary to conform to the requirements of this development code or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements. 
C.  Duration of Approval. Approval of a merger shall be valid for a period of two years from the date approval is given. During this period any and all conditions of approval shall be fulfilled and the deed and parcel map shall be recorded. Such period may be extended by approval of the director for up to an additional one year. Requests for an extension of time shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount prescribed by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.44.200 - Certificates of compliance. 
A.  Certificate of compliance applications are filed to establish a legal record where the city officially recognizes an existing parcel that was not created by approved subdivision map as a legal lot. A conditional certificate of compliance (Section 17.44.210), is used to validate a parcel where the property was not divided legally. Section 66499.35 of the Map Act makes approval of certificates mandatory. Any person owning real property, or a vendee of that person in compliance with a contract of sale of the property, may request a certificate of compliance. The preparation, filing and processing of certificate applications shall occur as set forth in this section. 
B.  Application. A certificate of compliance application shall include the form provided by the department, the required filing fee, and a chain of title, consisting of copies of all deeds beginning prior to the division and thereafter, unless the parcels were created through a recorded subdivision map. 
C.  Review and Approval. The department shall review all available information and make a determination whether the real property was divided in accordance with the Map Act, this development code, and other applicable provisions of this Code. Upon making the determination, the department shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed with the county recorder. In the event that the department determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of the Map Act or this development code, the application shall instead be processed as a conditional certificate of compliance (Section 17.44.210). 
D.  Form of Certificate. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division complies with the provisions of the Map Act and this development code. 
E.  Effective Date of Certificate. A certificate of compliance shall not become final until the document has been recorded by the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.44.210 - Conditional certificates of compliance. 
A conditional certificate of compliance is used to validate a parcel that was not legally divided. If the current owners are the original dividers, conditions may be based on current standards. The preparation, filing and processing of a conditional certificate of compliance application shall occur as set forth in this section. 
A.  Application. An application for a conditional certificate of compliance shall be prepared and include the same materials as a certificate of compliance (Section 17.44.200). 
B.  Review and Approval. The processing, review and approval of the application shall occur as set forth in this section. 
1.  Staff Report for the Development Review Committee. The department shall prepare a staff report that: 
a.  Describes the history of the land division; 
b.  Determines whether the property was legally divided, as set forth in Section 17.44.200(B); 
c.  References provisions of state law and city (or earlier county) ordinances applicable to the subdivision at the time the division in question occurred; and 
d.  Recommends Appropriate Conditions of Approval. 
2.  Review by Development Review Committee. The director shall schedule the conditional certificate of compliance for review by the development review committee. Upon making a determination that the real property does not comply with the provisions of the Map Act or this development code, the director, upon recommendation of the development review committee, shall grant a conditional certificate of compliance, imposing conditions in compliance with subsection C of this section. 
C.  Conditions of Approval. If the owners of the property for which a certificate is requested are the original subdividers, the director may impose any conditions that would be applicable to a current subdivision, in compliance with the Map Act and this development code, regardless of when the property was divided. If the owners had no responsibility for the subdivision that created the parcel, the director may only impose conditions that would have been applicable at the time the property was illegally divided. 
D.  Appeal. The conditions imposed by the director may be appealed to the commission as set forth in Chapter 17.74. 
E.  Completion of Process. Following expiration of the ten-day appeal period after the director has made his or her determination and imposed conditions, the department shall file a conditional certificate of compliance with the county recorder. The certificate shall identify the property, and serve as notice to the property owner or vendee who applied for the certificate, a grantee of the owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that the fulfillment and implementation of the conditions shall be required before subsequent issuance of a permit or other approval for the development of the property. 
F.  Effective Date of Certificate. A conditional certificate of compliance shall not become effective until the document has been recorded by the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.44.300 - Condominiums. 
A tentative map for a condominium or other common interest development (including a community apartment project, planned development or stock cooperative, in compliance with California Civil Code Section 1351), shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and shall be processed, approved or disapproved in the same manner in compliance with Chapter 17.41 for tentative maps. Chapter 17.42 determines whether a parcel or final map must also be filed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.44.310 - Condominium conversions. 
A condominium conversion is the conversion of real property to a common interest development as defined by Section 1351 of the California Civil Code. City policies on condominium conversion are in the Housing Improvement Program of the General Plan. A conversion shall require the approval of a tentative map, and parcel or final map, except where a parcel map, or tentative and final map are waived in compliance with Map Act Sections 66428(b) or 66428.1, for the conversion of a mobilehome park. If a parcel map is waived, a tentative map shall still be required. 
A tentative map for a condominium conversion shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and shall be processed, approved or disapproved in the same manner as set forth in Chapter 17.41 with the following exceptions. 
A.  Application Contents. Condominium conversion applications shall include the same information and materials as tentative map applications, except for conversions of residential projects, which shall also include the following information and materials. 
1.  Tentative Map. The tentative map for a condominium, community apartment project, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative need not show the buildings or the manner in which the airspace above the property shown on the map are to be divided. However, the applicant shall provide an illustration of how division will occur to enable verification of the accuracy of the legal descriptions on deeds for the transfer of ownership of the units. 
2.  Public notice materials: stamped, Number ten envelopes addressed to each tenant of the property being converted. 
3.  Verification of Stock Cooperative Vote. If the development being converted to a condominium is a stock cooperative, the application shall also include verification of the vote required by Map Act Section 66452.10. 
4.  Relocation assistance program: a program proposed by the applicant that will assist tenants displaced through the conversion in relocating to equivalent or better housing, in compliance with the General Plan. 
5.  Vacancy rate assessment: an assessment of the vacancy rate in multifamily housing within the city. 
6.  Mobilehome Park Conversion Impact Report. If the development being converted to a condominium is a mobilehome park, the application shall also include the report required by Map Act 66427.4. 
B.  Staff Report. The staff report on the tentative map for the condominium conversion (Section 17.60.070) shall be provided to the subdivider and each tenant of the subject property at least ten (10) days before any hearing or action on the tentative map by the review authority. 
C.  Public Notice. The following notice shall be provided in addition to that required by Chapter 17.78: 
1.  Tenant Notice. The subdivider shall give notice to all existing or prospective tenants as set forth in Map Act Sections 66452.8 and 66452.9, and shall provide the department satisfactory proof that the notice was given; and 
2.  Public Hearing Notice. Notice of the public hearing(s) on the tentative map shall be provided to all tenants of the subject property, as required by Map Act Section 66451.3. 
D.  Approval of Conversion—Required Findings. 
1.  Time Limit—Stock Cooperatives. The approval or disapproval of the conversion of an existing building to a stock cooperative shall occur within one hundred twenty (120) days of the application being found complete in compliance with Section 17.60.050. The one hundred twenty (120) day time limit may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the city. 
2.  Conversion Findings—Residential Projects. Approval of a tentative or final map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of residential real property into a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative shall not be granted unless the findings set forth in Map Act Section 66427.1 are first made. 
3.  Limitation on Conversions. In compliance with the General Plan, no condominium conversion shall be approved while the vacancy rate within the city for multifamily housing is less than four percent. 
4.  Completion of Conversion. The filing, approval and recordation of a parcel map or final map in compliance with Chapter 17.42 shall be required to complete the subdivision process, except where a parcel map, or tentative and final map are waived for the conversion of a mobilehome park in compliance with Map Act Section 66428(b). 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.46 - Subdivision Design and Improvement 
 
17.46.010 - Purpose and applicability of chapter. 
A.  Purpose. This chapter establishes standards for the design and layout of subdivisions, and the design, construction or installation of public improvements within subdivisions. The purpose of these standards is to ensure, through careful site evaluation and design, the creation of new parcels that are compatible with existing neighborhoods, the natural environment, the health and safety of city residents, and are consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan. 
B.  Applicability of Design and Improvement Standards. The requirements of this chapter apply to subdivisions, and conditional certificates of compliance, in addition to all applicable requirements of this development code, as follows: 
1.  Design Standards. The standards in Sections 17.46.020 through 17.46.120 of this chapter apply to the design of all proposed subdivisions, in addition to all applicable requirements of the city engineer, the Calabasas Public Works policies and related design standards and, where applicable, the performance standards for hillside development in Section 17.20.150. 
2.  Subdivision Improvement Standards—Conditions of Approval. The applicable subdivision improvement and dedication requirements of this chapter and any other improvements and dedications required by the review authority in compliance with Section 17.41.100 shall be described in conditions of approval adopted for each approved tentative map (Section 17.41.110). The design, construction or installation of all subdivision improvements shall comply with the requirements of the city engineer. 
3.  Conflicting Provisions. In the event of conflicts between the provisions of this chapter and other provisions of this development code, or other provisions of the Municipal Code, the most restrictive provisions shall control. 
C.  Extent of Improvements Required. As required by Article 1, Chapter 1 of the Map Act, improvements required for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels shall be limited to the dedication of rights-of-way, easements, and the construction of reasonable offsite and onsite improvements for the parcels being created. 
D.  Oversizing of Improvements. At the discretion of the review authority, improvements required to be installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision may also be required to provide supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and may be required to be dedicated to the city, as provided by Article 6, Chapter 3 of the Map Act. 
E.  Exceptions. Exceptions to the provisions of this chapter may be requested and considered in compliance with Section 17.40.040. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.46.020 - Access and circulation. 
Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide adequate access from each new parcel to a city street. Street systems to be constructed with new subdivisions shall be designed in compliance with this section, and with the Calabasas Public Works policies and related design standards. 
A.  Access to Subdivision. Every subdivision shall be designed to have access to a city street. Private roads are allowed only in compliance with subsection (D) of this section. Access shall be provided by: 
1.  The subdivision abutting a street, where the length of the subdivision along the street, the street right-of-way, and the width of the right-of-way will accommodate the construction of all road improvements required by this section; or 
2.  The subdivision being connected to a city street by a non-exclusive right-of-way easement for street, utility and appurtenant drainage facilities purposes, where the easement shall be: 
a.  Offered for dedication, 
b.  Unencumbered by any senior rights that might serve to restrict its proposed use, and 
c.  Of a width and location to accommodate the construction of all improvements required by this section and the Calabasas Public Works policies and related design standards. 
B.  Access to New Parcels. Parcels within a proposed subdivision shall be provided access as follows: 
1.  City Street Access Required. Each parcel within a proposed subdivision shall be provided access to a city street by being located on an existing city street or a new city street designed and improved in compliance with subsection (C) of this section, or on a private road if allowed by subsection (D) of this section. 
2.  Access Denial. When a state highway or a street classified as a major arterial in the circulation element of the General Plan passes through or abuts a proposed subdivision, direct access to the highway or arterial shall not be permitted from proposed parcels. Reservation strips shall be dedicated to the state or city, as appropriate, where required to control access over certain lot lines over the ends of street stubs. 
3.  Frontage Roads. When lots are proposed to front on a major arterial or state highway, the review authority may require the subdivider to dedicate and improve a service or frontage road separate from the arterial or highway. 
4.  Alleys. Alleys may be proposed as part of residential or nonresidential subdivisions. When a subdivision is proposed in an area zoned commercial or industrial, the subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve alleys at least twenty (20) feet wide at the rear of the parcels. 
C.  Design and Improvement of Proposed Streets. New streets proposed or required within a new subdivision or adjacent to a new subdivision shall be located and designed as follows, and in compliance with the Calabasas Public Works policies and related design standards: 
1.  Alignment. The alignment of streets shown on a tentative map shall be: 
a.  Consistent with the circulation element of the General Plan, where applicable; and 
b.  Located so as to be in alignment with existing adjacent streets by continuation of their centerlines, or by adjustments by curves; and 
c.  As required by the city engineer. 
2.  Right-of-Way and Surfaced Width. The width of the right-of-way and improved surface of streets shown on a tentative map shall be as provided by the Calabasas Public Works policies and related design standards. 
3.  Access to Unsubdivided Property. When a proposed subdivision abuts vacant land that is designated by the General Plan for future subdivision and development, the review authority may require that streets to be constructed with the proposed subdivision be extended to the boundary of the property to provide the future development street access. 
4.  Improvements to Existing Streets. When an existing city street provides access to, passes through, or is contiguous with a proposed subdivision, the review authority may require dedication of additional right-of-way and/or improvements to be made to the city street in compliance with the General Plan; provided they determine that the proposed subdivision will create the need for the improvements, or the subdivider otherwise agrees to the improvements. 
5.  Length of Loop, Cul-de-sac and Other Dead-End Streets. The maximum length of a loop street shall be one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet. A proposed subdivision shall not be designed with a dead-end street having a length from the first intersecting through street greater than six hundred (600) feet, except for private roads. The maximum length of a private dead-end road, including all dead-end roads accessed from that dead-end road, shall not exceed eight hundred (800) feet, regardless of the number of parcels served. Maximum length shall be measured from the edge of the roadway surface at the intersection that begins the road, to the end of the road surface at its farthest point. 
6.  Street Names. All streets within a proposed subdivision shall be named, and the names shall be approved by the review authority. Duplication of existing names within the same area shall not be allowed in a new subdivision unless the street is an obvious extension of an existing street. 
D.  Private Roads. Private roads are allowed as provided in this section. Private roads shall not be permitted except where the council determines that a private street system will adequately serve the proposed subdivision, will not be a substantial detriment to adjoining properties and will not disrupt or prevent the establishment of an orderly circulation system in the vicinity of the subdivision. 
1.  Maintenance Requirements. Provisions satisfactory to the city attorney shall be made for lot owners association or other organization to assume responsibility for the maintenance of private roads and ownership of the street right-of-ways of any subdivision. 
2.  Design and Improvement Standards. Private roads shall be designed and improved as set forth in subsections (B) and (C) of this section. 
3.  Security and Conditions. The review authority may require any guarantees and conditions it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this article pertaining to private roads. Private roads and easements providing access to parcels within a subdivision shall be located and shown on the parcel or tract map. 
E.  Alternative Circulation Systems. Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide rights-of-way for pedestrian paths, bikeways and multiple use trails consistent with the circulation element of the General Plan, the Parks and Recreation Master Plan or Bikeway Master Plan, as applicable, where the review authority determines that the alignment of these systems shown in the General Plan and/or any applicable specific plan can be feasibly accommodated within the subdivision, and that the system is needed because of the characteristics of the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.46.030 - Drainage and watercourses. 
A.  Drainage Systems Required. Subdivisions shall be provided storm drainage facilities as required by this section, Chapter 17.48 and Chapter 17.20. Storm drain facilities to be dedicated to Los Angeles County Flood Control District shall instead comply with the standards of that agency. 
1.  Performance and Capacity. Subdivisions shall be designed to provide drainage systems to carry storm run-off both tributary to and originating within the subdivision to approved points of discharge, determined to be necessary by the city engineer on the basis of information and recommendations provided by the engineer for the subdivider. Drainage facilities shall be designed pursuant to the current edition of the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works Hydrology Manual most recently adopted by the city engineer and available for review in the office of the city engineer. Drainage system design shall avoid unnatural concentrations of stormwater runoff and retain existing drainage courses wherever possible to avoid cross-lot drainage. 
2.  Culverts. The minimum diameter of a storm drain pipe placed beneath a public street shall be eighteen (18) inches. Pipes shall be made of reinforced concrete, and placed at the grade of the drainage channel whenever practical. Minimum allowable culvert grade shall be two percent under normal circumstances or where otherwise approved by the city engineer. Minimum allowable open ditch grade shall be one percent. 
3.  Location of Facilities. Drainage facilities shall be located within a street right-of-way or within public drainage easements. Drainage facilities shall be installed prior to the issuance of building permits unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
4.  Timing of Installation. Any drainage structures required for the individual parcels of a subdivision shall be installed at the same time as drainage structures within street rights-of-way and other subdivision improvements. Any drainage facilities to be transferred to Los Angeles County Flood Control district shall be designed to Los Angeles County Public Works standards. 
5.  Interim Maintenance. All subdivision drainage facilities shall be maintained by the developer until accepted by the Los Angeles County Flood Control District. 
B.  Drainage Easements. Required drainage systems shall be located within drainage easements delineated on the final map or parcel map, and the easements shall satisfy the following standards. Drainage easements to be dedicated to the Los Angeles County Flood Control District, shall instead comply with the standards of that agency. 
1.  Offer of Dedication. Drainage easements shall be offered for dedication in a form acceptable to the city engineer. 
2.  Alignment of Easements. The alignment of drainage easements shall conform to the meandering of the natural watercourse or to the alignment approved for the drainage system. 
3.  Width of Easements. 
a.  Natural Channels. A drainage easement for a natural channel is required where determined to be necessary by the city engineer. The width of drainage easements for natural channels shall be sufficient to include the one-hundred-year flood high water marks, plus five feet on either side, but in no case less than twenty (20) feet. 
b.  Constructed Channels. The minimum width of any drainage easement for a closed conduit system shall be ten (10) feet and the minimum width for any open system shall be twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Service Roads. For any conduit exceeding thirty (30) inches in diameter, or any open ditch with a top width exceeding twelve (12) feet, a twelve-foot service road shall be improved within the drainage easement. 
4.  Natural Watercourses. Drainage easements shall be provided for all natural watercourses. 
5.  Downstream Property. Where a subdivision causes an increase in and the unnatural concentration of surface waters onto adjacent private or public property, the subdivider shall obtain an easement for drainage purposes across the property of sufficient width and shall improve the easement in a manner adequate to convey the runoff to an approved point of disposal. If the owner(s) of the affected property agrees to accept the increased run-off concentration of surface water and the agreement has been recorded, an easement shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.46.040 - Energy conservation. 
The design of a subdivision for which a tentative and final map are required by this article shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivisions, in compliance with Map Act Section 66473.1. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.46.050 - Grading, erosion and sediment control. 
New subdivisions shall be designed so that all proposed grading incorporates appropriate erosion and sediment control measures in compliance with Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.46.060 - Landscaping materials. 
Residential subdivisions shall be provided landscaping in the form of street trees on each proposed parcel, and landscaping with irrigation facilities for any common areas or other open space areas within the subdivision. The improvements may be deferred until the subdivided lots are developed through the provisions of Section 17.48.040. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.46.070 - Lot and block design and configuration. 
The size, shape and arrangement of new parcels shall conform to the provisions of this section, or with any General Plan policy, applicable specific plan requirement, development code provision, or other Municipal Code provision applicable to a proposed subdivision. 
A.  Minimum Lot Area. The minimum area for new parcels shall be as required by Article II except as otherwise provided by this section. 
1.  Calculation of Area. When calculating the area of a parcel to determine compliance with this section, Article II or the General Plan, the following shall be deducted from the gross area of any parcel: 
a.  A vehicular or nonvehicular access easement through the lot; 
b.  An easement for or relating to an open drainage course, whether a ditch, natural channel or floodway; or 
c.  The "flag pole" (access strip) of a flag lot. (See subsection (B)(4) of this section.) 
The area of an easement exclusively for constructing and maintaining construction slopes may be included when calculating lot area. 
2.  Specific Minimum Lot Area Requirements—Small-Lot Projects. The minimum lot area requirements of Article II shall not apply to condominiums and condominium conversions, planned developments, townhouses, zero lot line, and similar small-lot projects intending individual lot ownership. However, the minimum lot area requirements of Article II shall apply to the creation of the original parcel or parcels that are the location of the small-lot project. 
B.  Size and Shape. The size and shape of new parcels shall be as required by Article II, except as otherwise provided by the following. 
1.  Lot Width. New parcels shall be designed to have a minimum width of fifty (50) feet; except that each parcel on a turnaround, cul-de-sac or curved street, where the side lot lines are diverging from the front to the rear of the parcel, shall have a minimum width of sixty (60) feet, or the width required by Article II, whichever is greater, measured at the front setback line required for the main building by Article II. 
2.  Lot Depth. No new parcel shall have a depth less than eighty feet, or a depth greater than three times the average width of the lot when the lot has a width of less than two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
3.  Exceptions. Parcels may be approved with a width and depth less than otherwise required by this section where: 
a.  Located in the CT (Old Town) zoning district (Chapter 17.14), and authorized through the approval of a development plan (Section 17.62.070) in compliance with the Old Town Calabasas Master Plan and Design Guidelines; 
b.  Located in the -OT and CH (Old Topanga/Highlands) overlay zoning districts (Section 17.18.020 and 17.18.025), and authorized through the approval of a development plan (Section 17.62.070); or 
c.  Located in the - DP (Development Plan) overlay zoning district (Section 17.18.030) and authorized through the approval of a development plan (Section 17.62.070). 
4.  Location of Lot Lines. 
a.  Orientation to Streets. The side lot lines of all parcels shall be at right angles to the center line of the street, and radial or approximately radial to curved streets. 
b.  City Limits. No parcel shall be designed so that it will be divided by the city's corporate boundary. 
c.  Relationship to Easements. Parcels shall be designed so that lot lines conform to existing or planned easements unless the easements are relocated to conform to the proposed lot pattern. 
5.  Flag Lots. Flag lots are generally discouraged unless they can improve the efficiency of land use, protect natural features, or implement provisions of the General Plan and Chapter 17.20. Where determined to be appropriate by the review authority, flag lots shall comply with the following requirements. 
a.  Lot Design and Size. The main portion of the flag lot (not including the access strip, or "flag pole") shall satisfy the provisions of this section for length, depth, area and design. In no case shall the access strip be less than eighteen (18) feet in width nor more than two hundred (200) feet in depth. 
b.  Number of Housing Units Served. No tentative map shall be approved with more than four homes being provided access to a public street by means of a single flag access strip. 
C.  Parcel and Block Configuration. The layout of proposed parcels and streets shall be designed to use land efficiently, mitigate environmental impacts, and minimize site disturbance in terms of cuts and fills, and the removal of significant vegetation. 
1.  Double-Frontage Lots. Parcels with streets along both the front and rear lot lines shall be prohibited, except when necessitated by topographical or other physical conditions or where access from one of the roads is prohibited. 
2.  Block Length. Blocks shall be no longer than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet unless existing conditions warrant an exception (Section 17.40.040). 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-2014)  
17.46.080 - Monuments. 
Survey monuments shall be set for all new subdivisions requiring a parcel map or final map by the engineer or surveyor, as set forth in this section. All monuments shall conform with the provisions of Article 9, Chapter 4 of the Map Act, the California Land Surveyors Act and the following standards: 
A.  Location of Monuments. Permanent ferrous survey monuments shall be set in the following locations: 
1.  At all angle points on the exterior boundary of the subdivision; 
2.  At all lot corners and at the beginning and ending of all property line curves, except that in a subdivision creating parcels each with a gross area of twenty (20) acres or more, a permanent ferrous monument shall be set at the major parcel corners and at the intersection of all property lines with the side lines of all street easements; 
3.  Swing ties points shall be provided at all locations where curves begin or end, at intersections, and as required by the Map Act. Swing ties sheets shall be provided to the city engineer on reproducible mylar film, on eighteen (18) by twenty-four (24) inch sheets; 
4.  A permanent survey monument approved by the city engineer shall be set at the intersection of all street centerlines; 
5.  If the exterior boundary of the subdivision or any lot or parcel line is at a location where setting a monument is impractical, a reference monument shall be set in a manner and location satisfactory to the city engineer; 
6.  All tract boundary corners shall be two-inch diameter pipe with cap and set in concrete; 
7.  All bench marks set for the subdivision shall be recorded with the county of Los Angeles surveyor's office. Copies of bench marks that have been accepted and recorded shall be provided to the city engineer and noted on the final map. 
B.  Timing of Monument Installation. The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be completely monumented or referenced before the final map or parcel map is submitted to the city engineer for filing. Interior monuments need not be set at the time the final map or parcel map is filed if the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set on or before a specified later date, and if the subdivider furnishes the city a bond, instrument of credit, or cash deposit in a sufficient amount to guarantee payment of the cost of setting the monuments in compliance with Map Act Section 66496. 
C.  Cost Estimate and Bond Requirements. The cost of setting monuments shall be included in the engineer's estimate for improvements in compliance with Section 17.46.040. If requested, this amount of the bond may be released upon verification of the setting of monuments by the city engineer. 
D.  Notice of Completion. Within five days after the final setting of all monuments has been completed, the engineer or surveyor shall give written notice to the subdivider and the city engineer that the final monuments have been set. Verification of payment to the engineer or surveyor shall be filed as required by Article 9, Chapter 4 of the Map Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.46.090 - Public utilities and utility easements. 
Public utilities including electricity, gas, water, sewer, telecommunications services, and storm drain shall be installed as part of the improvements within all subdivisions as provided by this section, and by Sections 17.46.100 and 17.46.120. The installation of utilities may be waived by the review authority through the exception process (Section 17.40.040) if the review authority finds not installing the utilities as part of the subdivision improvements to be in the public interest. 
A.  Underground Utilities Required. Utilities in new subdivisions shall be installed underground, as follows: 
1.  When Undergrounding is Required. All existing and proposed utility distribution facilities (including but not limited to electric, telecommunications and cable television lines) installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any subdivision, except for equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, including surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the affected utility companies for facility installation. The utilities shall be installed along the entire subdivision frontage unless waived by the city engineer. The review authority may waive the requirements of this section if topographical, soil or any other conditions make underground installation unreasonable or impractical. 
2.  Location of Installation. Underground utility lines may be installed within street rights-of-way or along any lot line. When installed within street rights-of-way, their location and method of installation, insofar as it affects other improvements within the street right-of-way, shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
3.  Timing of Installation. All underground utilities, water lines, sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in streets, shall be constructed before the streets are surfaced. Connections to all underground utilities, water lines and sanitary sewers shall be laid to sufficient lengths to avoid the need for disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made. 
B.  Utility Easements. 
1.  Minimum Width. The minimum width of easements for public or private utilities, sanitary sewers, or water distribution systems, shall be as determined by the review authority based on the recommendations of the city engineer for city facilities, and the recommendations of the applicable utility company, for public or private utilities. 
2.  Overhead Lines. Easements for overhead utility lines shall be located at the rear of lots where practical, and along the side of lots where necessary. Where practical, the poles supporting overhead lines shall not be installed within any street, alley or easement designated exclusively for drainage purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.46.100 - Sewage disposal. 
A proposed subdivision shall be designed to provide for connection to the city's sewage collection, treatment and disposal system, where available as determined by the city engineer. If any part of the system is to be installed within a street right-of-way, the system location and construction specifications shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. Sewage lines shall be installed as part of the improvements within all subdivisions and shall be dedicated to the city or other public agency. Installation shall be governed by Chapter 17.48 requirements, the current edition of the Los Angeles County Private Contract Sanitary Sewer Procedural Manual, most recently adopted by the city engineer and available for review in the office of the city engineer. When applicable, installations shall also be governed by the Las Virgenes Municipal Water District Standard Plans and Specifications for the Construction of Water Mains and Facilities, most recently adopted by the city engineer and available for review in the office of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.46.110 - Street lighting. 
A proposed subdivision shall incorporate street lighting facilities determined by the review authority to be consistent with the character of the area, and the needs of public safety, and designed and constructed to the standards established by the applicable lighting district, or the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.46.120 - Water supply. 
Water mains and services shall be installed to serve each lot in a proposed subdivision and connected to the facilities of the Las Virgenes Municipal Water District. These installations will require a separate permit issued by the Las Virgenes Municipal Water District. If any part of the water system is to be installed within a street right-of-way, the system location, including valve boxes, meter boxes, and fire hydrants and the system construction specifications shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer, and the location of fire hydrants shall also be approved by the Los Angeles County fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.48 - IMPROVEMENT PLANS AND AGREEMENTS 
 
17.48.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes procedures and requirements for the review and approval of improvement plans, the installation of improvements, agreements and guarantees for their installation, and dedications. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.48.020 - Improvement plans. 
After the approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall diligently proceed to complete any work necessary to fulfill the conditions of approval. A public works improvement application shall be required for all improvements proposed within new subdivisions. The application shall include any applicable forms on file with the city. Before the construction of any improvements, the subdivider shall submit plans to the city as follows: 
A.  Preparation and Content. Improvement plans shall be prepared by a California registered civil engineer. Improvement plan submittals shall include the following information: 
1.  Any drawings, specifications, calculations, design reports and other information required by the city engineer; 
2.  Grading, drainage, erosion and sediment control, and any pollution control requirements for the entire subdivision; and 
3.  Required fees, as approved by the council, including fees for improvement plan/specification checking and construction inspection. 
B.  Submittal of Plans. Improvement plans shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval. Upon the approval of improvement plans in compliance with subsection (C) of this section, the subdivider shall also submit a detailed cost estimate of all improvements to the city engineer on a form approved by the city, which shall include a fifteen (15) percent contingency factor. 
C.  Review and Approval. Improvement plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer within the time limits provided by Map Act Section 66456.2. 
D.  Effect of Approval. The approval of improvement plans shall be required before approval of a parcel or final map. The approval of improvement plans shall not bind the city to accept the improvements nor waive any defects in the improvements as installed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.48.030 - Installation of improvements. 
Subdivision improvements required as conditions of approval of a tentative map in compliance with this chapter (See Section 17.46.010(B)) shall be installed as provided by this section. 
A.  Timing of Improvements. Required improvements shall be constructed or otherwise installed only after the approval of improvement plans as provided by Section 17.48.020, and before the approval of a parcel or final map in compliance with Sections 17.42.140 or 17.42.230, except where: 
1.  Improvements are deferred in compliance with Section 17.48.040; or 
2.  Improvements are required as conditions on the approval of a subdivision of four or fewer lots, in which case construction of the improvements shall be required: 
a.  Only when a permit for development of an affected parcel is issued by the department, or 
b.  At the time the construction of the improvements is required in compliance with an agreement between the subdivider and the city, as set forth in Section 17.48.040, or 
c.  At the time set forth in a condition of approval, when the review authority finds that fulfillment of the construction requirements by that time is necessary for public health and safety, or because the required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. 
B.  Inspection of Improvements. The construction and installation of required subdivision improvements shall occur as follows. 
1.  Supervision. Before starting any work, the contractor engaged by the subdivider shall designate in writing an authorized representative who shall have the authority to represent and act for the contractor in contacts with the city. The designated representative shall be present at the work site at all times while work is in progress. At times when work is suspended, arrangements acceptable to the city engineer shall be made for any emergency work that may be required. 
2.  Inspection Procedures. 
a.  Inspections Required. The city engineer shall make any inspections as he or she deems necessary to ensure that all construction complies with the approved improvement plans. Where required by the city engineer, the developer shall enter into an agreement with the city to pay the full cost of any contract inspection services determined to be necessary by the city engineer. 
b.  Access to Site and Materials. The city engineer shall have access to the work site at all times during construction, and shall be furnished with every reasonable facility for verifying that the materials and workmanship are in accordance with the approved improvement plans. 
c.  Authority for Approval. The work done and all materials furnished shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city engineer. The inspection of the work or materials shall not relieve the contractor of any obligations to fulfill the work as prescribed. 
d.  Improper Work or Materials. Work or materials not meeting the requirements of the approved plans and specifications may be rejected, regardless of whether the work or materials were previously inspected by the city engineer. In the event that the city engineer determines that subdivision improvements are not being constructed as required by the approved plans and specifications, he or she shall order the work stopped and shall inform the contractor of the reasons for stopping work and the corrective measures necessary to resume work. Any work done after issuance of a stop work order shall be a violation of this title. 
3.  Notification. The subdivider shall notify the city engineer upon the completion of each stage of construction as outlined in this chapter, and shall not proceed with further construction until authorized by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.48.040 - Improvement agreements and security. 
A subdivider may file a parcel or final map before completion of all the improvements required by this article and conditions of approval of the tentative map, only when the subdivider first obtains council approval of a subdivision improvement agreement executed and submitted for council review by the subdivider, and provides the city performance security as required by this section. Improvement agreements and required security shall also comply with Chapter 5 of the Map Act. 
A.  Contents of Improvement Agreement. A subdivision improvement agreement shall be submitted on a form provided by the city engineer and approved by city attorney and shall include the following provisions. 
1.  Description of Improvements. A description of all improvements to be completed by the subdivider, with reference to the approved subdivision improvement plans; 
2.  Time Limit for Construction. The period within which all required improvements will be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
3.  Completion by City. Provide that if the subdivider fails to complete all required improvements within the specified time, the city may elect to complete the improvements and recover the full cost and expenses thereof from the subdivider or the surety, including any attorney and legal fees associated with enforcement of the agreement. The costs and expenses may be recorded as a lien against all parcels within the subdivision; 
4.  Surety Requirement. Require the subdivider to secure the agreement by furnishing security to insure full and faithful performance, as specified in subsection (B) of this section. The amount of surety shall be based on an engineer's cost estimate submitted by the subdivider as provided by Section 17.48.020(B) and approved by the city engineer. The total cost of improvements to be guaranteed shall be as provided in the approved engineer's cost estimate; 
5.  Phased Construction. Provisions for the construction of improvements in units, at the option of the subdivider; 
6.  Time Extensions. Provisions for an extension of time under conditions specified therein, at the option of the subdivider, consistent with the requirements of subsection (E) of this section; 
7.  Progress Payments or Partial Release. Provide for progress payments from surety deposits or partial release of agreement surety, at the option of the subdivider, consistent with the requirements of subsection (D) of this section; provided that no progress payment or partial release shall be construed to be acceptance by the city of any portion of the required improvements or any defective work or improper materials. 
B.  Security Required to Guarantee Improvements. A subdivision improvement agreement or a subdivision road maintenance and repair agreement shall be secured by adequate surety in a form approved as to form and sufficiency by the city attorney, as follows: 
1.  Type of Security. Subdivision improvement agreements shall be secured by all of the following: 
a.  A guarantee for faithful performance, in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the engineer's cost estimate; and 
b.  A guarantee for materials and labor, in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the engineer's cost estimate. 
2.  Form of Security. The required surety shall consist of a cash deposit of ten (10) percent of the amounts specified in subsection (B)(1) of this section, or other amount determined by the city engineer, or in one of the following forms for the full amounts specified in subsection (B)(1) of this section, as approved by the city engineer: 
a.  A bond or bonds executed by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties; 
b.  An instrument of credit or letter of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government pledging that funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment; or 
c.  A lien upon the property to be divided, created by contract between the owner and the city. 
C.  Release of Security. The security furnished by the subdivider shall be released as provided by Chapter 5 of the Map Act. 
D.  Progress Payments or Partial Release. No progress payment or partial release of surety shall be made except when the city engineer has certified that the work required to qualify for payment or release has been satisfactorily completed and the payment or release has also been approved by the council by at least four-fifths vote. No certificate given, progress payment made, or release of surety, except the final certificate of acceptance, shall be considered as any evidence of the performance of the agreement either wholly or in part. There shall be no partial acceptance of any improvements. 
E.  Time Extensions. An extension of time for completion of improvements under a subdivision improvement agreement pursuant shall be granted by the council only as follows: 
1.  Public Works Report. The city engineer notifies the council that the subdivider is proceeding to do the work required with reasonable diligence and has given satisfactory evidence of being able and willing to complete all required work within the time of the requested extension. 
2.  Agreement by Sureties. The sureties agree in writing to extend for the additional period of time at the original amount of the bond or other surety, or if recommended by the city engineer, at an increased amount. 
3.  Council Action. The council approves the extension by at least a four-fifths vote. As a condition of granting a time extension, the council may impose whatever additional requirements the council deems reasonable to protect the public interest. 
F.  Acceptance of Improvements. Before acceptance for maintenance or final approval by the council of subdivision improvements, the city engineer shall verify that the improvement work has been completed in substantial compliance with the approved plans and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.50 - DEDICATIONS AND EXACTIONS 
 
17.50.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes standards for subdivider dedications of land or payment of fees in lieu thereof, in conjunction with subdivision approval. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.50.020 - Applicability. 
A.  Compliance Required. All proposed subdivisions shall comply with the requirements of this chapter for dedications, reservations or the payment of in-lieu fees. 
B.  Conditions of Approval. The requirements of this chapter as they apply to a specific subdivision shall each be described in conditions of approval adopted by the review authority for the tentative map. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.50.030 - Park land dedications and fees. 
A.  Purpose. This section provides for the dedication of land and/or the payment of fees to the city for park and recreational purposes as a condition of the approval of a tentative map, in compliance with the General Plan. This section is enacted as authorized by the provisions Government Code Section 66477 also known as the "Quimby Act." 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Land Dedication and/or Fee Payment Required. As a condition of tentative map approval, the subdivider shall dedicate land and/or pay a fee in compliance with this section for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreation facilities. Only the payment of a fee shall be required in compliance with subsection (E) of this section, for subdivisions proposing less than fifty (50) parcels. 
2.  Value to Include Street Improvements. The amount and location of land to be dedicated or the fees to be paid shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision; therefore, the land dedication or fee in lieu of land calculated in compliance with this section shall also include full street improvements, either dedicated or to be maintained by a property owner for an equivalent amount of land. 
3.  Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
a.  Nonresidential subdivisions proposing less than five parcels, provided that a condition shall be placed on the approval of the parcel map that if a building permit is requested for the construction of any residential structure on one or more of the parcels within four years, the fee shall be paid by the owner of each parcel as a condition of building permit issuance; 
b.  Commercial or industrial subdivisions; 
c.  Condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old, when no new dwelling units are added; or 
d.  Any other subdivisions exempted by Map Act Section 66477. 
C.  Standards for Determinations. The amount of land or fees paid shall be based on the residential density, which shall be determined based on the approved or conditionally approved tentative map. 
1.  There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the average number of persons per household by units in a structure is the same as that disclosed by the most recent available Federal census or a census taken in compliance with Government Code Sections 40200 et seq. 
2.  Subdividers may offer evidence of the actual population densities of a proposed project for determination by the council. The council shall consider the evidence submitted and if it finds that the actual population density will differ from the presumed density, the council shall use the actual density to calculate the required land or in-lieu fee. The population density shall be for, but not limited to the persons for unit for: 
a.  Single-family dwellings; 
b.  Multifamily dwellings; 
c.  Mobilehomes within mobilehome parks; and 
d.  City approved senior citizen residential housing units. 
D.  Amount of Land to be Dedicated. The area of land required to be dedicated by a residential subdivider for park and recreational purposes shall be equivalent to a ratio of three acres of usable park land per one thousand (1,000) residents. 
The determination of area required for dedication shall be based upon the number of approved dwelling units in the subdivision and the average number of persons per household, using the following formula. 
A = .003 x UP 
Where: 
A = Amount of park land required, in acres. 
U = Total number of approved dwelling units in the subdivision. 
P = Population density per dwelling unit. 
.003 = 3 acres of park land per 1,000 population. 
E.  Formula for Fees in Lieu of Land. If the entire park land obligation for a proposed residential subdivision is not satisfied by dedication in compliance with subsection (D) of this section, the subdivider shall pay to the city a fee in lieu of dedication, as a condition of tentative map approval. The fee shall equal: 
1.  The park land obligation in acres derived from the formula in subsection (D) of this section, less the acreage of park land, if any, offered for dedication by the subdivider, times the per acre fair market value of the unimproved land within the subdivision; plus 
2.  The value of street improvements for the park land, calculated as the number of acres determined by subsection (D) of this section, times the fair market value per acre of the actual cost per acre for the full street improvements of the subdivision for which the fee is calculated. 
F.  Determination of Fair Market Value. For purposes of determining the required fee in lieu of land in compliance with subsection (E) of this section, fair market value shall be determined in compliance with the following requirements: 
1.  Methods of Determination. The fair market value of the unimproved land for subdivision shall be established by one or a combination of the following methods: 
a.  The fair market value can be determined through the use of accepted assessment practices and may be based on the current assessed value, with adjustments, if necessary, to reflect current fair market value in compliance with the standards and practices established by the county assessor. 
b.  If the city or subdivider objects to the valuation, either party at the subdivider's expense, may employ a recognized, qualified certified neutral real estate appraiser to obtain an appraisal of the property. The city or its designated representative shall be provided with a certified copy of the appraisal report in order to calculate and substantiate the in-lieu fee. 
c.  The city and the subdivider may agree to a fair market value through the use of a certified copy of the current escrow instructions establishing full purchase value, comparable sales records, or other mutually acceptable procedures or methods. 
2.  Time Limit for Determination. A land evaluation or appraisal shall be determined a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to map recordation. Written notice of the proposed valuation shall be provided by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the subdivider along with the city's calculation in compliance with this section. The notice shall be deemed served upon its deposit in the United States mail. 
3.  Objections to Valuation. The subdivider may object to the assessed valuation and resulting fee within thirty (30) days of service of the valuation notice. The objection shall be in writing and presented to the city manager by mail, or in person. The council may object within thirty (30) days of service of the valuation notice by a resolution adopted by a majority of its members. If no objections are made within thirty (30) days, all objections to the proposed value for use in calculating the in-lieu fees are deemed waived. 
G.  Criteria for Requiring Dedication and/or Fees. In subdivisions of over fifty (50) lots, the city may require the subdivider to dedicate both land and pay a fee, as follows: 
1.  Determination of Land or Fee. Whether the city accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, the amount shall be determined by consideration of the following: 
a.  The General Plan, Parks and Recreation Master Plan and any applicable specific plans, and the compatibility of dedication with those plans; 
b.  Topography, geology, access, size, shape and the location of land available for dedication; 
c.  Feasibility of dedication; and 
d.  Availability of previously acquired park property. 
2.  Fees Only. Only the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions of fifty (50) parcels or less; except that when a condominium project, stock cooperative, or community apartment project exceeds fifty (50) dwelling units, land dedication may be required regardless of the fact that the total number of parcels may be less than fifty (50). 
3.  Procedure for Determining Land or Fee. The council, upon recommendation of the director, shall determine whether the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay in-lieu fees, or provide a combination of both, at the time of tentative map approval. The recommendations and the action of the review authority shall consider the factors in subsection (G)(1) above, and shall include the following: 
a.  The amount of land required; 
b.  Whether a fee shall be charged in lieu of land; 
c.  Whether land and a fee shall be required, and/or that a stated amount of credit be given for private recreation facilities; 
d.  The location and suitability of the park land to be dedicated or use of in-lieu fees; and 
e.  The approximate time when development of the park or recreation facility shall commence. 
The determination of the city as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive. 
4.  Formula for Land and Fees. When both land dedication and fee payment are required or proposed, they shall be negotiated with the council and shall be calculated based on the number of acres determined in compliance with subsection (D) of this section, times the value for land and full street improvements per acre. 
5.  Credit for Improvements. If the subdivider provides park and recreational improvements on dedicated land, the value of the improvements together with any installed equipment shall be a credit against the required fees or land. 
6.  Credit for Private Recreation or Open Space. Where a substantial private park and recreational area is provided in a proposed subdivision (including planned developments, stock cooperatives, community apartment projects and condominiums) that will be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, credit may be given toward the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof as the council determines is appropriate. The council's determination shall be based on the recommendations of the director who shall consider the formula in the city's guidelines for determining allowed Quimby credit as well as factors in subsection (G)(1) of this section and subsections (G)(6)(a) through (G)(6)(f) of this section. In addition, before determining to grant credit, the council shall find all of the following: 
a.  Yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by Titles 15 and 17 of the Municipal Code are not included in the computation of the private open space; 
b.  The private ownership and maintenance of the open space in the future is adequately secured and contained in recorded written agreements, conveyances, covenants, conditions, or restrictions; 
c.  The use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants, conditions, or restrictions, which run with the land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city; 
d.  The proposed private open space is usable for active recreation; 
e.  The proposed private open space is open to all subdivision property owners and residents therein; and 
f.  Facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial compliance with the provisions of the General Plan and Master Plan of Parks. 
H.  Suitability of Land to be Dedicated. Each park site proposed for dedication in compliance with this section shall be physically suited for the intended use. 
1.  Land which is made part of a park site for subdivision design purposes, but which is physically unsuited for park use, shall be discounted when calculating the area of the park site provided in compliance with this section. The park space provided shall be calculated from the road rights-of-way and interior property lines abutting the site, and not from any abutting roadway centerline. 
2.  Land intended for other than trail use shall have a maximum slope of three percent. If necessary, the site shall be graded by the subdivider to achieve this slope, in compliance with plans approved by the city. Land which has an average slope of more than three percent may be credited against the park dedication requirement where the review authority determines that special circumstances exist which would make the acceptance of the land in the public interest. The amount of credit against the park obligation in these cases shall be calculated as shown in Table 4-1. Greater credit for sites in excess of three percent slope may be granted where the review authority determines that a site contains an exceptional visual, biotic or other natural resource. 
Table 4-1 
Credit for Dedication Based on Slope 
Park Site Slope 	Credit Against Park Obligation 
0 to 3% 	100% 
3.1 to 10% 	87% 
10.1 to 20% 	56% 
20.1 to 30% 	25% 
Over 30% 	No credit 
 
3.  If the council determines that any of the land proposed to be dedicated is not suitable for park use or open space purposes, it may reject all or any portion of the land offered, and in that event the subdivider shall instead pay a fee in compliance with subsection (E) of this section. 
I.  Conveyance of Land—Payment of Fees. 
1.  Real property being dedicated for park purposes shall be conveyed by grant deed in fee simple to the city by the subdivider, free and clear of all encumbrances except those which, in the opinion of the city attorney, will not interfere with use of the property for park and recreational purposes, and which the city agrees to accept. Required deeds for the dedication of land and/or the amount of required fees, including any fees required by this section pursuant to the Quimby Act, shall be deposited with the city at the time of submittal of a parcel or final map. The deeds and/or fees shall be held by the city until the map is recorded, withdrawn by the subdivider, or the time for recordation expires. The subdivider shall provide all fees and instruments required to convey the land, and title insurance in favor of the city in an amount equal to the value of the land. 
2.  If subdivider is only required to pay fees, these fees shall be paid no later than at the time of final map recordation. 
J.  Use of Collected Fees. Fees collected in compliance with this section shall be used only for either acquiring land or developing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the proposed subdivision. 
1.  The council, considering any recommendations from the director, shall develop a schedule specifying how, when, and where it will use the land or fees, or both, to provide park or recreational facilities to serve the residents of the subdivision. 
2.  Any fees collected shall be committed within five years after payment, or issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If the fees are not committed, they shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots within the subdivision. 
K.  Supplemental Regulations. The council may, by resolution adopted after a noticed public hearing, and upon the recommendation of the director, adopt regulations to further define administration, procedures, interpretations, and policies considered necessary or desirable to carry out the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.50.040 - Right-of-way dedications. 
A.  Offers of Dedication Required. As a condition of tentative map approval, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication in fee simple of all land within the subdivision that is determined by the review authority to be needed for public and private streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights; drainage; public and private greenways; scenic easements, public utility easements; and any other necessary public and private easements. 
B.  Improvements. The subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights; and drainage, public utility and other public easements in accordance with design and improvement standards within this chapter or as may be adopted by resolution of the council. 
C.  Rights-of-Way—Generally. Rights-of-way shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the required improvements. In addition, where parcels front on a city-maintained road of insufficient width, or when the existing right-of-way is not deeded, the subdivider shall dedicate right-of-way sufficient for the ultimate facility. Dedications on remainder parcels that are not at the smallest lot area allowed under present zoning will not be required unless necessary for orderly development of the area or public health and safety. 
D.  Bicycle Paths. If the subdivision, as shown on the final map, contains two hundred (200) or more parcels, any subdivider who is required to dedicate roadways to the public, shall dedicate additional land for bicycle paths for the use and safety of the residents of the subdivision. 
E.  Transit Facilities. Dedications in fee simple or irrevocable offers of dedication of land within the subdivision will be required for local transit facilities including bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing paths and similar items that directly benefit the residents of the subdivision if: 
1.  The subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for two hundred (200) dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown in the General Plan; and 
2.  The review authority finds that transit services are or will, within a reasonable time period, be available to the subdivision. 
F.  Alternative Transportation Systems. Whenever the subdivision falls within an area designated for the development of bikeways, hiking or equestrian trails in the General Plan, Parks and Recreation or Bikeways Master Plan, applicable specific plan, or implementing legislation, the subdivider shall dedicate land as is necessary and feasible to provide for these ways. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Article V. - Land Use and Development Permits  
Chapter 17.60 - APPLICATION FILING AND PROCESSING 
 
17.60.010 - Purpose. 
This article provides procedures and requirements for the preparation, filing and initial processing of applications for the land use permits and other entitlements required by this development code. Procedures and requirements for the filing and processing of subdivision maps are in Article IV. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.60.020 - Authority for land use and zoning decisions. 
Table 6-1 (Review Authority) identifies the city official or body responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of permit or amendment. 
For any specific project, the final review authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application ordinarily subject to the decision of a lower review authority shall be the higher review authority as identified in Table 6-1, if the application is filed concurrently with an application subject to the decision of a higher review authority as set forth in Table 6-1. 
Table 6-1 
Review Authority 
Type of Permit or Decision 	  Role of Review Authority (1) 
	Development Review Committee 	City Engineer 	Community Development Director 	Planning Commission 	City Council 
Administrative and Amendments 
Development Code amendment 			Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
General Plan Amendment 			Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
Interpretations 			Decision (2) 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Zoning Map amendment 			Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
   Development/Land Use Permits 
Administrative Plan Review 	Recommend 		Decision (2) 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Conditional Use Permit 	Recommend 		Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
Development Plan 	Recommend 		Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
Development Agreements 			Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
					
Minor Use Permit 			Decision (2) 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Home Occupation Permit 			Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Oak Tree Permits 			Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
Sign Permits 			Decision (2) 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Site Plan Review 	Recommend 		Recommend 	Decision (2) 	Appeal 
Scenic Corridor Permit 	Recommend 		Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
Minor Scenic Corridor Permit 			Decision(2) 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Temporary Use Permits 	Recommend 		Decision (2) 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Variances 	Recommend 		Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
Zoning Clearance 			Decision (2) 	Appeal 	Appeal 
   Subdivisions 
Certificates of Compliance 		Recommend 	Decision (2)(3) 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Conditional Certificates 		Recommend 	Decision (2)(3) 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Lot Line Adjustments 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision (2)(3) 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Lot Mergers 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision (2)(3) 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Parcel and Final Maps 		Recommend 		Recommend 	Decision 
Tentative Maps 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
 
Notes: 
1) "Recommend" means that the review authority makes a recommendation on the approval or disapproval of the request to a higher decision-making body; "Decision" means that the review authority makes the final decision on the matter; "Appeal" means that the review authority may consider and decide upon appeals to the decision of an earlier decision-making body, in compliance with Chapter 17.74. 
2) The director may refer any matter subject to a decision by the director to the commission, so that the commission may instead make the decision. 
3) The director's decision is based on the standards and guidelines in this development code. Final approval signature shall be required by the city engineer based on compliance with other applicable laws and codes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.60.025 - Review of projects within the CT Zone. 
In addition to all other review otherwise required by this Code, the historic preservation commission shall review all projects located within the Commercial, Old Town (CT) zone for consistency with the Old Town Calabasas Master Plan and Design Guidelines, as they may be amended from time to time. The historic preservation commission shall review and make recommendations to the appropriate approval body required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-276, § 6, 6-23-2010)  
17.60.030 - Application filing. 
A.  Application Contents. Applications for permits, amendments, and other matters pertaining to this development code shall be filed with the department on a city application form, together with all fees, plans, maps, reports and other information prepared as required by the land use application preparation and contents instruction lists provided by the department. Applicants are encouraged to contact the department before submitting an application to verify which materials are necessary for application filing. 
B.  Eligibility for Filing. Applications may only be made by the owners or lessees of property, or their agents, or persons who have contracted to purchase or lease property contingent upon their ability to acquire the necessary permits under this development code. 
C.  Pre-Application Conference. A prospective applicant or agent is encouraged to request a pre-application conference with the department prior to completion of project design and the formal submittal of a permit application. The purpose of this conference is to inform the applicant of city requirements as they apply to the proposed development project, review the procedures outlined in this development code, explore possible alternatives or modifications, and identify any technical studies that may be necessary for the environmental review process when a formal application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.60.040 - Application fees. 
The council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for permits, amendments and other matters pertaining to this development code. The schedule of fees may be changed or modified only by resolution of the council. The city's processing fees are cumulative. For example, if an application for site plan review also requires a variance, both fees will be charged. Also, unusually large or complex projects may be subject to an hourly rate in addition to the basic application fees. Processing shall not commence on any application until all required fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.60.050 - Initial application review. 
All applications filed with the department as required by this development code shall be initially processed as follows: 
A.  Completeness Review. Within thirty (30) days of filing, the department shall review all applications for completeness and accuracy before they are accepted as being complete and officially filed. 
1.  Notification of Applicant. The applicant shall be informed by a letter either that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing; or that the application is incomplete and that additional information, specified in the letter, must be provided. When an application is incomplete, the time used by the applicant to submit the required additional information shall not be considered part of the time within which the determination of completeness must occur. The time available to an applicant for submittal of additional information is limited by subsection (A)(3) of this section. 
2.  Appeal of Determination. Where the department has determined that an application is incomplete, and the applicant believes that the application is complete and/or that the information requested by the department is not required, the applicant may appeal the determination in compliance with Chapter 17.74. 
3.  Expiration of Application. If a pending application is not completed by the applicant (i.e., not accepted as complete by the city) within six months after the first filing with the department, the application shall expire and be deemed withdrawn unless otherwise extended by the director. A new application may then be filed in compliance with this article. 
4.  Additional Information. After an application has been accepted as complete, the department may require the applicant to submit additional information needed for the environmental review of the project as provided by Section 17.60.060. 
B.  Referral of Application. At the discretion of the director or where otherwise required by this development code, state or federal law, any application filed in compliance with this development code may be referred to any public agency that may be affected by or have an interest in the proposed land use. 
Table 6-2 
Development Impacts of Individual Development Projects 
Issue 	Development Impact 
Preservation of Open Space 	A new discretionary development project that would prevent the city from achieving (i) its open space objective of 4,000 acres of designated natural open space within the city limits, or (ii) an open space network of protected areas with a high degree of visual and physical continuity. 
Hillside Management 	Discretionary development projects that are not in compliance with hillside grading performance standards. 
Biotic Resources 	A discretionary development project that results in a net loss of habitat value in an area mapped as a significant ecological area, wildlife linkage or corridor on General Plan Conservation Element Figure IV-1, or that is otherwise identified as an area containing any biological species or habitat identified as a candidate, sensitive, or special status species in local or regional plans, policies, or regulations, or by the California Department of Fish and Game or the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Figure IV-1 is to be updated periodically. 
The construction of channelized flood control works, debris basins, and retention/detention facilities within a perennial or intermittent stream or wetlands area and any net loss of wetland area. 
Air Quality 	• A discretionary development project that: Interferes with attainment of Federal or State ambient air quality standards, hinders attainment of the greenhouse gas emission reduction objectives of AB 32, or is inconsistent with the AQMP. 
•  Causes a violation of the State's one hour or eight hour standard for carbon monoxide (CO). 
Water Resources 	• A discretionary development project that: Involves an amendment to the zoning map that increases water consumption beyond water supplies available from the Las Virgenes Municipal Water District. 
• Fails to incorporate best management practices in plumbing fixtures or is inconsistent with the city's Water Efficient Landscape Criteria. 
• Is located in an area for which providing reclaimed water supplies is feasible, and could legally use reclaimed water supplies, but is not designed for such use. 
• Is inconsistent with applicable NPDES permit requirements. 
Soil Conservation 	A discretionary development project where grading or subsequent operations result in deposits of soils on public streets or on downstream properties at a rate greater than natural erosion. Employment of "best management practices" and compliance with applicable NPDES requirements are presumed to reduce the impacts of a development to a less than significant level. 
Energy Conservation 	A discretionary development project that does not meet all applicable Title 24, California Code of Regulations and Calabasas Green Building Ordinance energy conservation requirements, and, in addition, does not employ best management practices for passive energy conservation. 
Solid Waste Management 	A discretionary development project inconsistent with the city's Source Reduction and Recycling Element. 
Mineral Resources 	Any extraction of mineral resources for off-site use that is inconsistent with the hillside management provisions of the General Plan. 
Seismic, Geologic, Flooding, and Fire Hazards 	• A discretionary development project that does not meet Title 15 of this Code. 
• Placement of a discretionary development project within a FEMA 100-year flood zone unless FEMA issues a letter of map revision indicating that the site has been removed from the 100-year flood zone. 
•  Placement of development adjacent to a creek that has shown evidence of past erosion unless a hydrology study indicates that the project will not be subject to erosion-related damage and will not create further downstream erosion. 
Noise 	• A discretionary development project that: Would create noise in excess of the standards outlined in the Calabasas Noise Ordinance. 
• Is located in an area that currently exceeds or will exceed the "normally acceptable" range for the proposed use, as outlined on Figure VIII-3 of the General Plan Noise Element, unless mitigation can either reduce exterior noise levels to the normally acceptable level or achieve an acceptable interior noise level (45 dBA CNEL for residences) 
• Would generate traffic noise that would be audible at a sensitive receptor location and would increase the long-term CNEL along a roadway by 
 — 7 dB or more where the existing CNEL is less than 50 dBA 
 — 5 dB or more where the existing CNEL is between 50 dBA and 55 dBA 
 — 3 dB or more where the existing CNEL is 55 dBA and 60 dBA 
 — 2 dBA or more where the existing CNEL is between 60 dBA and 50 dBA 
 — 1 dBA or more where the existing CNEL is between 65 dBA and 75 dBA 
 — Any amount where the existing CNEL is greater 75 dBA 
Hazardous Materials 	A discretionary development project that is inconsistent with the most current Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. 
Disaster Response 	A discretionary development project that would be inconsistent with adopted standards of the city or other disaster response agency. 
Population Growth 	A discretionary development project that would result in a population or employment increase in excess of that included in SCAG's regional forecasts for the City of Calabasas, as accepted by the city, 
Housing 	A discretionary development project that: 
• Prevents the city from meeting its share of regional production needs (Table V-3 of the General Plan Housing Element) 
• Results in the net loss of any subsidized affordable housing units 
• Results in the net loss of rental housing at any time the vacancy rate for rental housing is below five percent (5%) 
Land Use 	• A discretionary development project that: Would cause significant impacts on other properties based on other standards included in this table 
• Is inconsistent with standards contained in the development code unless it can be demonstrated that a variance from applicable standards would not cause significant impacts on other properties based on other standards included in this table 
Circulation 	• A discretionary development project that: Roadway level of service along nearby streets exceeds the performance objectives outlined in the "Vehicular Circulation" objectives of the General Plan Circulation Element: 
 — Prior to project development 
 — Subsequent to project development 
 — At General Plan buildout; and 
• The project will create a peak hour volume-to-capacity (V/C) increase in excess of the criteria outlined in General Plan Circulation Element Table VI-3. 
Fiscal Management 	A discretionary development project that increases the cost or lowers the level of municipal services or facilities that are being provided to existing development. 
Community Design 	A discretionary development project that would be inconsistent with a policy of the General Plan Community Design Element 
Historical and Cultural Resources 	A discretionary development project that impacts an identified historical or archaeological resource pursuant to Section 15064.5 of the State CEQA Guidelines or would be inconsistent with the city's Historic Preservation Ordinance. 
Parks and Recreation 	A discretionary development project that: 
• Prevents the use of an existing or proposed public or private park; or 
• Does not provide mitigation for increased demand for parks as required by this Development Code 
Municipal Services and Facilities 	A discretionary development project that: 
• Would not meet adopted performance standards of the affected municipal service or facility provider; or 
• Reduces the level of service provided to existing development below adopted performance standards of municipal service and facility providers; or ;eoll;• Results in any further reduction in the level of service to existing development where the level of service being provided to existing development is already below the adopted performance standards of municipal service or facility providers. 
Responsible Regionalism 	A discretionary development project that would create impacts in excess of these standards outlined in this table within other jurisdictions without providing offsetting benefits to those jurisdictions. 
Quality of Life 	A discretionary development project that: 
• The increase in nighttime intensity of light would be inconsistent with the city's Dark Skies Ordinance; or 
• Humidity, heat, cold, or glare is noticeable without instruments by the average person on an adjacent property; or 
• Unpleasant odors are created that would be perceptible by the average person on an adjacent property. 
 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.60.055 - Community development forum requirement. 
A.  Purpose. The city is committed to informing and engaging the community as large development projects are proposed within the city and move through the city's development permit application review and approval process. The required community development forums offer the community, applicants, and project stakeholders an opportunity to hear and consider the ideas and concerns of residents and stakeholders as applicants develop and finalize project design before and during the initial stage of the formal application process and the city's development permit application review and approval process. 
Statement of Purpose. Every notice required to be provided by applicants under this section shall include the following statement of purpose: 
"The City of Calabasas requires that Community Development Forums be conducted for the following reasons: 
1.  This forum is an opportunity to inform the public at the earliest stage possible that a development project may be proposed for the area. 
2.  Because the development project being discussed may be one that could have an effect, benefit, impact, or contribution to your neighborhood, the City believes that community engagement and outreach is important. 
3.  The City of Calabasas believes that an informal exchange of project information, together with ideas and concerns from members of the public, can result in superior projects. 
4.  This Forum is not a formally noticed "public hearing," and no decisions will be made at the Forum. Neither is there any obligation for the City, Applicant, or Property Owner to adopt or incorporate ideas and suggestions which arise and are discussed at the Forum." 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Projects Required to Hold Two Community Development Forums. The city requires that two (2) community development forums be held for project applications located in commercial, recreational, multi-family or planned development zones proposing either a new, replacement or addition building area larger than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, or seeking one (1) or more of the following entitlements, in addition to all other applicable application requirements under this Code: 
a.  General plan amendment, 
b.  Development plan amendment, 
c.  Development agreement, 
d.  Zone change, 
e.  Variance, 
f.  Tract maps. 
2.  Exemptions. This requirement does not apply to development projects that are either individual single-family residences in a residential zoning district or consist of solely interior remodeling or alterations of existing commercial structures. 
3.  Other Projects. An applicant for a project not subject to the requirement to host community development forums may nevertheless choose to hold community development forums for any project of potentially significant public interest. 
4.  Waiver Requests and Criteria. Notwithstanding the requirements in subsection (B)1 of this section, an applicants may apply for a waiver of the community development forums requirement. The director may waive the requirement for projects with a building area smaller than ten thousand (10,000) square feet if the director finds that waiving the requirement would not substantially impact the ability of the public to provide meaningful comments on a project's development and that adequate alternative measures exist to ensure that the public is kept informed of the proposed project, including, but not limited to, a public hearing notice for a project under consideration by the planning commission. The planning commission may waive the requirement for projects with a building area larger than ten thousand (10,000) square feet if the planning commission finds that waiving the requirement would not substantially impact the ability of the public to provide meaningful comments on a project's development, that adequate alternative measures exist to ensure that the public is kept informed of the proposed project, including, but not limited to, a public hearing notice for a project under consideration by the planning commission, and that granting the waiver is not likely to result in substantial adverse impacts as a result of insufficient public participation in considering the application. 
C.  Forum Number, Location, and Timing Requirements. 
1.  Two (2) Community Development Forums Required. An applicant is required to hold two (2) community development forums. The applicant must hold the first community development forum prior to submitting a development application for planning entitlements for a project subject to this section. The applicant must hold the second community development forum after the development review committee has met and considered the submitted project application. The city will not deem an application subject to this section complete until after submission of proof, as specified in this section, that the applicant has held both the first and second community development forums. 
2.  Location and Time. The applicant must hold community development forums on a Monday through Thursday, starting between six p.m. and seven p.m. Community development forums may not be held on Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays, or a declared federal, state, or city holiday. Applicants shall consider scheduled community events that may be likely to conflict and shall coordinate with planning department staff in scheduling community development forums. Community development forums must be located within city limits, and near the project site to the extent feasible. The first community development forum may be held at a private facility or one (1) of two (2) city facilities, Founders Hall located at 200 Civic Center Way, and the community center located at 27040 Malibu Hills Road. The second community development forum shall be held in either the council chambers or Founders Hall in the Civic Center, and broadcast on the Calabasas TV Channel (CTV), which is to also be publicly available via the CTV website. 
D.  Forum Notice Requirements. 
1.  The applicant is required to provide at least 21-days' notice of the first and second community development forums, using the community development forum template available from the director, by US mail to the following persons and entities: 
a.  To all resident stakeholders identified as having a potential interest in the project, known to the applicant and/or city by having signed up on an interest or notification list maintained by the applicant for the project or by having signed up with the city on a list seeking additional information regarding a project. 
b.  To all residents of the city zone in which the project is located, whether east, central, or west, as depicted on the city's most recent notification zones map available from the director, using USPS "Every Door Direct Mail" or other equivalent targeted mail service. Notices sent using this service shall be sent to both property owners and resident tenants, to the extent separate addressing information is available. 
c.  To the Planning Department. Upon receipt of a copy of the first community development forum notice, the city will assist in advertising the forum in the city's website, and will additionally send the notice by email to: 
i.  The city's citywide homeowners associations (HOA) list; 
ii.  The city's standard media notification lists; and 
iii.  The city's listing of individuals who have requested to be notified of public meetings, specific projects as applicable, or all community development forums. 
d.  For the second community development forum, to all persons who attended the first community development forum and signed in or otherwise provided their mailing address to the applicant. 
2.  The applicant is additionally required to publish a minimum one-eighth-page display ad providing notice of the first and second community development forums in the Acorn newspaper or other adjudicated newspaper of general circulation in the city at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the workshops. The applicant is additionally required to place a banner or sign, acceptable in form and size to the director, announcing the first and second community development forums at the project site twenty-one (21) days in advance of each community development forum. If available and approved by the director, banners announcing the meeting may also be placed at the city's designated community messaging sites. 
E.  Forum Content Requirements. 
1.  First Community Development Forum. The first community development forum is intended as an opportunity to exchange ideas with the community about the proposed development and project options and alternatives for the project site. The format is ideally a "charrette", with audience participation in design concepts and development features. 
a.  To facilitate the purposes of the first community development forum, the applicant is required to provide the following materials to attendees and complete the following requirements in holding the first community development forum: 
i.  Any available slide show presentation providing information on the proposed project, such as an overview of the project's conceptual plan, proposed land uses, and site plan, with optional copies for the public; 
ii.  A recent aerial photograph of the site and surrounding area; 
iii.  The adopted zoning map and zoning designation of the subject property, along with a list of allowable land uses under that zoning designation; 
iv.  The city adopted general plan land use designation of the subject project, and any specific plan which identified desired or specified uses or development at that location; 
v.  Any applicant-generated preliminary plans/concepts/sketches or image boards that illustrate the project's idea or concept for site use. If the applicant has analyses of project traffic, geotechnical studies, parking calculations, or other specific information, applicants shall include that information as well; 
vi.  An opportunity for the public to engage with the project's design team and other subject matter experts. The proposer may, at their option, use a "hands on" or "charrette" style interactive design process; 
vii.  Applicant's company profile or individual biography, providing a list of significant or relevant past projects or other relevant development background; and 
viii.  Contact information for a designated representative and the address of a project website or social media site. 
b.  At the conclusion of the forum, the applicant is required to provide an oral summary of the discussions held, ideas received, and concepts offered by attendees. 
c.  The applicant must provide a sign-in sheet to allow attendees to register their attendance and provide their name, mailing address, and other contact information for receipt of future project notices. The applicant must advise attendees that the sign-in sheet will be transmitted to the city, is a public document, and thus that attendees are not required to sign in to attend the forum. 
2.  Second Community Development Forum. The second community development forum is intended to be held after the applicant has received formal comments from the city's design review committee regarding the proposed project, but must be held before the project application may be deemed complete. The city intends that this second forum serve as an opportunity for the applicant to inform the public about project proposals and updates after the first forum and to inform the public and neighborhood about benefits that the project will contribute to the community. It is also a forum for the applicant to receive substantive audience comments regarding the project's size, land uses, and other aspects and suggestions in order to improve and refine project designs. 
a.  To facilitate the purposes of the second community development forum, the applicant is required to provide the following materials to attendees to the extend they are available, and complete the following requirements in holding the second community development forum: 
i.  The project and site information available at the first community development forum, updated as applicable; 
ii.  A project site plan; 
iii.  Floor plans, elevations and cross-sections through the project; 
iv.  Renderings or models; 
v.  A written narrative of how the project addresses applicable site constraints and city, regional, state, and federal legal requirements, related to traffic, parking, natural, biological, historic, and other resources, grading, or other potential environmental impacts, and any planned mitigation measures to reduce one (1) or more of those potential impacts; 
vi.  A written narrative of how the project addresses the goals and requirements of the general plan and development code, and any applicable specific plan or specialty zone or development standard, such as the scenic corridor; and 
vii.  A written narrative of special conditions at the project site, as appropriate. 
b.  At the second community development forum, the applicant is required to present the project's conceptual plan, provide an overview of the proposed land uses and site plan, provide an overview of the information required above, and then answer detailed questions from the audience. Planning staff will also be present to provide an overview of the various applicable standards, such as those found in the general plan, any relevant specific plan and the development code which will be used in evaluating the proposal. After completing the presentation and answering questions from the public, the applicant is required to host several small-group discussions with members of the project's design and engineering teams, then answer further specific questions from members of the public. The city anticipates that the public will have specific questions regarding project impacts such as traffic, noise, or grading of concern to the community, and thus the applicant is required to have present members of the project team qualified to answer questions regarding those and other potential impacts of the project. After completing the small-group break-out sessions, the applicant is required to provide an oral summary of the discussions held, ideas received, and concepts discussed at each small-group break-out session. 
F.  Development Permit Application Requirements After Community Development Forum. 
1.  Post-First Forum Requirements. After the first community development forum, the applicant may file formal planning entitlement applications with the city planning department, in compliance with all applicable requirements of this Code. The applicant must include the following materials, to the extent that they are available from the first community development forum, as part of the application submittal for a project subject to this section: 
a.  A copy of the published Acorn or other newspaper ad, with a proof of publication; 
b.  A copy of the residents and other stakeholders list developed and used for notification of the first community development forum; 
c.  A proof of service evidencing that notices were delivered to the city zone in which the project is located through USPS "Every Door Direct Mail" or other targeted mail service; 
d.  A copy of the sign-in sheet from the first community development forum; 
e.  Copies of available presentation materials from the first community development forum; 
f.  A written narrative description/summary of the first community development forum, that must describe the applicant's presentation, materials and format, include a summary of the applicant's outreach efforts to identify key stakeholder groups and explanation of the use of social media sites to solicit meeting interest, include a summary of public comments, suggestions and concerns, and include a narrative description of how those public comments, suggestions and concerns will be addressed; and 
g.  Proof that the applicant has established a webpage or social media page for the project, as well as contact information for a project representative. 
2.  Post-Second Forum Requirements. After the second community development forum, the applicant must submit the following materials to the city, to the extent that they are available, providing proof of completing this requirement, before the project's planning entitlement applications may be deemed complete, if in compliance with all other applicable requirements of this Code: 
a.  A copy of the published Acorn or other newspaper ad, with a proof of publication; 
b.  A copy of the residents and other stakeholders list developed and used for notification of the second community development forum; 
c.  A proof of service evidencing that notices were delivered to the city zone in which the project is located through USPS "Every Door Direct Mail" or other targeted mail service; 
d.  A copy of the sign-in sheet from the second community development forum; 
e.  Copies of available presentation materials from the second community development forum; 
f.  A written narrative description/summary of the second community development forum, that must describe the applicant's presentation, materials and format, include a summary of the applicant's outreach efforts to identify key stakeholder groups and explanation of the use of social media sites to solicit meeting interest, include a summary of public comments, suggestions and concerns, and include a narrative description of how those public comments, suggestions and concerns will be addressed in revised project plans, as applicable; and 
g.  Proof that the applicant has established an updated webpage or social media page for the project, as well as contact information for a project representative. 
G.  Enforcement. The director shall have the power to enforce this section under all remedies available under this Code and to require an applicant to comply with the terms of this section by not deeming a planning entitlement application complete until the applicant submits proof of compliance, as stated in Subsection (F), with the terms of this section. The director shall also have the power to waive strict compliance with the terms of this section, in the event of failure or deviation by an applicant from strict compliance with the terms of this section, if the director finds that granting a waiver of strict compliance with this section will not defeat the stated purpose of this section and will not prejudice the public's right to be apprised of and participate in a community development forum for a project subject to this section. Any person may appeal a director determination under this subsection to the planning commission under Chapter 17.74 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-353 , § 1, 5-23-2018)  
17.60.060 - Environmental assessment. 
After acceptance of a complete application, the project shall be reviewed as required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and the City of Calabasas CEQA guidelines, to determine whether the proposed project is exempt from the requirements of CEQA or is not a project as defined by CEQA, whether a negative declaration may be issued, or whether an environmental impact report (EIR) must be required. These determinations and, where required, EIRs shall be prepared in accordance with CEQA guidelines. 
If the city finds that the significant development impacts identified in Table 6-2 could potentially have a significant impact on the environment a mitigated negative declaration or environmental impact report shall be prepared. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.60.070 - Staff report and recommendations. 
A.  Staff Evaluation. The development review committee and/or department staff shall review all discretionary applications filed in compliance with this chapter to determine whether they comply and are consistent with the provisions of this development code, other applicable provisions of the Municipal Code, and the General Plan, and shall provide a recommendation to the review authority on whether the application should be approved, approved subject to conditions, or disapproved. 
B.  Staff Report Preparation. A staff report shall be prepared by the department that describes the conclusions of the development review committee and/or department staff about the proposed land use and any development as to its compliance and consistency with the provisions of this development code, other applicable provisions of the Municipal Code, applicable specific plans, and the General Plan. The staff report shall include recommendations on the approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the application, based on the evaluation and consideration of information provided by the applicant and any environmental documents, reports, or studies, if applicable. 
C.  Report Distribution. Staff reports shall be furnished to applicants at the same time as they are provided to members of the review authority prior to a hearing on the application. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.60.080 - Application Denial—Reapplication. 
A.  Whenever an application or portion of an application has been denied or revoked and the denial or revocation becomes final, any new application for the same or similar request shall not be accepted until after one year of the date of the denial, unless the director finds that the conditions surrounding the application have sufficiently changed to warrant a new application or unless the review authority which denies the permit or application does so without prejudice to a new filing sooner than would otherwise be permitted by this section. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, "changed conditions" shall mean any of the following: 
1.  A substantial change or improvement has occurred regarding land use(s) on properties in the vicinity; 
2.  A substantial change or improvement has occurred regarding infrastructure in the vicinity; 
3.  A substantial change or improvement has occurred regarding traffic patterns on surrounding streets and intersections, 
4.  A change in General Plan policy or zoning has occurred which affects the subject property and may benefit the proposed project or request, or 
5.  Any such similar change has occurred resulting in a changed or improved physical condition warranting reconsideration of the proposal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.62 - PERMIT APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL 
This chapter provides standards for the final review, and approval or disapproval of the land use permit applications established by this development code. Procedures and standards for the review and approval of subdivision maps are found in Article IV. Where applicable, the procedures of this chapter are carried out after those described in Chapter 17.60 for each application. 
Land uses not listed in this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.11.020 E- Applicable Standards and Permit Requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010) 
 
17.62.020 - Site plan review. 
A.  Purpose. Site plan review is a discretionary land use permit required for certain proposed land uses that involve new construction. The site plan review process is intended to promote comprehensive design and planning for orderly and compatible development, and ensure that site development, the exterior appearance of structures, landscaping, grading, signs and other improvements are designed to minimize adverse aesthetic and environmental impacts on the site and its surroundings. 
B.  Applicability. Site plan review is required for all land uses identified by this title as allowable subject to site plan review, and the following: 
1.  New site development, or new construction and additions to existing buildings over five thousand (5,000) square feet in commercial and special purpose zoning districts; 
2.  Construction of new residential single-family, multifamily housing, or mixed use residential projects; 
3.  Residential home additions to existing legally permitted single-family or multifamily housing or structures, where the cumulative square footage of the addition, plus the square footage(s) of any legally permitted addition(s) accomplished within the previous five-year period, meets or exceeds any of the following thresholds: 
a.  Additions of over four hundred (400) square feet to existing legally permitted single-family or multifamily housing or structures where the gross floor area of the addition is twenty (20) percent or greater than the gross floor area of the existing legally permitted home or structures, except in the Old Topanga and Calabasas Highlands Overlay Districts; 
b.  Additions over one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet to existing legally permitted single-family or multifamily housing or structures, except in the Old Topanga and Calabasas Highlands Overlay Districts; or 
c.  Additions over two hundred fifty (250) square feet to existing legally permitted single-family housing on properties located in the Old Topanga or Calabasas Highlands Overlay Districts. 
4.  New single family homes in the Old Topanga and Calabasas Highlands Overlay Districts except for items for which the director is the review authority pursuant to subsection 17.62.050(C)(2); and 
5.  For new site development or construction in the scenic corridor except for items for which the director is the review authority pursuant to subsection 17.62.050(C)(2). 
C.  Where used in subsection B above, "residential home addition" means the construction of any new or expanded, fully enclosed structure, on a property with existing, legally permitted, single-family or multifamily housing. 
D.  Application Filing and Processing. An application for site plan review shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.60. 
E.  Project Review, Notice and Hearing. Each site plan review application shall be analyzed to ensure that the proposed development complies with all applicable provisions of this development code. Each application for new structures or site plan modifications shall be reviewed by the commission. The commission shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 17.78 for all projects requiring site plan review. 
F.  Findings, Decision and Conditions. After a public hearing, the review authority shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. The review authority may approve a site plan review application with or without conditions, if all of the following findings are made: 
1.  The proposed project complies with all applicable provisions of this development code; 
2.  The proposed project is consistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and any special design theme adopted by the city for the site and vicinity; 
3.  The approval of the site plan review is in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA); 
4.  The proposed structures, signs, site development, grading and/or landscaping are compatible in design, appearance and scale, with existing uses, development, signs, structures and landscaping for the surrounding area; 
5.  The site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the proposed structures, yards, walls, fences, parking, landscaping, and other development features; and 
6.  The proposed project is designed to respect and integrate with the existing surrounding natural environment to the maximum extent feasible. 
G.  Expiration. A site plan review shall be exercised within one (1) year from the date of approval or the permit shall become void, unless an extension is approved by the director in compliance with Chapter 17.64. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2018-367 , § 3, 9-26-2018)  
17.62.030 - Temporary use permit. 
A.  Purpose. A temporary use permit allows short-term activities that might not meet the normal development or use standards of the applicable zoning district, but may be acceptable because of their temporary nature. This section provides a process for reviewing a proposed use to ensure basic public health, safety and welfare standards are met, and approving suitable temporary uses with the minimum necessary conditions or limitations consistent with the temporary nature of the use. 
B.  Permitted Temporary Uses and Events. The following temporary uses and events may be permitted, subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit. Uses that do not fall within the categories defined below shall instead comply with the use and development restrictions and permit requirements that otherwise apply to the property. 
1.  Construction Yards. Off-site contractors' construction yards in conjunction with an approved construction project. 
2.  Location Filming. Location filming is subject to Municipal Code Chapter 5.04. 
3.  Seasonal Sales Lots. Christmas tree sales lots or the sale of other seasonal products (e.g., pumpkins), and temporary residence/security trailers. A permit shall not be required when the sales are in conjunction with an established commercial business holding a valid business license, provided the activity does not consume more than fifteen (15) percent of the total parking spaces on the site and does not impair emergency vehicle access. 
4.  Special Events. Art and craft fairs, carnivals, circuses, ethnic celebrations, festivals and other similar special events. These may be approved in commercial districts provided that they do not continue for more than five consecutive days. 
5.  Temporary Offices and Work Trailers. A trailer, coach or mobilehome as a temporary office facility, or work site for employees of a business (not including temporary construction trailers, see Section 17.02.020(B)): 
a.  During construction or remodeling of a permanent commercial or industrial structure when a valid building permit is in force; or 
b.  Upon demonstration by the applicant that this temporary facility is a short-term necessity while a permanent facility is being obtained or constructed. 
The permit may be granted for up to one year. An extension may be authorized by the commission through conditional use permit approval. 
6.  Storage—Temporary portable structures subject to the standards in Section 17.12.220. 
7.  Temporary signs and banners pursuant to Section 17.30.080(A). 
8.  Similar Temporary Uses. Similar temporary uses which, in the opinion of the director, are compatible with the zoning district and surrounding land uses. 
C.  Development Standards. Standards for structure setbacks, heights, floor areas, parking and landscaping areas and other structure and property development standards that apply to the type of use or the zoning district of the site shall be used as a guide for determining the appropriate development standards for temporary uses. However, the temporary use permit may authorize variation from the specific requirements as may be appropriate. 
D.  Application. A temporary use permit application shall be made on a form prescribed by the director and filed with the department. The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
1.  Illustrations. Sketches or drawings of sufficient size and clarity to show without further explanation the following: size and location of the property, location of the adjacent street, location and size of all structures on the site, location of structures on adjacent lots, location and number of parking spaces, and location of any temporary fences, signs, or structures to be installed as part of the temporary use; 
2.  Statement of Operations. Letter describing the hours of operation, days that the temporary use will be on the site, number of people staffing the use during operation, anticipated number of people using the facility during commercial operation, and other information about the operation of the use that pertains to the impact of the use on the community or on adjacent uses; and 
3.  Letters from Abutting Property Owners. For uses proposed to last more than thirty-five (35) consecutive days per calendar year (where listed as allowable uses in the applicable zoning district by Article II) letters signed by the property owners of each lot abutting the site on which the temporary use is proposed to be located. The letters shall acknowledge the proposed use, dates and times of operation, and state the abutting property owner's agreement to the operation of the temporary use as described. Applications for which the applicant is unable to obtain these letters may be converted to a standard conditional use permit where the use is allowed with conditional use permit approval by the applicable zoning district. 
E.  Project Review. A temporary use permit may be approved, modified, conditioned or disapproved by the director. At the discretion of the director, a temporary use permit may be referred to the commission for a hearing and decision. A temporary use permit shall be reviewed by the development review committee for recommendations on approval, modification, conditions or disapproval prior to approval by the director or commission. 
F.  Findings. The review authority may approve or conditionally approve a temporary use permit application, only if all the following findings are made: 
1.  That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use; and 
2.  The use, as described and conditionally approved, will not be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city. 
In making these determinations, the review authority shall take into consideration the short time period of the proposed use. 
G.  Conditions of Approval. In approving an application for a temporary use permit, the review authority may impose conditions deemed necessary to ensure that the permit will be in compliance with the findings required by subsection (F) of this section. 
H.  Condition of Site Following Temporary Use. Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be cleaned of debris, litter or any other evidence of the temporary use upon completion or removal of the use, and shall thereafter be used in compliance with the provisions of this development code. A bond may be required prior to initiation of the use to ensure cleanup after the use is finished. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.62.040 - Minor use permits. 
A.  Purpose. A minor use permit is a discretionary administrative review process that allows for the review and approval of minor use applications as required by this Title. 
B.  Applicability. A minor use permit is required for all land uses identified by this Title as allowable subject to minor use permit approval including hobby farms and large farm animals as an accessory use. 
C.  Application Filing and Processing. An application for minor use permit shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.60 (Application Filing and Processing). 
D.  Project Review, Notice and Hearing. Each minor use permit application shall be analyzed to ensure that the proposed use complies with all applicable provisions of this development code. Each application for new structures or site plan modifications shall be reviewed by the director. The director shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 17.78 (Public Hearings). 
E.  Findings, Decision, Conditions. After a public hearing, the director shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. The director may approve a minor use permit application with or without conditions, if all of the findings are made: 
1.  The proposed use is permitted within the applicable zoning district and complies with all applicable provisions of this development code; 
2.  The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, any special design theme adopted by the city for the site and vicinity; 
3.  The approval of the minor use permit for the proposed use is in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA); 
4.  The proposed structures, signs, site development, grading, and/or landscaping related to the proposed use are compatible in design, appearance, and scale, with existing uses, development, signs, structures, and landscaping for the surrounding area; 
5.  The site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the proposed structures, yards, walls, fences, parking, landscaping, and other development features related to the proposed use; and 
6.  The proposed use is designed to respect and integrate with the existing surrounding natural environment to the maximum extent feasible; 
F.  Expiration. A minor use permit shall be exercised within one year from the date of approval or the permit shall become void, unless an extension is approved by the director in compliance with Chapter 17.64. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.62.050 - Scenic corridor permits. 
A.  Purpose. A scenic corridor permit is a discretionary review process that allows for the review and approval of development applications within the -SC (scenic corridor) overlay zoning district (Section 17.18.040), 
B.  Applicability. All development within the -SC overlay zoning district shall receive land use permit approval in compliance with this subsection in addition to the permit normally required by the development code, except for: 
1.  Interior tenant improvements for residential, commercial, office or industrial projects; 
2.  Ministerial projects as defined in Section 15268 of the California CEQA Guidelines and/or the city's CEQA Guidelines; 
3.  Where it is determined by the director that the project will not be visible from the designated scenic corridor; and 
4.  Where a project is exempt per Section 17.02.020. 
C.  Project Review, Notice and Hearing. Each scenic corridor permit application shall be analyzed to ensure that the application is consistent with all applicable provisions of this development code. A public hearing shall be required in compliance with Chapter 17.78. 
1.  Scenic Corridor Permit. The commission shall be the review authority for any new construction or site development within the scenic corridor overlay zone except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section. 
2.  Minor scenic corridor permit. The director shall be the review authority for the following: 
a.  Residential Accessory Structures. Residential accessory structures, including decks, gazebos and patio covers, and fences and walls not exceeding six feet in height; 
b.  Residential Additions. All ground floor additions to single-family homes and additions above the ground floor not exceeding five hundred (500) square feet; 
c.  Signs. Individual, freestanding or wall-mounted signs in compliance with Chapter 17.30; and 
d.  Tennis Courts. Tennis courts without night lighting. 
D.  Required Findings. Approval of development within an -SC overlay district shall require that the review authority make following findings, in addition to the findings required by a site plan review. 
1.  The proposed project design complies with the scenic corridor development guidelines adopted by the council; 
2.  The proposed project incorporates design measures to ensure maximum compatibility with and enhancement of the scenic corridor; 
3.  The proposed project is within an urban scenic corridor designated by the General Plan, and includes adequate design and landscaping, which serves to enhance and beautify the scenic corridor; or 
4.  The proposed project is within a rural or semi-rural scenic corridor designated by the General Plan, and is designed to ensure the continuing preservation of the character of the surrounding area. 
5.  The proposed structures, signs, site development, grading, and/or landscaping related to the proposed use are compatible in design, appearance, and scale, with existing uses, development, signs, structures, and landscaping of the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2014-310, § 1(Att. A) , 2-12-2014)  
17.62.060 - Conditional use permit. 
A.  Purpose. Conditional use permits are intended to allow for activities and uses that are unique and whose effect on the surrounding environment cannot be determined prior to being proposed for a particular location. At the time of application, a review of the location, design, configuration and potential impact of the proposed use shall be conducted by comparing it to established development standards and design guidelines. 
B.  Applicability. Conditional use permit approval is required for all land uses identified by Article II as allowable subject to conditional use permit approval. 
C.  Application Filing and Processing. An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.60. 
D.  Project Review, Notice and Hearing. Each conditional use permit application shall be analyzed to ensure that the application is consistent with all applicable provisions of this development code. Each application shall be reviewed by the director, who shall make a recommendation to the commission. The commission shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 17.78, and may approve or disapprove the conditional use permit in compliance with this section. 
E.  Findings, Decision and Conditions. Following a public hearing, the commission shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. The commission may approve a conditional use permit application with or without conditions, if all of the following findings are made: 
1.  The proposed use is conditionally permitted within the subject zoning district and complies with all of the applicable provisions of this development code; 
2.  The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan or master plan; 
3.  The approval of the conditional use permit for the proposed use is in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA); and 
4.  The location and operating characteristics of the proposed use are compatible with the existing and anticipated future land uses in the vicinity. 
F.  Expiration. A conditional use permit shall be exercised within one year from the date of approval or the permit shall become void, unless an extension is approved by the director in compliance with Chapter 17.64. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.62.070 - Development plan. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of a development plan permit is to permit greater flexibility and creativity in order to allow land uses and development that is superior to those attainable under existing zoning district standards. Development plan approval is required for the following: (i) all development proposed on a site that is subject to a development plan DP overlay zoning district, (ii) all development proposed within the PD zoning district, (iii) to establish setbacks for projects in the PF, REC and OS zoning districts, (iv) to modify the standards for multi-family projects pursuant to Section 17.12.145, (v) to increase the allowed height in the CR zones, (vi) to establish a parcel width and depth less than required by Section 17.46.070 and (vii) subdivisions that propose a cluster development project pursuant to 17.18.030(F). Development plans may also be utilized to modify development standards as set forth in this Title. 
B.  Application Filing and Processing. An application for a development plan shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.60. 
C.  Project Review, Notice and Hearing. Each development plan application shall be analyzed to ensure that the application is consistent with all applicable provisions of this development code. Each application shall be reviewed by the development review committee and the director, who shall make a recommendation to the commission. The commission shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 17.78, and shall make a recommendation to the council. The council may approve or disapprove a development plan in compliance with this section. 
D.  Findings, Decision and Conditions. Following a public hearing, the council shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. The council may approve a development plan application with or without conditions, if all of the following findings are made: 
1.  The proposed use is conditionally permitted within the subject zoning district and complies with all of the applicable provisions of this development code; 
2.  The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan or master plan; 
3.  The approval of the development plan for the proposed use is in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA); and 
4.  The location, design, scale and operating characteristics of the proposed use are compatible with the existing and anticipated future land uses in the vicinity. 
E.  Expiration. A development plan shall be exercised within one year from the date of approval or the permit shall become void, unless an extension is approved by the director in compliance with Chapter 17.64. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.62.080 - Variance. 
A.  Purpose. The provisions of this section allow for variance from the development standards of this development code only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of this development code denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and in identical zoning districts. 
B.  Applicability. The commission may grant a variance from the requirements of this development code governing only the following development standards: 
1.  Dimensional standards (i.e., distance between structures, parcel area, site coverage, landscape and paving requirements, parcel dimensions, setbacks, and structure heights); 
2.  Sign regulations (other than prohibited signs); and 
3.  Number and dimensions of parking areas, loading spaces, landscaping or lighting requirements, except as otherwise provided in this development code. A variance may be granted for a reduction in the number of parking spaces greater than the reduction allowed pursuant to Section 17.28.50. 
Variances shall not be issued to allow deviations from allowed land uses, or residential density regulations. 
C.  Application Requirements. An application for a variance shall be filed in compliance with Section 17.60.030. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by subsection (E) of this section. 
D.  Project Review, Notice and Hearing. Each variance application shall be analyzed to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose and intent of this section. The director shall make a recommendation to the commission, which shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 17.78. 
E.  Findings and Decision. Following a public hearing, the commission may approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove the variance, and shall record the decision in writing with the findings upon which the decision is based, in compliance with state law (Government Code Section 65906). The commission may approve an application, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings are made: 
1.  That there are special circumstances applicable to the property which do not generally apply to other properties in the same zoning district (i.e., size, shape, topography, location or surroundings), such that the strict application of this chapter denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and in identical zoning districts; 
2.  That granting the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other property owners in the same vicinity and zoning district and denied to the property owner for which the variance is sought; 
3.  That granting the variance would not constitute the granting of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations of other properties in the same zoning district. 
4.  That granting the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located; and 
5.  That granting the variance is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan. 
F.  Conditions. Any variance granted shall be subject to conditions that will ensure that the variance does not grant special privilege(s) inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and same zoning district. 
G.  Expiration. A variance shall be exercised within one year from the date of approval, or the variance shall become void, unless an extension is approved by the director in compliance with Chapter 17.64. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-297, § 1(Att. A), 5-23-2012)  
17.62.090 - Administrative plan review. 
A.  Purpose. Administrative plan review is a discretionary land use permit required for certain proposed land uses that involve new construction. The administrative plan review process is intended to promote comprehensive design and planning for orderly and compatible development, and ensure that site development, the exterior appearance of structures, landscaping, grading, signs and other improvements are designed to minimize adverse aesthetic and environmental impacts on the site and its surroundings. 
B.  Applicability. Administrative plan review is required for all land uses identified by this title as allowable subject to administrative plan review including the following: 
1.  Construction in residential zoning districts as provided below, unless located in a scenic corridor; 
a.  Residential home additions to existing legally permitted single-family or multifamily housing or structures, where the cumulative square footage of the addition, plus the square footage(s) of any legally permitted addition(s) accomplished within the previous five-year period, meets or exceeds any of the following thresholds: 
(1)  Additions of up to four hundred (400) square feet to existing legally permitted single-family or multifamily housing or structures where the gross floor area of the addition is twenty (20) percent or greater than the gross floor area of the existing legally permitted home or structures, except in the Old Topanga and Calabasas Highlands Overlay Districts; 
(2)  Additions of over four hundred (400) square feet, and up to a maximum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, to existing legally permitted single-family or multifamily housing or structures where the gross floor area of the addition is less than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the existing legally permitted home or structures, except in the Old Topanga and Calabasas Highlands Overlay Districts; 
(3)  Additions of two hundred fifty (250) square feet or less to existing legally permitted single-family homes or structures on properties located in the Old Topanga or Calabasas Highlands Overlay Districts. 
b.  Where used in subsection (B)(1)(a) above, "residential home addition" means the construction of any new or expanded, fully enclosed structure, on a property with existing legally permitted single-family or multifamily housing. 
2.  Exterior modifications to buildings or site plans in non-residential zones; 
3.  Fences in all zoning districts except residential zoning districts. Fences for residential properties located in the scenic corridor overlay district shall require a minor scenic corridor permit; 
4.  Flags higher than the height of a building; 
5.  Pole mounted flags in the RS, RC, RR and OS zones; 
6.  Pool and spa with reduced setback from rear of side property line adjacent to dedicated open space (subsection 17.12.165(H)(5)); 
7.  Satellite antenna larger than one (1) meter unless located in the scenic corridor overlay district; 
8.  Reverse vending machines (up to five (5) machines); and 
9.  Tennis and other recreational fencing over six (6) feet in height. 
C.  Application Filing and Processing. An application for administrative plan review shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.60. 
D.  Project Review, Notice, and Hearing. An administrative plan review may be approved, modified, conditioned or disapproved by the director. Each administrative plan review application shall be analyzed to ensure that the proposed project complies with all applicable provisions of this development code. The director shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 17.78. 
At the discretion of the director, an administrative plan review application may instead be referred to the commission for a hearing and decision in compliance with this section. 
E.  Findings, Decision and Conditions. The review authority shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. The review authority may approve an administrative plan review application with or without conditions, if all of the following findings are made: 
1.  The proposed project complies with all applicable provisions of this development code; 
2.  The proposed project is consistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, and any special design theme adopted by the city for the site and vicinity; 
3.  The approval of the administrative plan review is in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA); 
4.  The proposed structures, signs, site development, grading and/or landscaping are compatible in design, appearance and scale, with existing uses, development, signs, structures and landscaping for the surrounding area; 
5.  The site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the proposed structures, yards, walls, fences, parking, landscaping, and other development features; and 
6.  The proposed project is designed to respect and integrate with the existing surrounding natural environment to the maximum extent feasible. 
F.  Expiration. An administrative plan review shall be exercised within one year from the date of approval or the permit shall become void, unless an extension is approved by the director in compliance with Chapter 17.64. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-297, § 1(Att. A), 5-23-2012; Ord. No. 2018-367 , § 4, 9-26-2018)  
17.62.100 - Home occupation permit. 
A.  Purpose. A home occupation permit is established to allow home occupations to exist, provided the residential character of residential neighborhoods is maintained and provided safeguards are established to prevent the use of home occupations from transforming the use of a residence into a commercial use or a residential neighborhood into a commercial one. 
B.  Project Review. An application for a home occupation permit must be submitted to the city on forms supplied by the department. The applicant must provide information required by the application and any additional information requested by the city to assist in the review of the permit request. 
C.  Decision. The director shall issue the home occupation permit after determining that the request complies with Section 17.12.115 and all other Code provisions applicable to the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.62.110 - Zoning clearance. 
A.  Purpose. Zoning clearance is the procedure used by the city to verify that a proposed structure or land use complies with (i) the permitted list of activities allowed in the applicable zoning district, and (ii) the development standards applicable to the type of use. Where Article II requires zoning clearance as a prerequisite to establishing a land use, the director shall evaluate the proposed use to determine whether the clearance may be granted in compliance with this section. 
B.  Applicability. A zoning clearance shall be required at the time of department review of any building, grading or other construction permit, or other authorization required by this development code for the proposed use. Where no other authorization is required, a request for zoning clearance shall be filed with and as required by the department. 
C.  Criteria for Clearance. The director shall issue the zoning clearance after determining that the request complies with all development code provisions applicable to the proposed project. 
D.  A zoning clearance is not required for projects that have been approved under another permit process identified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.64 - PERMIT IMPLEMENTATION, TIME LIMITS AND EXTENSIONS 
 
17.64.010 - Purpose. 
The following provisions outline requirements for the implementation or exercising of the permits required by this development code, including time limits, and procedures for extensions of time. Time limits and extension criteria for tentative maps are found in Article IV, beginning with Section 17.41.300. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.64.020 - Effective date of permits. 
The land use permits established by this article shall become effective on the eleventh day following the date of application approval by the appropriate review authority, provided that no appeal of the review authority's action has been filed in compliance with Chapter 17.74. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.64.030 - Applications deemed approved. 
Any permit application deemed approved in compliance with Government Code Section 65956 shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this development code, which shall be satisfied by the applicant before any construction permit is issued, or a land use not requiring a construction permit is established. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.64.040 - Performance guarantees. 
A permit applicant may be required by conditions of approval or by action of the director to provide adequate security to guarantee the faithful performance and proper completion of any approved work, and/or compliance with conditions of approval imposed by the review authority. The provisions of this section apply to performance guarantees for projects authorized by any of the land use permits covered by this article. Requirements for performance guarantees for subdivision improvements are instead provided by Section 17.48.040. 
A.  Form and Amount of Security. The required security shall be in the form of a cash deposit, cashier's check or certified check deposited with the city's finance department. Where approved by the director, a certificate of deposit or letter of credit may be used, with the city named as beneficiary, where the security pledges that funds necessary to complete permitted work are on deposit and guaranteed for payment to the city when required by the city. The amount and form of security shall be as determined by the director. The amount of security shall be sufficient to ensure proper completion of the work and/or compliance with conditions of approval. 
B.  Security for Maintenance. In addition to any improvement security required to guarantee proper completion of work, the director may require security for maintenance of the work, in an amount determined by the director to be sufficient to ensure the proper maintenance and functioning of improvements. 
C.  Duration of Security. Unless otherwise specified in the permit, required improvement security shall remain in effect until final inspections have been made and all work has been accepted by the director. Unless otherwise specified in the permit, maintenance security shall remain in effect for one year after the date of final inspection. Security for oak tree monitoring shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.32. 
D.  Release or Forfeit of Security. Upon satisfactory completion of work and the approval of a final inspection (or after the end of the required time for maintenance security), the improvement and/or maintenance security shall be released. However, upon (i) failure to complete the work, (ii) failure to comply with all of the terms of any applicable permit, or (iii) failure of the completed improvements to function properly, the city may do the required work or cause it to be done, and collect from the permittee or surety all the costs incurred by the city, including the costs of the work, and all administrative and inspection costs. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee after deduction of the cost of the work by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.64.050 - Time limits and extensions. 
A.  Time Limits. Unless conditions of approval or other provisions of this development code establish a different time limit, any permit or entitlement not exercised within one year of approval shall expire and become void. A permit shall not be deemed exercised until the permittee has obtained a building permit and performed substantial construction, commenced construction, or has commenced the permitted use on the subject property in compliance with the conditions of approval provided, however, that if a permittee has taken all actions necessary to obtain a building permit and such a permit has not issued solely due to the requirements of Sections 17.18.020(E), 17.18.025 (E) or Section 17.18.050(B) of this title, then the expiry of the permit shall be tolled from the date the permittee takes the last action on necessary to obtain a building permit to the date that a permit issues. 
B.  Extensions of Time. Upon request by the applicant, the director may extend the time for an approved permit to be exercised. The applicant shall file a written request for an extension of time with the department at least ten (10) days before the expiration of the permit, together with the filing fee required by the city fee resolution. The director shall then determine whether the permittee has attempted to comply with the conditions of the permit. The burden of proof is on the permittee to establish with substantial evidence that the permit should not expire. If the director determines that the permittee has proceeded in good faith and has exercised due diligence in complying with the conditions in a timely manner, the director may renew the permit for an additional one year from the date of the decision. 
C.  Hearing on Expiration. At the request of the applicant, the director may hold a hearing on any proposed expiration of a permit, in compliance with Chapter 17.78. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2010-267, § 6, 2-10-2010)  
17.64.060 - Changes to an approved project. 
Development or a new land use authorized through an entitlement granted in compliance with this chapter shall be established only as approved by the review authority and subject to any conditions of approval, except where changes to the project are approved in compliance with this section. An applicant shall request desired changes in writing, and shall also furnish appropriate supporting materials and an explanation of the reasons for the request. Changes may be requested either before or after construction or establishment and operation of the approved use. 
A.  The director may authorize changes to an approved site plan, architecture or the nature of the approved use if the changes: 
1.  Are consistent with all applicable provisions of this chapter; 
2.  Do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically addressed or was a basis for findings in a negative declaration or environmental impact report for the project; 
3.  Do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically addressed or was a basis for conditions of approval for the project or that was a specific consideration by the review authority in the approval of the permit; 
4.  Do not result in a significant expansion of the use; and 
5.  Are generally consistent with the intent of the original approval. 
B.  Changes to the project involving features described in subsections (A)(2) and (3) of this section shall only be approved by the review authority through a new permit application processed in compliance with this development code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.64.070 - Permits to run with the land. 
A.  A conditional use permit granted in compliance with Chapter 17.62 shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site, business, service, use or structure that was the subject of the permit application. 
B.  Change in Ownership. In the event there is a change in either the owner or operator of a site with a conditional permit, the issuance of a new conditional use permit shall not be required. The new owner or operator shall (i) notify the city of the change in identity of the owner or operator within fifteen (15) days after the date the change becomes effective, (ii) register such change with the director by providing the name and business address of the new owner or operator, and (iii) verify in writing that the new owner or operator has fully reviewed the conditional use permit and is familiar with its terms. Upon receipt of notification of a change in the owner or operator of a conditional use permit, the city may inspect the property to make certain that the new owner or operator is complying with all the terms and conditions of the conditional use permit. The new owner/operator shall agree in writing to all applicable conditions and operating standards prior to re-opening/use under the new ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.66 - Specific Plans 
 
17.66.010 - Purpose. 
When required by the General Plan, this development code, or by state law to systematically implement the General Plan for any part of the city, a specific plan shall be prepared, processed, approved or disapproved, and implemented in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.66.020 - Mandatory pre-application conference. 
Before preparing a draft specific plan in compliance with this chapter, the applicant shall contact the director to request a pre-application conference with the development review committee. The purpose of the meeting shall be for the committee (i) to review with the applicant the requirements of this chapter, the General Plan, this development code, and/or state law which trigger the need to prepare a the specific plan, (ii) to discuss issues associated with the specific plan area that must be addressed by the proposed plan, and (iii) to respond to questions from the applicant about the plan preparation and processing implementation issues if it is approved. The director shall convene the committee to meet with the applicant at a mutually acceptable time. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.66.030 - Specific plan—Preparation and content. 
An applicant shall prepare a draft specific plan for review by the city that includes the following detailed information in the form of text and diagrams, organized in accordance with department requirements: 
A.  Proposed Land Uses. The distribution, location and extent of land uses proposed within the area covered by the plan, including open space areas; 
B.  Infrastructure. The proposed distribution, location, extent and intensity of major components of public and private infrastructure needed to support the proposed land uses, including such facilities related to transportation, sewage, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy and other essential facilities to be located within the specific plan area; 
C.  Land Use and Development Standards. Standards and criteria by which development will proceed, and standards for the conservation, development and utilization of natural resources, where applicable; 
D.  Implementation Measures. A program of implementation measures, including regulations, programs, public works projects, and financing measures necessary to carry out the proposed land uses, infrastructure and development and conservation standards and criteria; 
E.  Relationship to General Plan. A statement of the relationship of the specific plan to the General Plan; 
F.  Additional Information. The specific plan shall contain any additional information determined to be necessary by the director because of the characteristics of the area to be covered by the plan, applicable policies of the General Plan, or any other issue determined by the director to be significant. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.66.040 - Specific plan—Filing and processing. 
A draft specific plan shall be filed with the department, and shall be accompanied by the fee required by the city fee resolution. The draft plan shall be processed in the same manner as required for General Plans by Government Code Sections 65350 et seq., and as follows: 
A.  Development Review Committee Evaluation. After the filing of a draft specific plan, the development review committee shall review the draft specific plan to determine whether it conforms with the provisions of this section. If the draft plan is not in compliance, it shall immediately be returned to the applicant with a written explanation as to why it does not comply, and with suggested revisions to ensure compliance. When a draft plan is returned by the applicant to the department and the committee determines it is complete and in compliance with this section, the plan shall be deemed to be accepted for processing. 
B.  Environmental Review. The draft specific plan shall be subject to environmental review as specified in Section 17.60.060. 
C.  Staff Report. A staff report shall be prepared for the draft specific plan in compliance with Section 17.60.070 which shall include detailed recommendations for changes to the text and diagrams of the specific plan to make it acceptable for adoption. 
D.  Public Hearings. A proposed specific plan shall be subject to public hearings before both the commission and council before its adoption, as follows: 
1.  Commission. The director shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed specific plan after completion of a staff report and any required environmental documents, but not before the expiration of any public review periods for environmental documents required by CEQA. The hearing shall receive public notice and be conducted in compliance with Chapter 17.78. After the hearing, the commission shall forward a written recommendation to the council. 
2.  Council. After receipt of the commission recommendation, a public hearing on the specific plan shall be scheduled. The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in compliance with Chapter 17.78. After the hearing, the council may adopt the specific plan, may disapprove the plan, or may adopt the plan with changes, provided that any changes to the plan that were not considered by the commission shall be referred to the commission for its recommendation. Failure of the commission to report within forty-five (45) days after the referral, or any longer period set by the council shall be deemed a recommendation for the approval of the changes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.66.050 - Adoption of specific plan. 
The adoption of a proposed specific plan is entirely at the discretion of the council. The council shall adopt a specific plan only if it first determines that the plan: 
A.  Is consistent with the General Plan; and 
B.  Will not have a significant effect on the environment, or is subject to the overriding findings specified in the city's CEQA Guidelines. 
The specific plan shall be adopted by ordinance, or by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.66.060 - Implementation—Amendments. 
A.  Development within Specific Plan Area. After the adoption of a specific plan, no public works project may be approved, no tentative map or parcel map for which a tentative map was not required may be approved, and no amendment to this development code may be adopted within an area covered by a specific plan unless it is consistent with that specific plan. The council may impose a specific plan fee surcharge on development permits within the specific plan area, in compliance with Government Code Section 65456. 
B.  Amendments. An adopted specific plan may be amended through the same procedure specified by this chapter for the adoption of a specific plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.68 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
 
17.68.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter outlines the procedures and requirements for the review and approval of development agreements. The provisions of this chapter are fully consistent with the provisions of state law governing development agreements (Article 2.5 of Section 4 of Division 1 of Title 7, commencing with Section 65864 of the California Government Code). 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.68.020 - Application. 
A.  Filing. Any owner of real property may request and apply through the director to enter into a development agreement provided the following are met: 
1.  The status of the applicant as the owner or long-term lessee of the property is established to the satisfaction of the director; and 
2.  The application is made on forms approved, and contains all information required, by the director. 
B.  Processing. The director is empowered to receive, review, process and prepare, together with recommendations for commission and council consideration, all applications for development agreements. 
C.  Fees. Processing fees shall be collected for any application for a development agreement made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.68.030 - Development agreement hearings. 
A.  Commission Review. Upon finding the application for a development agreement complete, the director shall set the application, together with staff recommendations, for a public hearing before the commission in compliance with Chapter 17.78. Following conclusion of the public hearing, the commission shall make a written recommendation to the council. 
B.  Council Consideration. Upon receipt of the commission's recommendation, the city clerk shall set the application and written report for public hearing before the council in compliance with Chapter 17.78. Following conclusion of the public hearing, the council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application. 
C.  Council Action. Should the council approve or conditionally approve the application, it shall as a part of its action direct the preparation of a development agreement embodying the terms and conditions of the application as approved or conditionally approved, and an ordinance authorizing execution of the development agreement by the city manager. 
D.  Ordinance Content. The ordinance shall contain findings that the development agreement is consistent with this chapter, the General Plan, and any applicable specific plans. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.68.040 - Content of development agreement. 
A.  Mandatory Contents. All development agreements shall contain the following provisions: 
1.  Duration of the agreement; 
2.  Permitted uses for the subject property; 
3.  Density or intensity of the permitted uses; 
4.  Approved site plans, elevations, floor plans and sections; 
5.  Provisions, if any, for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes; 
6.  Protection from either a future growth control ordinance or a future increase in development impact fees; 
7.  A tiered amendment review procedure that may incorporate the following: 
a.  Director sign-off for minor modifications to the development project, with specific criteria for the minor modifications, and 
b.  Approval of major modifications to the development project by the council; 
8.  Provisions which would necessitate a reconsideration or amendment of the a development agreement when there is a discovery of health and safety issues of compelling public necessity (i.e., a new environmental health hazard is discovered). 
B.  Permissive Contents. A development agreement may include the following at the option of the council: 
1.  Conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions, provided that these provisions shall not prevent development of the land in the manner specified in the agreement; 
2.  Provisions which require that construction shall be commenced within a specified time and that the project or any single phase, be completed within a specified time; 
3.  Terms and conditions relating to applicant financing of necessary public improvements and facilities, including applicant participation in benefit assessment proceedings; and 
4.  Any other terms, conditions and requirements as the council may deem necessary and proper, including, a requirement for ensuring, to the satisfaction of the city, performance of all provisions of the agreement in a timely fashion by the applicant/contracting party. 
1.  The plain terms of the development agreement itself; 
2.  The provisions of state law (Government Code Sections 65864 et seq., cited above); and 
3.  The provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.68.050 - Execution and recordation. 
A.  Effective Date. The city shall execute development agreements on or after the effective date of the ordinance approving the agreement. 
B.  Recordation. A development agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Los Angeles County recorder no later than ten (10) days after it is executed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.68.060 - Periodic review. 
A.  Review Required. Every development agreement approved and executed in compliance with this section shall be subject to periodic city review during the full term of the agreement. Appropriate fees to cover the city's costs to conduct the periodic reviews shall be collected from the applicant in compliance with Section 17.60.040. 
B.  Purpose of Review. The purpose of the periodic review shall be to determine whether the applicant or its successor-in-interest has complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant or its successor to demonstrate compliance to the full satisfaction of, and in a manner prescribed by, the city. 
C.  Action Based on Noncompliance. If, as a result of periodic review the council finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant or its successor-in-interest has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the council may order, after a noticed public hearing, that the agreement be terminated or modified. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.68.070 - Effect of development agreement. 
A.  Applicable Regulations. Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement itself, the rules, regulations and official policies governing permitted uses of the land, density and design, improvement and construction standards and specifications, applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement, are the rules, regulations and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement. 
B.  Additional Requirements. A development agreement does not prevent the city, in subsequent actions, from applying new rules, regulations and policies that do not conflict with those applicable to the property, nor does a development agreement prevent the city from conditionally approving or disapproving any subsequent development project application on the basis of existing or new rules, regulations and policies. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.68.080 - Amendments or extensions to development agreements. 
A.  Changes to Approved Development. If any development agreement is amended during its term, any change in the overall intensity of development or revisions to approved land uses shall be consistent with the provisions of the General Plan. In any case where state law requires a finding of consistency with the General Plan in order to approve an amendment to a development agreement, the provisions of the amendment shall be made consistent with the General Plan. 
B.  Extension of Agreement. If the term of a development agreement is extended, any development that occurs after the original expiration date shall be consistent with the provisions of the General Plan as of the adoption date of the amended development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Article VI. - Development Code Administration  
Chapter 17.70 - ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY 
 
17.70.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter describes the authority and responsibilities of city staff and official bodies in the administration of this development code, in addition to the council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.70.020 - Planning agency defined. 
The functions of a planning agency shall be performed by the Calabasas city council, planning commission and community development department, in compliance with Government Code Section 65100. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.70.030 - Community development director. 
A.  Appointment. The director shall be appointed by the city manager. 
B.  Duties and Authority. The director shall: 
1.  Head and manage the department; 
2.  Have the responsibility to perform all the functions designated by Government Code Section 65103; 
3.  Perform the duties and functions prescribed in this development code, including, the review of development projects, and making similar use determinations and code interpretations, in compliance with this development code and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA); 
4.  Make determinations regarding consistency with all indicated standards and guidelines in this development code. 
5.  Perform any other responsibilities assigned by the city manager or council. 
Except where otherwise provided by this development code, the responsibilities of the director may also be carried out by department employees under the supervision of the director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.70.040 - Development review committee (DRC). 
A.  Membership. The DRC shall consist of the following members: 
1.  The director or designee, who shall serve as the chair and secretary; and 
2.  Other city department directors or their designees (public works, fire, police, etc.) as needed. 
B.  Duties and Authority. The duties and responsibilities of the DRC shall be to review discretionary development/improvement proposals, provide applicants with appropriate design comments, and make recommendations to the director, or the Commission, as provided by this development code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.70.060 - Architectural review panel (ARP). 
The Calabasas architectural review panel (ARP) is established, and assigned duties and authorities by Chapter 2.40 (architectural review panel) of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.70.070 - Planning commission. 
The Calabasas planning commission is established, and assigned duties and authorities by Chapter 2.28 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.72 - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES, USES AND LOTS 
 
17.72.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes uniform provisions for the regulation of nonconforming structures, land uses and lots. Within the zoning districts established by title, there exist structures, land uses and lots that were lawful prior to the adoption, or amendment of this development code, but which would be prohibited, or regulated or restricted differently under the terms of this development code or future amendments. It is the intent of this development code to discourage the long-term continuance of these nonconformities, but to permit them to exist under limited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.72.020 - Restrictions on nonconforming structures and uses. 
Nonconformities may be continued subject to the following provisions, except as otherwise provided by Section 17.72.030. 
A.  Nonconforming Uses. A use, lawfully occupying a structure or a site on the effective date of this chapter or of amendments thereto, that does not conform with the use regulation for the applicable zoning district shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided in this article. A site that does not conform with parking, loading, landscaping, or sign regulations of the applicable zoning district shall not be deemed a nonconforming use solely because of one of more of these nonconformities. A nonconforming use of land or within a structure may be continued, transferred or sold, provided that: 
1.  The use shall not be expanded or intensified without complying with all applicable provisions of this development code; 
2.  The use shall not be extended to occupy a greater area than it lawfully occupied before becoming a nonconforming use without complying with all applicable provisions of this development code; and 
3.  No additional uses are established on the site unless the nonconforming use is first discontinued, and any replacement use complies with all applicable provisions of this development code. 
B.  Nonconforming Structures. A nonconforming structure may continue to be used as follows: 
1.  Alterations and Additions to Structures. A building or structure that does not conform to the standards of the applicable zoning district may be structurally altered or enlarged, upon approval of any applicable permit, as follows: 
a.  The alteration or addition shall not increase the discrepancy between the existing conditions and the current development standards including site coverage, pervious surface, setbacks, and height. 
b.  A nonconforming setback may be continued provided the alteration or addition is an extension of that portion of the existing structure that encroaches into a required setback; provided, however, the alteration or addition shall not (i) extend into the required setback farther than the existing portion of the structure that encroaches into the required setback, (ii) have an area greater than fifty (50) percent of the area of the existing portion of the structure that encroaches into the required setback or (iii) exceed fifty (50) percent of the length or the existing structure that encroaches into the required setback. This provision may only be utilized once on a property. Future alterations or additions may not encroach into the required setback. 
c.  New construction on the second or third floors shall conform to the setback of the applicable zoning district except as provided in subsection b. above. 
d.  A reconstruction or alteration of a nonconforming accessory structure that are not considered part of the floor area of the main structure, such as attached or detached patio covers, may be remodeled or reconstructed utilizing the existing setback if the new structure has no greater floor area than existed before the reconstruction or alteration. For those structures without floor area, such as covered patios, the floor areas shall mean that area occupied by the structure. Measurement of this area shall be from post or other vertical support and shall not include any overhangs or projections. 
e.  Structures that are to be remodeled or renovated such that fifty (50) percent or greater of any existing exterior walls or existing square footage is demolished or removed within a two-year period, shall conform to all current development standards for that district. 
2.  Maintenance and Repair. A nonconforming structure may undergo normal maintenance and repairs provided no structural alterations are made involving the removal and reconstruction of fifty (50) percent or more of the non-conforming structure (exception: see subsection (B)(3), following); and 
3.  Seismic Retrofitting. Reconstruction required to reinforce unreinforced masonry structures shall be permitted without cost limitations, provided the retrofitting is limited exclusively to compliance with earthquake safety standards. 
C.  Nonconforming Use of a Conforming Structure. The nonconforming use of a building that otherwise conforms with all applicable provisions of this chapter may be continued, transferred and sold, as follows: 
1.  Expansion of Use. The nonconforming use of a portion of a structure may be extended throughout the building with conditional use permit approval. 
2.  Substitution of Use. The nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to a use of the same or more restricted nature, with conditional use permit approval. 
D.  Conforming Use of a Nonconforming Structure. A new use may occupy a non-conforming structure pursuant to the requirements herein for use permits. Structural alterations to a nonconforming structure shall be permitted when necessary to comply with the requirements of law, or to accommodate a conforming use when such alterations do not increase the degree of nonconformance. 
E.  Destroyed Structure. The reconstruction of a structure damaged by fire or calamity, which at the time was devoted to a nonconforming use may be authorized by the site plan permit approval, provided that an application shall be submitted within twelve (12) months and reconstruction shall commence no later than twenty-four (24) months after the date of the damage, and the reconstructed building shall have no greater floor area than the one destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.72.030 - Loss of nonconforming status. 
If a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a conforming structure is discontinued for a continuous period of one year, it shall be presumed that the use has been abandoned. Without further action by the city, further use of the site or structure shall comply with all the regulations of the applicable zoning district and all other applicable provisions of this development code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.72.040 - Nonconforming signs. 
Requirements for nonconforming signs are provided by Sections 17.30.090, 17.30.100 and 17.30.110. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.72.050 - Nonconforming lots. 
A nonconforming lot of record that does not comply with the access, area or width requirements of this development code for the zoning district in which it is located, shall be considered to be a legal building site if it meets one of the criteria specified by this section. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to produce sufficient evidence to establish the applicability of one or more of the following. 
A.  Approved Subdivision. The lot was created through a subdivision approved by the county of Los Angeles or the city. 
B.  Individual Lot Legally Created by Deed. The lot is under one ownership and of record, and was legally created by a recorded deed prior to the effective date of the zoning amendment that made the parcel nonconforming. 
C.  Variance or Lot Line Adjustment. The lot was approved through the variance procedure (Section 17.62.080) or resulted from a lot line adjustment as provided in the Article IV. 
D.  Partial Government Acquisition. The lot was created in conformity with the provisions of this development code, but was made nonconforming when a portion of the lot was acquired by a governmental entity so that the lot size is decreased not more than twenty (20) percent and the yard facing any road was decreased not more than fifty (50) percent. 
Where structures have been erected on a nonconforming lot, the area where structures are located shall not be later divided so as to reduce the building site area and/or frontage below the requirements of the applicable zoning district or other applicable provisions of this development code, or in any way that makes the use of the parcel more nonconforming. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.72.060 - Nonconforming Use—Large farm animals. 
Large farm animals in excess of the number allowed in Section 17.12.040 may be continued on a property if the property is sold or otherwise transferred, provided that the number of large farm animals shall not be expanded or intensified without complying with all applicable provisions of this development code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.74 - APPEALS AND CALLS FOR REVIEW 
 
17.74.010 - Purpose. 
Determinations or actions of the director or commission may be appealed or called for review as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.74.020 - Subjects and jurisdiction. 
Determinations and actions that may be appealed or called for review, and the authority to act upon an appeal or called for review shall be as follows: 
A.  Code Administration and Interpretation. The following actions of the director and department staff may be appealed to or called for review by the commission and then appealed to or called for review by the council: 
1.  Determinations of the meaning or applicability of the provisions of this development code that are believed to be in error, and cannot be resolved with staff; 
2.  Any determination pursuant to Government Code 65943 that a permit application or information submitted with the application is incomplete; and 
B.  Land Use Permit and Hearing Decisions. Decisions of the director on applications including zoning clearances, sign permits, administrative plan reviews, minor scenic corridor permits, lot line adjustments, and minor use permits may be appealed to, or called for review to the commission. Decisions by the commission may be appealed to, or called for review, the council. 
C.  Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter and in the remainder of Title 17 of the Calabasas Municipal Code to the contrary, a determination of the director or department staff that a violation of the development code exists pursuant to Section 17.80.020 is not appealable to the commission or to the council, nor is it subject to a call for review. When an action or application for a land use permit occurs in connection with the abatement of a violation of the development code, any appeal or call for review pursuant to subsections A or B above, shall not stay or otherwise affect the city's exercise of the remedies set forth in Section 17.80.050. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.74.030 - General requirements. 
A.  Appeals. 
1.  Unless another provision of this development code specifies otherwise, for any order, requirement, decision, determination, interpretation or ruling described in subsection A. of Section 17.74.020, appeals may be initiated by (i) any person who sought a determination of the meaning or applicability of a provision of the development code; or (ii) any person who filed an application which city determines is incomplete pursuant to Government Code section 65943. 
2.  Unless another provision of this development code specifies otherwise, for decisions described in subsection B. of Section 17.74.020, appeals may be initiated by (i) the applicant; (ii) an owner of real property, any part of which is located within five hundred (500) feet of the external boundaries of the subject property; or (iii) any person who, in person or through a representative explicitly identified as such, presented written or oral testimony to the director or commission at a public hearing for the subject approval. 
B.  Calls for Review. As an additional safeguard to avoid results inconsistent with the purposes of this Code, any order, requirement, decision, determination, interpretation or ruling of the director may be called up for commission review upon written request by two (2) members of the commission and any order, requirement, decision, determination, interpretation or ruling of the commission may be called up for council review upon written request by any two (2) members of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2016-334, § 2 , 4-13-2016)  
17.74.040 - Form and content. 
A.  Filing of Appeals. A notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in duplicate in the office of the city clerk upon forms provided by the city. An appeal from any order, requirement, decision, determination, or interpretation by the commission or director in the administration of the provisions of this title must set forth specifically the error or abuse of discretion claimed by the appellant or how an application did meet or fail to meet, as the case may be, the standards of this title. 
B.  Initiation of a Call for Review. A call for review may be initiated by any two (2) members of the commission or any two (2) members of the city council and shall be filed in writing with the city clerk. 
C.  Effect on Decisions. Decisions that are appealed or called up for review shall not become effective until the appeal or review is resolved. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2016-334, § 3 , 4-13-2016)  
17.74.050 - Processing of appeals. 
A.  Action and Findings. 
1.  When reviewing a decision on a land use permit, the appeal body may adopt additional conditions of approval that may address other issues or concerns than the subject of the appeal. 
2.  A decision by an appeal body may also be appealed as provided by Section 17.74.020, provided that the decision of the council on an appeal shall be final. 
B.  Judicial Review. The time within which judicial review of any final decision must be sought is governed by Municipal Code Chapter 3.32 and the California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
C.  Withdrawal of Appeal—Commission Actions. After an appeal of a commission decision has been filed, the appeal shall not be withdrawn except with the consent of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.74.060 - Time for filing. 
A.  Appeals. Appeals shall be initiated within ten (10) business days after director or commission action. 
B.  Calls for Review. Calls for review shall be initiated within ten (10) business days after director or commission action. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.74.070 - Filing fees. 
A.  Appeals. An appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount determined by council resolution. 
B.  Calls for Review. No fee shall be required for a call for review. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.74.080 - Procedures for appeals and calls for review. 
A.  Scheduling. Within thirty (30) days after the director or commission action, the commission or council shall schedule the appeal or call for review for hearing and decision and give notice of the date, time and place thereof to the applicant, the commission and the appellant, if any. Prior to the hearing, the director shall transmit to the city clerk a report of the findings of the director or commission and the director shall present at the hearing all exhibits, notices, petitions and other papers and documents on file with the commission. The hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days after the commission action. 
B.  Public Hearing and Notice. An appeal or call for review shall be a public hearing if the decision being appealed or reviewed required a public hearing. Notice shall be given in the manner required for the decision being appealed or reviewed. 
C.  Evidence. The hearing shall be de novo. At the hearing, the commission or council shall consider all pertinent material, including all documents constituting the administrative record. 
D.  Hearing. At the hearing, any party or person may appear in person or by agent or attorney to provide testimony. 
E.  Required Findings, Decision and Notice. Following an appeal or review hearing, the commission may remand the matter to the director for further consideration or may affirm (in whole or in part), modify, or reverse the decision appealed or reviewed or the council may remand the matter to the commission for further consideration or may affirm (in whole or in part), modify, or reverse the decision appealed or reviewed. If the commission does not remand the matter to the director or the city council does not remand the matter to the commission, it shall make the findings prescribed by this Code for the matter in issue. The commission or council decision shall be made within thirty (30) days of the hearing date. The city clerk shall mail notice of the commission or council decision to the applicant and to the appellant, if any, within five working days after the date of the decision. When the commission or council acts on an appeal by denying an application it may do so with or without prejudice to a new filing of a substantially similar project sooner than would be permitted by Section 17.60.080 of this Title. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.76 - GENERAL PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT CODE AMENDMENTS 
 
17.76.010 - Purpose. 
The following provisions allow for the amendment of the General Plan, the official zoning map, or this development code whenever required by public necessity and general welfare. A General Plan amendment may include revisions to text, goals, policies, actions or land use designations. Zoning map amendments have the effect of rezoning property from one zoning district to another. Amendments to this development code may modify any standards, requirements or procedures applicable to the subdivision, development or use of property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.76.020 - Hearings and notice. 
Upon receipt of a complete application to amend the General Plan, the zoning map or this development code, or upon initiation by the director, commission or council, and following department review, public hearings shall be set before the commission and council. Notice of the hearings shall be given in compliance with Chapter 17.78. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.76.030 - Commission action on amendments. 
The commission shall make a written recommendation to the council whether to approve, approve in modified form, or disapprove the proposed amendment, based upon the findings contained in Section 17.76.050. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.76.040 - Council action on amendments. 
Upon receipt of the commission's recommendation, the council shall, approve, approve in modified form or disapprove the proposed amendment based upon the findings in Section 17.76.050. 
If the council proposes to adopt any substantial modification to the amendment not previously considered by the commission during its hearings, the proposed modification shall be first referred back to the commission for its recommendation. Failure of the commission to report within forty-five (45) days after the referral, or within any longer time set by the council, shall be deemed a recommendation for approval of the modification. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.76.050 - Findings. 
A.  Findings for General Plan Amendments. An amendment to the General Plan may be approved only if all of the following findings are made: 
1.  The proposed amendment is internally consistent with the General Plan; 
2.  The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience or welfare of the city; 
3.  The site is physically suitable (including access, provision of utilities, compatibility with adjoining land uses, and absence of physical constraints) for the requested/anticipated land use development(s); and 
4.  The proposed amendment is in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
B.  Findings for Zoning Map or Development Code Amendments. An amendment to the text of this development code or the official zoning map may be approved only if all of the following findings are made, as applicable to the type of amendment. 
1.  Findings Required for all Zoning Map and Development Code Amendments. 
a.  The proposed amendment is consistent with the goals, policies, and actions of the General Plan; 
b.  The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience or welfare of the city; and 
c.  The proposed amendment is in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
2.  Additional Finding for Development Code Amendments. The proposed amendment is internally consistent with other applicable provisions of this development code. 
3.  Additional Finding for Zoning Map Amendments. The site is physically suitable (including access, provision of utilities, compatibility with adjoining land uses, and absence of physical constraints) for the requested zoning designations and anticipated land  uses/developments. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.78 - PUBLIC HEARINGS 
 
17.78.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter provides procedures for public hearings before the commission and council as required by this development code. Public notice shall be given and the hearing shall be conducted as provided by this chapter, and applicable provisions of state law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.78.020 - Notice of hearing. 
The public shall be provided notice of hearings in compliance with state law (the Planning and Zoning Law, Government Code Sections 65000 et seq., Subdivision Map Act, Government Code Sections 66410 et seq., and the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code 21000 et seq.). 
A.  Content of Notice. Notice of a public hearing shall include: the date, time and place of the hearing; the name of hearing body; a general explanation of the matter to be considered; a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property that is the subject of the hearing. If a proposed negative declaration or final environmental impact report has been prepared for the project pursuant to the Calabasas CEQA Guidelines, the hearing notice shall include a statement that the hearing body will also consider approval of the proposed negative declaration or certification of the final environmental impact report (EIR). 
B.  Method of Notice Distribution. Notice of a public hearing required by this chapter for a permit, permit amendment, appeal, or zoning ordinance amendment shall be given as follows, as required by Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091: 
1.  Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten (10) days before the hearing. 
2.  Notice shall be mailed or delivered at least ten (10) days before the hearing to: 
a.  The owner(s) of the property being considered or the owners agent, and the applicant; 
b.  Each local agency expected to provide water, schools or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide the facilities and services may be significantly affected; 
c.  All owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within five hundred (500) feet of the property that is the subject of the hearing; 
d.  Any person whose property might, in the judgment of the director, be affected by the proposed project; and 
e.  Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the director and has paid the fee set by the most current city fee resolution for the notice. 
If the number of property owners to whom notice would be mailed is more than one thousand (1,000), the director may choose to provide the alternate notice allowed by Government Code Section 65091(a)(3). 
3.  Notice shall be posted in at least three places in compliance with council resolution. 
C.  Additional Notice. If the director determines that the notice required by subsection (B) of this section will not be sufficient, the subject property shall be posted in a conspicuous place with a notice/sign of conspicuous size, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The director may also provide any additional notice that the director determines is necessary or desirable. 
D.  Additional Notice in Old Topanga and Calabasas Highlands Overlay Districts. In addition to the notice required for a public hearing by this chapter, the proposed site shall be posted with a notice, designed, prepared, and placed as required by the department at least ten (10) days prior to a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.78.030 - Scheduling of hearing. 
After the completion of any environmental documents required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and a department staff report, the matter shall be scheduled for public hearing on the next available commission or council agenda (as applicable) reserved for such matters, but no sooner than twenty-one (21) days after the posting of a proposed negative declaration. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.78.040 - Hearing procedure. 
Hearings shall be held at the date, time and place for which notice has been given as required in this chapter. Any hearing may be continued provided that prior to the adjournment or recess of the hearing, a clear public announcement is made specifying the date, time and place to which the hearing will be continued. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.78.050 - Notice of decision—Director. 
The director shall announce and record the decision at the conclusion of a scheduled hearing. The decision shall contain applicable findings and any conditions of approval. Following the hearing, a notice of the decision and any conditions of approval shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown upon the application. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.78.060 - Notice of decision—Commission. 
The commission may announce and record the decision at the conclusion of a scheduled hearing; or defer action and take specified items under advisement and announce and record the decision at a later date. The decision shall contain applicable findings and any conditions of approval. Following the hearing, a notice of the decision and any conditions of approval shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown upon the application. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.78.070 - Recommendation by commission. 
At the conclusion of any public hearing on a matter which requires final approval by the council, the commission shall forward a recommendation, including all required findings, to the council for final action. Following the hearing, a notice of the commission's recommendation shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.78.080 - Notice of decision—Council. 
For applications requiring council approval, the council shall announce and record its decision at the conclusion of the public hearing. The decision shall contain the findings of the council and any conditions of approval and reporting/monitoring requirements deemed necessary to mitigate any impacts and protect the health, safety and welfare of the city. The decision of the council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Chapter 17.80 - ENFORCEMENT OF DEVELOPMENT CODE PROVISIONS 
 
17.80.010 - Purpose. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended to ensure compliance with the requirements of this development code and any conditions of land use permit or subdivision approval, to promote the city's planning efforts and for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.80.020 - Violations. 
A.  Any structure or use which is established, operated, erected, moved, altered, enlarged or maintained, contrary to the provisions of this development code or any applicable condition of approval is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. This subsection shall also apply, without limitation, to any improved or unimproved land that is altered, graded or maintained in violation of this development code. 
B.  Any person, partnership, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or failing to comply with any provision(s) of this development code or any condition imposed on any entitlement, development permit, map or license, shall be subject to the sanctions that are set forth in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
C.  Any construction in violation of this development code or any condition(s) imposed on a permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stop work order. Any violation of a stop work order shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.80.030 - Remedies are cumulative. 
All remedies contained in this development code for the handling of violations or enforcement of the provisions of this development code shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other applicable provisions of city, county or state law. Should a person be found guilty and convicted of a misdemeanor or infraction for the violation of any provision of this development code, the conviction shall not prevent the city from pursuing any other available remedy to correct the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.80.040 - Inspection. 
Every applicant seeking a permit or any other action in compliance with this development code shall allow the city officials handling the application access to any premises or property which is the subject of the application. If the permit or other action in compliance with this development code is approved, the owner or applicant shall allow appropriate city officials access to the premises in order to determine continued compliance with the approved permit and/or any conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.80.050 - Legal remedies. 
The city may choose to undertake any of the following legal actions to correct and/or abate nuisances or violations of this development code. 
A.  Civil Actions. 
1.  Injunction. At the request of the director, the district attorney or city attorney may apply to the Superior Court for injunctive relief to terminate a violation of this development code. 
2.  Abatement. Where any person, firm or corporation fails to abate a violation and/or nuisance after being provided a notice thereof and the opportunity to correct or end the violation, the director may request the city attorney or district attorney to apply to the Superior Court of Los Angeles County for an order authorizing the city to undertake actions necessary to abate the violation and requiring the violator to pay for the cost of the actions. 
3.  Nuisance Abatement. The city may, in its discretion, elect to exercise the administrative procedures in Chapter 8.20 of the Calabasas Municipal Code to cause the abatement of a public nuisance. 
B.  Civil Remedies and Penalties. 
1.  Civil Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this development code or any permit issued in compliance with this development code, shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each day that the violation continues to exist. 
2.  Costs and Damages. Any person violating any provisions of this development code or permits issued in compliance with this development code, shall be liable to the city for the costs incurred and the damages suffered by the city, its agents, and agencies as a direct result of the violations. 
3.  Procedure. In determining the amount of the civil penalty to impose, the court shall consider all relevant circumstances, including the extent of the harm caused by the conduct constituting a violation, the nature and persistence of the conduct, the length of time over which the conduct occurred, the assets, liabilities and net worth of the defendant, whether corporate or individual, and any corrective action taken by defendant. 
C.  Criminal Actions and Penalties. Person who violate this development code are subject to the sanctions contained in Sections 1.16.010 and 1.16.020 of the Calabasas Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.80.065 - Prohibition on new permits on properties in violation of code. 
This section is intended to aid enforcement of this Code by preventing those who own or control a property in a condition, other than a legal nonconforming use, which violates the provisions of this Code from increasing the extent to which a property is out of compliance with this Code and to avoid confusion as to the relationship between legal and illegal improvements on the site and the facts surrounding each. 
A.  Prohibition Against Permit Issuance. No permit under the Calabasas Municipal Code may be issued for any property on which the director finds a violation of this Code exists until such violation(s) is corrected to the satisfaction of the director. 
B.  Exceptions. Notwithstanding the prohibition contained in subsection (A), this section shall not apply where the director, in his or her sole discretion, finds that an emergency or condition exists which necessitates the issuance of a permit, or where the issuance of a permit is necessary to correct the existing code violation(s). In such case, a permit may issue but shall be conditioned on a requirement that the illegal condition be corrected in conjunction with the permitted development on the property. 
C.  Cost of Additional Services. If deemed necessary by the director, additional sheriff, code enforcement, fire, and other city services shall be provided for inspection of construction or other services to confirm that existing violations of this Code are properly abated in conjunction with development on the property permitted pursuant to subsection (B) of this section. The cost of such additional services shall be paid in advance to the city by the applicant prior to the issuance of any permit in an amount reasonably estimated by the director. 
D.  Additional Conditions. The director may impose any conditions found necessary to protect the public health safety and welfare on a permit issued under subsection (B), of this section. 
E.  Appeal Procedures. A decision of the director to issue, conditionally issue, or deny a permit under this section shall be final unless appealed as provided in Chapter 17.74 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2018-364 , § 3, 4-25-2018)  
17.80.070 - Permit revocation. 
The review authority must hold a public hearing in order to revoke or modify any permit or entitlement granted in compliance with the provisions of this development code. Ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be delivered in writing to the applicant and/or owner of the property for which the permit was granted. Notice shall be deemed delivered two days after being mailed, first class postage paid, to the owner as shown on the current tax rolls of the county of Los Angeles, and/or the project applicant. 
A.  Permit Revocation. A permit may be revoked or modified by the review authority if any one of the following findings can be made: 
1.  That circumstances have changed so that one or more of the findings contained in Section 17.62.030 or 17.62.060 can no longer be made; 
2.  That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud; 
3.  That the improvement authorized in compliance with the permit had ceased or was suspended for six or more months; 
4.  That one or more of the conditions of the permit have not been met; 
5.  That the improvement authorized in compliance with the permit is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation; or 
6.  That the improvement allowed by the permit is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or constitutes a nuisance. 
B.  Variance Revocation. A variance may be revoked or modified by the review authority if any one of the following findings can be made, in addition to those outlined in subsection (A) of this section: 
1.  That circumstances have changed so that one or more of the findings contained in Section 17.62.080(E) can no longer be made, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the variance; or 
2.  That one or more of the conditions of the variance have not been met, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the variance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.80.080 - Recovery of costs. 
This section establishes procedures for the recovery of administrative costs, including staff time expended on the enforcement of the provisions of this development code in cases where no permit is required in order to correct a violation. The intent of this section is to recover city administrative costs reasonably related to enforcement. 
A.  Record of Costs. The department shall maintain records of all administrative costs, incurred by responsible city departments, associated with the processing of violations and enforcement of this development code, and shall recover the costs from the property owner in compliance with this section. Staff time shall be calculated at an hourly rate as established and revised from time to time by the council. 
B.  Notice. Upon investigation and a determination that a violation of any of the provisions of this development code is found to exist, the director shall notify the record owner or any person having possession or control of the property by mail, of the existence of the violation, the department's intent to charge the property owner for all administrative costs associated with enforcement, and of the owner's right to a hearing on any objections they may have. The notice shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. 
C.  Summary of Costs and Notice. At the conclusion of the case, the director shall send a summary of costs associated with enforcement to the owner and/or person having possession or control of the property by certified mail. The summary shall include a notice in a form approved by the city attorney, advising the responsible party of their right to request a hearing on the charges for city cost recovery within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, and that if no such request for hearing is filed, the responsible party will be liable for the charges. In the event that no request for hearing is timely filed or, after a hearing the director affirms the validity of the costs, the property owner or person in control shall be liable to the city in the amount stated in the summary or any lesser amount as determined by the director. These costs shall be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the city, in any court of competent jurisdiction within the city. 
D.  Request for Hearing on Costs. Any property owner, or other person having possession and control of the subject property, who receives a summary of costs shall have the right to a hearing before the director on their objections to the proposed costs. 
1.  A request for hearing shall be filed with the department within ten (10) days of the service by mail of the department's summary of costs, on a form provided by the department. 
2.  Within thirty (30) days of the filing of the request, and on ten (10) days' written notice to the owner, the director shall hold a hearing on the owner's objections, and determine their validity. 
3.  In determining the validity of the costs, the director shall consider whether total costs are reasonable in the circumstances of the case. Factors to be considered include, but are not limited to: whether the present owner created the violation; whether there is a present ability to correct the violation; whether the owner moved promptly to correct the violation; the degree of cooperation provided by the owner; and whether reasonable minds can differ as to whether a violation exists. 
4.  The director's decision shall be appealable to the council as provided by Chapter 17.74. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.80.090 - Retroactive permit requirements. 
If any person establishes a land use, or erects, constructs, alters, enlarges, moves or maintains any structure without first obtaining any permit required by this development code, that person shall be required to fully comply with applicable permit application processes and requirements of this development code including the payment of the additional permit processing fees established by the city fee resolution prior to the city's issuance of any permit for any building, structure or use on the site. At the discretion of the director, the city shall not be obligated to process permits for work or improvements on the property until all documented code violations are first remedied. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
Article VII. - Development Code Definitions  
Chapter 17.90 - DEFINITIONS 
 
17.90.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter provides definitions of terms and phrases used in this development code that are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common usage. If any of the definitions in this chapter conflict with definitions in other chapters of the Municipal Code, these definitions shall prevail for the purposes of this development code. If a word is not defined in this chapter, or other titles of the Municipal Code, the most common dictionary definition is assumed to be correct. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010)  
17.90.020 - Definitions of specialized terms and phrases. 
A.  Definitions, A. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Accessory retail uses" means the retail sales of various products (including food service) in a store or similar facility that is located within an health care, hotel, office or industrial complex. These uses include pharmacies, gift shops and food service establishments within hospitals; convenience stores and food service establishments within hotel, office and industrial complexes. 
"Accessory structure" means a structure that is physically detached from, secondary and incidental to, and commonly associated with the primary structure. See also "Accessory Uses and Structures, Residential. 
"Accessory use" means a use customarily incidental to, related and clearly subordinate to a principal use established on the same parcel, or within the same tenant space/business, which does not alter the principal use nor serve property other than the parcel or tenant space/business where the principal use is located. 
"Accessory uses and structures, residential" means any use and/or structure that is customarily a part of, and clearly incidental and secondary to, a residence and does not change the primarily residential character of the residential use. These uses include the following detached accessory structures, and other similar structures normally associated with a residential use of property: garages, gazebos, greenhouses, spas and hot tubs, studios, storage sheds, swimming pools, tennis courts, workshops, other on-site sport courts, and other similar residential facilities. This term does not include secondary housing units or accessory dwelling units, which are defined separately. Lawfully operated home occupations, permitted under Section 17.12.100 are also allowed accessory uses. Accessory uses do not include any short-term or transient rental or occupancy of any residential property or a portion thereof located in the city for any purpose, including but not limited to a vacation, for less than thirty (30) days if that rental or occupancy occurs in exchange for any form of compensation or consideration. A bed and breakfast inn requires separate permits under the Calabasas Municipal Code section and is not an accessory use. 
"Adult entertainment businesses" means any adult bookstore, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater, cabaret, sexual encounter center, or any other business or establishment that offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, but not including those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state law. Does not include therapeutic massage services provided by licensed professionals, which are included under the definition of "Personal services." 
"Agent" means a person authorized in writing by the property owner to represent and act for a property owner in contacts with city employees, committees, commissions and the council, regarding matters regulated by this development code. 
Agricultural Uses for Fuel Modification. "Agricultural use" means and includes only the area of fuel modification required by the fire department. All agricultural uses shall be designed to avoid significant adverse effects to surrounding area resources including increases in erosion, slope failure or sedimentation on adjacent or downstream watershed properties or the application of pesticides adjacent to existing residences. Agricultural uses are generally limited to slopes not to exceed two to one. Agricultural uses may not involve activities which require the issuance of commercial license by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) or the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF). 
"Alley" means a public or private roadway that provides vehicle access to the rear or side of lots having other public street frontage that is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
"Allowed use" means a use of land identified by Article II as an "allowed use," shown as an "A" use on the Land Use Table in Chapter 17.11, that may be established with approval of a zoning clearance, or minor use permit and, where applicable, building permit approval, subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this development code. 
"Alter/Alteration" means, with respect to an oak tree, any action that may cause damage, stress, injury, death or disfigurement of an oak tree or scrub oak, including removing, transplanting, detaching, cutting or pruning, poisoning, over-watering, or excavating or paving within the protected zone of the oak tree. 
"Alteration" means, with respect to a structure, any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a structure, or a change in the external appearance of any structure, not including painting. 
"Alteration" means any exterior change or modification, through public or private action, to the character-defining or significant physical features of properties affected by Chapter 17.36. Such changes may be changes to or modifications of the structure, architectural details or characteristics, rock curbs, the addition of new structures, cutting or removal of trees, and the placement or removal of significant objects such as signs, plaques, light fixtures, street furniture, walls, fences, or steps, affecting the significant, historical qualities of the property. 
"Antenna" means a device used in communications which transmits and/or receives radio frequency signals. 
"Antenna structure" has the meaning set forth in section 17.12.050(L) of this title. 
"Anti-drain valve" or "check valve" means a valve located in a lateral or in or under a sprinkler head to hold water in the system so it minimizes drainage from the lower portions of the system. 
"Applicant" means a person who has either (a) a freehold interest in the land which is the subject of an application, (b) a possessory interest in that land which entitles him/her to exclusive possession, or (c) contractual interest which is specifically enforceable and thereby may become a freehold or exclusive possessory interest. "Applicant" includes an authorized agent. 
"Application rate" or "precipitation rate" means the depth of water applied to a given area, usually measured in inches per hour. 
"Architectural review panel" means the Calabasas architectural review panel established by Chapter 2.40 of the Municipal Code, for the purpose of reviewing proposed development that is subject to design guidelines. 
"Arterial street" means streets that predominantly carry through traffic. 
Assisted living facility" means individual housing units within a multifamily structure or complex, with social and support services. Limited medical care and supervision may also be provided, where the emphasis of the facility remains residential. 
"Average natural grade" means the average of the highest and lowest elevations of the pre-development ground surface of the site, at the edges of a proposed structure. 
"Average slope" means the characteristic slope of the ground surface of an area of land, expressed as a percent, based on the most accurate available topographic information. Average slope shall be determined using one of the following methods. 
1.  Basic Method. This method can be used where the director determines that slopes are uniform, with little variation. Where line drawn between the highest and lowest points on a parcel is adequate to represent the direction and extent of slope for the entire parcel, the difference in elevation between the high and low points, divided by the distance between the points will determine the average slope. 
2.  Contour Measurement Method. Where varied slope conditions or complex topography exist, the most precise measurement of average slope is the following formula. 
S = 0.00229 (I × L) A 
Where: 
S = Average slope of the parcel in percent 
A = Total number of acres in the parcel (or section measured) 
L = Length of contour lines in scaled feet 
I = Vertical distance of contour interval in feet 
3.  Sectional Method. Where the parcel contains distinct sections of differing slope, the average slope of each section may be determined through the contour measurement method in subdivision (2) above, and then combined as an average for the entire parcel. 
B.  Definitions, B. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Bar/Cocktail Lounge " means a building or tenant space within a building where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-site consumption that are not part of a larger restaurant. Includes bars, taverns, pubs cocktail lounges and similar establishments where any food service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. May also include beer brewing as part of a brew pub. Live entertainment and/or dancing is considered a night club, which is separately defined. 
"Banquet Hall" means an establishment which is rented by individuals or groups to accommodate private (invitation only) functions including, but not limited to banquets, weddings, anniversaries, and other similar events. Such a use may include kitchen facilities for preparation of food to be consumed on the premises. 
"Beauty salon" means a service business operating to provide services related to hair, skin, nail and cosmetology care. 
"Bed and breakfast inn" means a commercial facility designed to appear as a single-family dwelling, with one family in permanent residence, where bedrooms without individual cooking facilities are rented for overnight lodging. This definition does not include "hotels and motels," or rooming and boarding houses, which are defined separately; or the rental of an entire residence for one week or longer. 
"Bedrock" means the solid undisturbed rock in place either exposed at the ground surface or beneath superficial deposits of loose rock or soil. 
"Bench" means a relatively level step excavated into sloping natural ground on which engineered fill or embankment fill is to be placed. 
"Best management practice (BMP)" means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, maintenance procedures, education programs, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, and drainage from raw materials storage. The California Storm Water Best Management Practice Handbooks for Municipal, Industrial/Commercial and Construction Activity provide a detailed discussion of BMPs. 
"Biotic resources" means populations, individuals, or parts thereof of living organisms, including genetic, taxonomic and ecological scales of organization, and with actual or potential economic, aesthetic, or other value to humanity. 
"Block" means a group of lots surrounded by streets or roads. 
"Block length" means the longest dimension of a block along a street or road. 
"Boutique home furnishing stores" a store under two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in size selling a variety of items including but not limited to; home décor ; pillows; decorative books; lamps; linens; fabrics; art; antiques; cutlery; glassware; kitchen utensils; and china. Stores that do not fit the definition of boutique home furnishings store include but are not limited to: single-purpose, high-volume stores that customarily exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in gross size such as: carpet and flooring stores; tile stores; building materials stores; lighting stores; mattress stores; and, big-box retail or discount furniture stores. 
"Brightness" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, the magnitude of sensation that results when viewing surfaces from which light is reflected to the eye. The sensation is determined by both measurable luminance and the conditions affecting the observer. 
Building. See "Structure." 
"Building envelope" means the area of a site enclosed by the required setbacks and height limit established by this development code, within which a building may be constructed. 
"Building-mounted" means mounted to the top or side of a building or to other structures. 
"Building site area" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.72, an area designated by the applicant, including all or a portion of one or more parcels comprising the development site, where development may occur in compliance with this section. Portions of a site that are subject to flooding (as determined by the building official) shall not be included in the calculated area (square feet) of the building site. 
C.  Definitions, C. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Calabasas Road District" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.30, both sides of Calabasas Road from the east side of Mureau Road to the west side of Parkway Calabasas. 
"California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)" means state law (California Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.) requiring public agencies to document and consider the environmental effects of a proposed action, prior to allowing the action to occur. 
"California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC)" means the governmental agency which regulates the terms and conditions of the public utilities in the state of California. 
"Canopy cover" means the percentage of a site covered by oak canopy based on the sum of all oak crown canopies within the property boundaries. 
"Carpool" means a vehicle carrying two to six persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis. 
"Certificate of appropriateness" means a certificate issued by the historic preservation commission approving such plans, specifications, statements of work, and any other information which are reasonably required by the commission to make a decision on any proposed alteration, restoration, rehabilitation, construction, removal, relocation or demolition, in whole or in part, to a historical resource. 
"Certificate of economic hardship" means a certificate issued pursuant to Section 17.36.090 or 17.36.120 of this title. 
"Certified landscape professional" means a landscape architect, nursery person, arborist, or landscape contractor, licensed or, where applicable, certified, by the state of California. 
"Certified local government (CLG)" means a local government certified under a federal program by the state office of historic preservation for the purpose of more direct participation in federal and state historic preservation programs. 
"Child day care center" means a commercial or nonprofit child day care facility other than a family day care home designed and approved to accommodate fifteen (15) or more children for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. Includes infant centers, preschools, sick-child centers and school-age day care facilities. These may be operated in conjunction with a school or church facility, or as an independent land use. 
"Children's play structure" means recreational structures intended for outdoor use and enjoyment by children; to include, but not limited to such things as A see-saw, merry-go-round, swing set, slide, jungle gym, chin-up bars, spring rider, monkey bars, overhead ladder, trapeze rings, playhouses, and mazes. A playground structure shall not include (I) sandboxes or other similar structures less than twelve (12) inches in height, and (II) children's play toys which are portable and useable indoors. 
"City" means the City of Calabasas, state of California, referred to in this development code as "city." 
City council. See "Council" 
"City engineer" means the city engineer or any employee of the Calabasas public works department designated by the city engineer to perform any duty assigned to him or her by this development code. 
"City-qualified arborist" means an individual having special expertise regarding the preservation of oak trees and scrub oak habitat, including a registered landscape architect or certified arborist, and authorized by city staff to review and provide recommendations with respect to oak trees and scrub oak habitat within the city. 
"Civil engineer" means a professional engineer registered as a civil engineer by the state of California. 
"Clustered development" means a combination or arrangement of attached or detached dwellings and their accessory structures on contiguous or related building sites where the yards and open spaces are combined into more desirable arrangements of open space and where the individual lots may have less area then the required average for the zoning district but the density of the overall development meets the required standard. 
"Co-location" means the locating of wireless communications equipment from more than one provider on the same supporting structure. 
"Collector street" means a street that collects and distributes through traffic between the arterial network and local roads. 
"Commercial building" means any building or structure, all or part of which contains a commercial or industrial land use, not including any building constructed or reconstructed for the elderly or handicapped. 
"Commercial zone or zoning district" means any of the commercial zoning districts established by Section 17.10.010 of this development code. 
"Commission," except as otherwise provided by Section 17.12.050(I) of this title, means the planning commission appointed by the city council pursuant to Chapter 2.28 of Title 2 of this Code. 
"Common interest development" means and includes a condominium, community apartment project, planned development or stock cooperative, as provided by California Civil Code Section 1351. 
"Community apartment project" means a development in which an undivided interest in land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon; as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code and Section 1351(d) of the Civil Code. 
"Community center, neighborhood" means one or more buildings and associated structures and site improvements used for recreational, social, educational, and cultural activities, owned by a mutual benefit non-profit entity, such as a homeowners association, and not a public benefit non-profit entity, located in the same neighborhood as and operated solely for the benefit of the membership of the organization or the residents of the common interest development or neighborhood it serves. A neighborhood community center is accessory to a residential development and cannot be operated as a for-profit commercial business entity. Uses may include kitchen, classrooms, exercise areas, playgrounds, meeting rooms, multi-purpose rooms and swimming pools open to all residents of the common interest development or neighborhood and their guests for recreational uses such as tennis, basketball, soccer, and swimming, community events, and resident-hosted parties and gatherings. 
"Community center, regional" means one or more buildings and associated structures and site improvements owned and/or operated by a public entity or non-profit organization and used for recreational, social, educational and cultural activities, which is open to the general public and intended to serve a large region extending beyond the City of Calabasas. Uses may include commercial kitchen, classrooms, exercise areas, playgrounds, gymnasiums, meeting rooms, multi-purpose rooms, spectator sports, swimming pools, events involving social or fraternal gatherings, and areas for public assembly, such as an auditorium, theater and/or stage. A regional community center is different from a neighborhood community center, which is defined separately. 
"Community garden" means an area of land privately or publicly owned that is divided into a series of plots or gardens where individuals other than the property owner are authorized to use the area for the purpose of cultivating private gardens. 
"Compaction" means the increase in the density of soil or rock fill by mechanical means. 
"Conditional use permit" means a discretionary land use permit that may be granted under the provisions of this development code that authorizes a specific use of land on a specific site, subject to compliance with any conditions of approval imposed on the permit. See Section 17.62.060. 
"Condominium" means as defined by Civil Code Section 1351(f), a development where undivided interest in common in a portion of real property is coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map or parcel map. The area within the boundaries may be filled with air, earth or water, or any combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to any land except by easements for access and, if necessary, support. 
"Condominium conversion" means the conversion of real property to a common interest development as defined by Section 1351 of the California Civil Code. 
"Congregate care facility" means individual housing units within a multi-family structure or complex, with common areas for group dining and socializing. Limited medical care and supervision may also be provided, where the emphasis of the facility remains residential. 
"Contrast" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, the ratio of one surface luminance to a second surface luminance. Contrast values exceeding thirty (30) to one are generally considered uncomfortable; ten (10) to one clearly visible; and less than three to one are not perceptible. 
"Construction costs," for the purposes of the art in public places program (Chapter 17.26), means the total value of construction or reconstruction work on a commercial building as determined by the building official at building permit issuance. 
"Contributing resource" means any improvement, building, structure, sign, feature, tree, or other object adding to the historical, architectural, or cultural significance of a district. 
"Convalescent care" means residential facilities providing nursing and health-related care as a principal use with in-patient beds, such as: skilled nursing facilities (facilities allowing care for physically or mentally disabled persons, where care is less than that provided by an acute care facility); extended care facilities; convalescent and rest homes; board and care homes. Hospices and long-term personal care facilities that do not emphasize medical treatment are classified in "Residential care homes." 
"Convenience stores" means retail stores typically of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or less in gross floor area, which carry a range of merchandise oriented to convenience and travelers' shopping needs. These stores may be part of a service station or an independent facility. 
"Council" means the City of Calabasas city council, referred to in this development code as "council". 
Cut. See "Excavation." 
"Cut through traffic" is traffic that would need to pass through a local street to reach a collector or arterial roadway (these street types are identified in Figure VI-1 of the General Plan). For example, a new development that could only gain access to a collector or arterial via an existing local street would generate "though traffic" on that street. 
D.  Definitions, D. The following definitions are in alphabetical order: 
"Day care - large family" means a state licensed facility located in a single-family residence where an occupant of the residence provides care and supervision for up to fourteen (14) children for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours a day pursuant to Health & Safety § 1597.465. Children under the age of ten (10) years who reside in the home count as children served by the day care facility. 
"Day care - small family" means a state licensed facility located in a single-family residence where an occupant of the residence provides care and supervision for up to eight children for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours a day pursuant to Health & Safety Code § 1597.44. Children under the age of ten (10) years who reside in the home count as children served by the day care facility. 
"Day Spa" means facilities that offer a combination of non-medical personal services that may include hair, nail and skin care treatment or other services typically found in a beauty shop; also massage therapy and similar treatment of the human body, and may also include spa tubs, therapeutic immersion pools, steam rooms, saunas or other related accessory facilities and uses intended for health and beauty enhancement. 
"dB" means decibel; a unit used to express the relative intensity of a sound as it is heard by the human ear. 
"dBA" means the "A-weighted" scale for measuring sound in decibels; weighs or reduces the effects of low and high frequencies in order to simulate human hearing. Every increase of ten (10) dBA doubles the perceived loudness though the noise is actually ten (10) times more intense. 
"Deadwood" means limbs, branches or a portion of a tree that contains no green leaves during a period of the year when they should be present, and no translocation of nutrients within the cambium layer. 
"Deck" means a horizontal unenclosed platform, either freestanding or attached to a building. 
"Demolition" means, for purposes of Chapter 17.36 of this title, any act or process that destroys in part or in whole an individual historical resource, or a structure within a historic district. 
"Density" means the number of dwellings per net acre, unless otherwise stated, for residential uses. 
"Department" means the City of Calabasas community development department, referred to in this development code as "department." 
"Design guidelines" means for purposes of Chapter 17.36 (Historic Preservation) of this title, the principles contained in a document which illustrate appropriate and inappropriate methods of rehabilitation and construction. The purpose of using design guidelines is to aid design and decision-making with regard to retaining the integrity of scale, design, intent, materials, feelings, patterns of development, and historical character of a historical resource. 
"Designated site" means a parcel or part thereof on which a historical resource is situated, including any abutting parcel or part thereof constituting part of the premises on which the historical resource is situated, which has been designated a historic landmark or district pursuant to Chapter 17.36. 
"Detached" means any structure that does not have a wall or roof in common with another structure. 
"Development" means any grading or construction activity or alteration of the land, its terrain contour or vegetation, including the addition to, erection, expansion, or alteration of existing structures. New development is that which occurs, after the effective date of this development code. 
"Development agreement" means a contract between the city and an applicant for a development project, in compliance with Chapter 17.68 of this development code and Sections 65864 et seq., of the Government Code. 
"Development code" means the City of Calabasas Land Use and development code, Title 17 of the Calabasas Municipal Code, referred to as "this development code." 
"Development review committee (DRC)" means the development review committee established by Section 17.70.030. 
"Diameter," with respect to oak trees, means the average diameter at breast height (DBH) measured at four and one-half feet above grade on the high side of the tree. 
"Director" means the City of Calabasas community development director, or any employee of the Calabasas community development department designated by the community development director to perform any duty assigned to him or her by this development code, referred to in this development code as "department." 
"Disability glare" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, the effect of stray light in the eye that reduces visibility and visual performance. A direct glare source that produces visual discomfort can also produce disability glare by introducing a measurable amount of stray light into the eye. 
"Displayed" means merchandise set out for viewing by the public. 
"Distribution uniformity" means uniformity of water application by the irrigation system, as defined by the Irrigation Auditor Handbook. 
"Domestic oak" means any oak planted, grown and/or held for sale as a part of a licensed nursery business that does not exceed eight inches in diameter, and is so identified by the city. 
"Dripline" means the outermost edge of an oak tree's canopy. When shown on a map, the dripline will appear as an irregular shape that follows the outline of the oak tree branches as viewed from above. 
"Drive-in and drive-thru sales" mean facilities or establishments where food or other products may be purchased or received by motorists from their vehicles. Such facilities include as examples fast-food restaurants and drive-through dairies. 
"Drive-in and drive-thru services" means facilities or establishments where services may be obtained by motorists from their vehicles. Such facilities include as examples drive-up teller windows in banks. Does not include: automatic teller machines (ATMs), service stations, or car washes. 
"Duplex" means a detached, multifamily housing structure under single ownership containing two dwellings. 
"Dwelling" or "dwelling unit" means a room or group of internally connected rooms that have sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation facilities, but not more than one kitchen, which constitutes an independent housekeeping unit, occupied by or intended for one household on a long-term basis. Types of dwellings include single-family dwellings, duplexes, multifamily dwellings, mobilehomes, condominiums and townhouses. 
E.  Definitions, E. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Embankment" means a fill consisting of a deposit of soil, rock or other materials mechanically placed, including the conditions resulting there from. 
"Emergency shelter" has the same meaning as defined in subdivision (e) of Section 50801 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Encroach/Encroachment," with respect to an oak tree, means any intrusion of human activity into the protected zone of an oak tree, including alteration, grading, excavating, paving, trenching disposal or use of materials, construction of animal corrals, parking of vehicles, disposal or use of toxic substances, installation of landscaping, any type of temporary or permanent storage, additional irrigation, or the construction of structures or other improvements. 
"Engineered fill" means engineered material mixed, processed, water conditioned and compacted to a specified density per a civil engineer recommendations. 
"Engineering geologist" means a registered geologist certified as an engineering geologist by the state of California. 
"Engineering geology" means the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works. 
"Environmental impact report (EIR)" means an informational document used to assess the physical characteristics of an area and to determine what effects will result if the area is altered by a proposed action, prepared in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
"Ephemeral stream" means a stream where storm water may be found on an infrequent basis and generally occurs only for a short time after extreme storms within poorly defined channels. An ephemeral stream does not include drainage culverts, swales, and other manmade drainage features. 
"Equestrian facilities" means commercial horse, donkey and mule facilities including horse ranches, boarding stables, riding schools and academies, horse exhibition facilities (for shows or other competitive events), pack stations, and barns, stables, corrals and paddocks accessory and incidental to these uses. These facilities may include the retail sales of tack and feed supplies as an accessory use. 
"Equipment", for the purposes of Chapter 17.11, means radio electronic equipment necessary to operate a wireless telecommunication facility which is often installed on a pole, in a ground-mounted metal cabinet, or an underground vault. 
"Erosion" means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water or ice. 
"Excavation" means the mechanical removal of earth material. 
Existing Grade. See "Grade." 
"Exotic animals" means non-domesticated animals that are carnivorous, poisonous or not native to North America, commonly displayed in zoos. 
F.  Definitions, F. The following definitions are in alphabetical order: 
"Farm animals" means cattle, donkeys, fowl, goats, horses, mules, poultry, sheep, swine and other animals determined by the director to be not commonly regarded as household pets. Does not include cats, dogs and other common household pets, which are separately defined. 
"FCC" has the meaning set forth in Section 17.12.050(L) of this title. 
"Feasible" means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors. 
"Fence" means a linear structure of wood, wrought iron, chain link or other materials (except entirely of concrete or masonry) which provide for separation and/or screening between adjoining sites or areas within a site. Similar structures primarily of concrete or masonry are included under the definition of "Walls." 
"Fill" means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means. 
"Final map" means a final map prepared in compliance with Article 2, Chapter 2 of the Subdivision Map Act and approved in compliance with Article 4, Chapter 3 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
Finish Grade or Grading. See "Grade." 
Flag Lot. See "Lot types." 
"Floor area ratio (FAR)" is the ratio of floor area to total lot area. FAR restrictions are used to limit the maximum floor area allowed on a site (including all structures on the site). The maximum floor area of all structures (measured from exterior wall to exterior wall) permitted on a site (including residential carports) shall be determined by multiplying the Floor Area Ratio (FAR) by the total net area of the site (FAR x Net Site Area = Maximum Allowable Floor Area). FAR for non-residential projects shall apply to the gross area of all functional and habitable floors of all structures and shall not apply to supporting parking facilities (open parking lots or structures) which provide required off-street parking in accordance with Section 17.28. Carports and private garages shall be included as part of the FAR for projects located in the Old Topanga and Calabasas Highlands Overlay zones. 
  
"Footcandle" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, a unit of measure for illuminance on a surface that is everywhere one foot, from a uniform point of light of one candle and equal to one lumen per square foot. 
"Fortunetelling" means and includes the telling of fortunes, forecasting of fortunes or futures, or furnishing of any information not otherwise ordainable by ordinary process of knowledge, by means of occult, psychic power, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves, or other such reading, telepathy, or other craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized ordinance or substance, gypsy cunning or foresight, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries or magic, or other similar means, of any kind or nature for any form of consideration. 
Front Property Line. See "Lot line or property line." 
"Fuel modification area" means an area where the volume of flammable vegetation has been reduced by thinning and the removal of dead material, on both sides of a driveway or road for a depth of ten (10) feet on each side, to provide for reduced fire intensity and duration. 
"Full cut-off" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, a lighting fixture that by design of the housing does not allow any light dispersion or direct glare to shine above a horizontal plane from the base of the fixture. Full cut-off fixtures must be installed in a horizontal position as designed in order to achieve cut-off. 
G.  Definitions, G. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Garage or carport" means covered parking space for automobiles or other vehicles, where the size of the parking space complies with the provisions of Section 17.28.070. A garage is a structure with a door, enclosed on four sides; a carport has no door, and is enclosed on two or fewer sides. 
"General Plan" means the City of Calabasas General Plan, including all elements thereof and all amendments thereto, as adopted by the Council under the provisions of Sections 65300 et seq. of the Government Code, and referred to in this development code as the "General Plan." 
Geotechnical Engineer. See "Soils engineer." 
"Glare" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, visual discomfort experienced from high contrast. Glare is categorized into three levels. These levels are based on the contrast ratio as follows: 
1.  "High glare sources" means a brightly lighted surface where the contrast ratio exceeds thirty (30) to one. 
2.  "Medium glare sources" means brightly lighted surfaces where the contrast ratio exceeds ten (10) to one, but is less than thirty (30) to one. 
3.  "Low glare sources" means illuminated surfaces where the contrast ratio exceeds three to one, but is less than ten (10) to one. 
"Grade" means the vertical location of the ground surface. 
1.  "Existing or natural grade" means the contour of the existing topography excluding any cut and/or fill. 
2.  "Finish grade" means the final grade of the site that conforms to an approved grading plan and grading permit. 
"Grading" means any excavating or filling or combination thereof. 
"Gross floor area" means the total area in square feet of all floors in all buildings on a site, including all area within the exterior surfaces of the exterior walls. 
Guesthouse. See "Secondary housing unit." 
H.  Definitions, H. The following definitions are in alphabetical order: 
Habitat linkage" means large, regional (landscape level) connections between habitat blocks (core areas) meant to facilitate animal movements and essential genetic flows between different sections of the landscape. These linkages are not necessarily currently constricted, but are essential to maintain connectivity function in the ecoregion. 
"Hedge". See "shrub/hedge". 
"Historic district" means any district designated pursuant to Section 17.36.050(c) or (E). 
"Historic landmark" means any landmark designated pursuant to Section 17.36.050(B) or (E). 
"Historic landscape" means any landscape district designated pursuant to Section 17.36.050(D). 
"Historical resources" means improvements, buildings, structures, signs, features, historic districts, conservation zones, trees, or other objects of cultural, architectural, or historical significance to the citizens of Calabasas and the state of California, the Southern California region, or the nation, which have been determined to be eligible for nomination or designation by the historic preservation commission, or by the council on appeal, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.36. 
"Hobby farm" means a parcel of land where farm animals are raised and/or garden crops are grown (fruits, vegetables, flowers and tree nuts) in a manner incidental to a principal residential use of the property. 
"Home occupation" means the gainful employment of the occupants of a dwelling, with the business activity being subordinate to the residential use of the property, with no display, or commodity sold on the premises except as provided by Section 17.12.100 and no persons employed other than residents of the dwelling. 
"Hotel or motel" means guest rooms or suites, provided with or without meals or kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for overnight or other temporary lodging (less than thirty (30) days). Hotels provide access to most guest rooms from an interior walkway. Motels provide access to most guest rooms from an exterior walkway. Also includes accessory guest facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic facilities, accessory retail uses, and other such facilities. 
"Household pets" means the raising or keeping of birds, cats, dogs or other common household pets, and other animals determined by the director to have similar space and sanitation requirements, and noise characteristics, accessory to a residential use. 
"Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs. It may be irrigated or non-irrigated. When irrigated, a hydrozone is served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. 
I.  Definitions, I. The following definitions are in alphabetical order: 
"Illuminance" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, means a measure of light energy incident at a specific point on a surface over a specified area. The unit for this quantity is the footcandle (fc). 
"Improvement" means any street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the applicant/developer on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways and easements, as are necessary for the general use of site occupants, lot owners in a subdivision and/or local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition of a land use permit or precedent to the approval and acceptance of a final map. Improvement also refers to any other improvements, the installation of which, either by an applicant, by public agencies, by private utilities, or by any other entity, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the General Plan or any applicable specific plan. 
"Improvement" means, for purposes of Chapter 17.36, any building, structure, fence, gate, tree, wall, or other specified object constituting a historical physical feature of real property, or any part of such feature. 
"Infinity pool" means a swimming pool which produces a visual effect of water extending to the horizon, vanishing, or extending to "infinity". 
"Initial study" means an analytic document used to determine the significance of various environmental effects that may result from a proposed action, prepared in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The initial study determines whether an EIR or negative declaration shall be prepared. 
"Intermittent stream" means a stream that typically has sustained flows for multiple days only during the wet season. 
J.  Definitions, J. No definitions of terms beginning with the letter "J" are used at this time. 
K.  Definitions, K. The following definitions are in alphabetical order: 
"Kitchen" means any room or portion of room wherein food is prepared, cooked, served or consumed. A kitchen often contains, but need not contain, installations and appliances (collectively "facilities") for the preparation, cooking and/or serving of food, such as a sink, a refrigerator, a stove, range, grill, oven or microwave, or any combination thereof. 
L.  Definitions, L. The following definitions are in alphabetical order: 
"Land Use" means the type of activity or purpose for which land or building is occupied, arranged designed or intended, or for which either land or building is or may be occupied or maintained, as approved by the city. 
"Landform grading" means a contour grading method which creates artificial slopes with curves and varying slope ratios in the horizontal and vertical planes designed to simulate the appearance of surrounding natural terrain. See Figure 8-2. 
  
"Landscape area" means a planted area in addition to all hardscape elements including, decks, pools, patios, sidewalks, etc., but does not include building structures, parking lots, driveways and streets. 
"Land use" means and includes any purpose for which land is dedicated, developed, devoted or improved, and all other activities that occur, are conducted or maintained on unimproved or improved land, or within any structure thereon. "Land Use" includes any type of purpose or activity that is permitted, regulated or prohibited by this development code. 
"Land use permit" means any of the entitlements established by Article V, including zoning clearance (Section 17.62.090), site plan review (Section 17.62.020), temporary use permits (Section 17.62.030), minor use permits (Section 17.62.040), conditional use permits (Section 17.62.060), development plans (Section 17.62.070), variances (Section 17.62.080) and oak tree permits (Chapter 17.32). 
Large Family Day Care Home. See day care facilities." 
"Lawfully built" means a structure that was built in compliance with applicable city, county, state and federal laws and regulations in existence at the time of construction. 
"Leq" means the energy equivalent level, defined as the average sound level on the basis of sound energy (or sound pressure squared). The Leq is a "dosage" type measure and is the basis for the descriptors used in such standards as the 24-hour Community Noise equivalent Level (CNEL). 
"Light fixture" means for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, an electrical device used to create artificial light or illumination. A light fixture includes the light source or lamp, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a pole on which the light is supported, the reflector or directing the light, an aperture (with or without a lens), the outer shell or housing for lamp alignment and protection, an electrical ballast, if required, and connection to a power source. 
"Light pollution" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, any artificial light which causes a detrimental effect to the environment, night sky, undesirable glare, or light trespass. 
"Light pole" means, for the purposes of Section 17.12.050, means a single or segmented structure, with a single continuous footing, that is not stabilized by guy wires, and has only a light fixture attached. 
"Light trespass" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, artificial light that produces an unnecessary and unwanted illumination of the public right-of-way or adjacent property. 
"Liquor store" means a retail use which sells beer, wine, and distilled spirits to a customer for consumption off the premises and which needs a State of California Alcoholic Beverage Control License Type 21 (off-sale general). This definition shall not include a grocery store, drug store or convenience market where fifty (50) percent or less of the sales floor area, are alcoholic beverages. 
"Live entertainment" means a use which includes but is not limited to disc jockey, live bands, comedians, theater for the performing arts, and other forms of entertainment which include live performances at a commercial establishment, provided that the following shall not be consider live entertainment for the purposes of Title 17: 
1.  Adult use live entertainment establishments which are subject to the requirements of Section 17.12.025; or 
2.  Performances by one or two performers with no voice or instrument amplifications. 
3.  Recorded music played over a speaker system as background music, and not delivered by a disc jockey. 
"Local street" means streets that have no through traffic function and provide property access only. 
"Loss" means, with respect to oak trees, tangible or intangible diminished existence of the ecosystem, aesthetics, and view shed, and historical or irreplaceable value. 
"Lot" means and includes the following: 
1.  A parcel of real property shown on a subdivision or plat map, required by the Subdivision Map Act or this development code to be recorded before the sale of parcels shown on the map or plat, at the time the map was recorded; 
2.  A parcel of real property that has been issued a certificate of compliance as provided by Government Code Section 66499.35 and Chapter 17.44 of this development code; or 
3.  A parcel of real property not described in subdivision (1) or (2) above, provided the parcel resulted from a separate conveyance or from a decree of a court of competent jurisdiction which was on record before the requirement of the filing of a subdivision map by the Subdivision Map Act or this development code. 
Lot Area. "Gross lot area" is the total area included within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of adjacent dedicated street rights-of-way. "Net lot area" is exclusive of easements, including those for utilities or flood control channels, which limit the use of the lot. 
"Lot line" or "property line" means any recorded boundary of a lot. Types of lot lines are as follows (see Figure 8-3, Lot Features): 
1.  "Front lot line," on an interior lot, means the property line separating the parcel from the street. The front lot line on a corner lot is the line with the shortest frontage. (If the lot lines of a corner lot are equal in length, the front lot line shall be determined by the director.) On a through lot, both lot lines adjacent to the street are front lot lines and the lot is considered to have no rear lot line. 
2.  "Interior lot line" means any lot line not abutting a street. 
3.  "Rear lot line" means a property line that does not intersect the front lot line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line. 
Lot Depth, Location of Yards. The measurement of lot depth and the location of required yards are illustrated in Figure 8-3, Lot Features. 
Lot Types. Types of lots include the following. See Figure 8-4. 
1.  "Corner lot" means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets where they intersect at an interior angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. If the intersection angle is more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, the lot is considered an interior lot. 
2.  "Flag lot" means a lot having access to a public street by means of private right-of-way strip that must be owned in fee. 
3.  "Interior lot" means a lot abutting only one street. 
4.  "Key lot" means an interior lot, the front of which adjoins the side property line of a corner lot. 
5.  "Reverse corner lot" means a corner lot, the rear of which abuts a key lot. 
6.  "Through lot" means a lot with frontage on two generally parallel streets. 
"Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. See Figure 8-3, Lot Features. The director shall determine lot width for parcels of irregular shape. 
  
  
"Luminance" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, a measure of light energy reflected from a specific surface in a specific direction over a standard area. The unit for this quantity is the footlambert (fL). 
"Luminance ratio" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, the relationship between the maximum and minimum luminance values over an area. Uniform ratios close to one indicate an area with even brightness. Large ratios indicate areas with high glare. 
M.  Definitions, M. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Major construction project" means a construction project on a lot within the Old Topanga Overlay Zone, Calabasas Highland Overlay Zone, or the Park Moderne Overlay Zone involving one or more of the following: (i) site grading of fifty (50) cubic yards or more; (ii) construction or installation of an in-ground swimming pool; or (iii) addition of four hundred (400) square feet or more of habitable area. A major construction project does not include: (iv) reconstruction of any structure damaged by a fire, flood, or natural disaster that does not increase the pre-damage habitable area by four hundred (400) square feet or more; (v) construction or other work required to comply with another requirement of this Code; or, (vi) a project conducted by or on behalf of a government agency. 
Map Act. See "Subdivision Map Act." 
"Medical marijuana dispensary" means a facility where marijuana is made available for medical purposes in accordance with Health & Safety Code Section 11362.5. The word "marijuana" shall have the same meaning as the definition of that word in Health & Safety Code Section 11018. 
"Mills Act contract" means a property contract entered into between the city and a property owner that provides for lower property taxes in return for the rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation of a qualified historical property pursuant to California Government Code Section 50280, et seq. 
"Mitigated negative declaration" means a written statement issued by the city, describing the reasons that a proposed project will not have a significant adverse effect on the environment, including mitigation measures incorporated into the proposed design and/or operation of the project that will avoid, eliminate, reduce, or minimize environmental impacts identified through the process of project review, and therefore does not require the preparation of an EIR, in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). See also "Negative declaration." 
"Mixed use development" means the development of a site or structure with two or more different land uses, including a combination of residential, office, retail, public, manufacturing or entertainment in a single or physically integrated group of structures. 
"Mobilehome park" means any site that is planned and improved to accommodate two or more mobilehomes used for residential purposes, or on which two or more mobilehome lots are rented, leased, or held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium or other form of resident ownership, to accommodate mobilehomes used for residential purposes. 
"Monopole" means a single or segmented structure, with a single continuous footing, that is not stabilized with guy wires, and has antennas attached. 
Motel. See "Hotel or motel." 
"Multifamily housing" means and includes a building or a portion of a building used and/or designed as residences for two or more families living independently of each other. Includes: duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes (buildings under one ownership with two, three or four dwelling units, respectively, in the same building); apartments (five or more units under one ownership in a single building); townhouse development (three or more attached single-family dwellings where no unit is located over another unit); senior citizen multifamily housing; and common ownership attached unit projects such as condominiums. 
"Multiple trunk" means more than one trunk growing from a tree's root system, with the aggregate diameters totaled, deemed to equal one tree. 
"Municipal Code" means the City of Calabasas Municipal Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 
N.  Definitions, N. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)" means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System established by Section 402 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1342, as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Native landscaping or plant" means any plant which is a member of a species which was present at a given site prior to European contact. 
"Negative declaration" means a written statement issued by the city, describing the reasons that a proposed project will not have a significant adverse effect on the environment, and therefore does not require the preparation of an EIR, in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). See also "Mitigated negative declaration." 
"Night clubs" means any bar, cocktail lounge, discotheque or similar establishment which provides live entertainment n conjunction with alcoholic beverage sales. 
"Nonconforming lot" means a lot of record that was legally created, but does not conform to the provisions of this development code because the lot is of a size, shape, or configuration no longer allowed in the zoning district that applies to the site, as a result of amendments to this development code. 
"Nonconforming structure" means a structure that was legally constructed, but does not conform to the provisions of this development code because amendments to the development code made the structure nonconforming in its size, type of construction, location on its site, separation from other structures, number of parking spaces provided, or other features. 
"Nonconforming use" means a use of land (and/or within a structure) that was legally established, but does not conform with the provisions of this development code because the use is no longer allowed in the zoning district that applies to the site, as a result of amendments to this development code. A use that does not conform to the development standards (e. g. parking, loading, landscaping and sign regulations) of the zoning district in which it is located shall not be deemed a nonconforming use. 
"Noncontributing resource" means, for purposes of Chapter 17.36, any improvement, building, structure, sign, feature, tree, or other object that does not add to the historical, architectural, or cultural significance of a district. 
O.  Definitions, O. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Oak tree" means any protected oak tree of the genus Quercus, including Valley Oak (Quercus lobata) and California Live Oak (Quercus agrifolia) measuring four inches dbh (diameter at breast height) or greater and Scrub Oak (Quercus dumosa or Quercus berberidifolia), having a diameter greater than one inch when measured twelve (12) inches above grade. 
"Oak tree permit" means a permit issued by the city in compliance with Section 17.26.070 of this title. 
"Oak Tree Preservation and Protection Guidelines" means the guidelines adopted by council resolution 91-36, as amended, on file with the city clerk, or the most recently adopted council resolution replacing them. This document may be referred to as the "Guidelines." 
"Oak Tree Report" means a report prepared by a licensed arborist, landscape architect or other licensed consultant specializing in oak tree preservation and approved by the city that contains specific information on the location, condition, potential impacts of development, recommended actions and mitigation measures regarding one or more scrub oak or oak trees on an individual lot or project site. 
"Oak woodlands" means an area of land containing at least ten (10) percent ground coverage of the genera Quercus (i.e.: with single trunk diameters greater than six inches at DBH or if multi-trunked, eight composite inches at DBH with no trunk less than two inches in diameter) and total oak canopy coverage of a minimum of one acre, not surrounded by or heavily influenced by urban development such as structures or roads, and where the understory has not been permanently disturbed by structures or roads. 
"Object" means, for purposes of Chapter 17.36, a material thing of historical, cultural, or architectural value. 
"Occupancy" means all or a portion of a structure occupied by one tenant. 
"Ordinary maintenance and repair" means, for purposes of Chapter 17.36, any work for which a building permit is not required by law, where the purpose and effect of such work is to correct any deterioration of or damage to a structure or any part thereof, and to restore the same to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration or damage. 
"Original parcel" means a contiguous area of land under one ownership at the time of division, which is proposed for division under Article IV of this development code. 
P.  Definitions, P. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Parcel map" means the map described by Article 3, Chapter 2 of the Subdivision Map Act, which is required by Article IV of this development code to complete a subdivision of four or fewer lots. 
Parcel. See "Lot." 
"Perennial stream" means a stream that flows for most or all of the year within a well defined channel. 
"Permeable paving" means any paving material that permits water penetration to a soil depth of eighteen (18) inches or more. Includes nonporous surface material poured or laid in sections not exceeding one square foot in area and less than two-thirds of the total surface area of a lot that permits water penetration to a soil depth of eighteen (18) inches or more. Examples include crushed stone or gravel. 
"Permitted use" means any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association; city, county, state or district; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative thereof. 
"Personal wireless telecommunication facility," "wireless communication facility" or "wireless communication facilities" has the meaning set forth in Section 17.12.050(L) of this title. 
"Pervious surface" means portions of a site that are only paved with permeable paying materials and are not covered with structures after development. Includes landscaped and natural areas. 
Planning commission. See "commission." 
"Planted area" means the total area of a site containing only plants and natural landscaping and not covered by buildings, parking lots, driveways, patios, plazas, or other structures. 
"Pool house" means a building with a toilet, sink, and shower used as a changing and rinsing facility in conjunction with a swimming pool. 
"Portable storage container" means portable, weather-resistant receptacle designed and used for the storage or shipment of household goods, wares, building materials or merchandise. 
"Preferential parking" means parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings, for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single occupant vehicles. 
"Preservation" means, for purposes of Chapter 17.36, the identification, study, protection, restoration, rehabilitation, or acquisition of historical resources. 
"Primary structure" means a structure that accommodates the primary use of the site. 
"Primary use" means the main purpose for which a site is developed and occupied, including the activities that are conducted on the site a majority of the hours during which activities occur. 
"Professional medical office" means the business office operated and occupied by a licensed and practicing medical professional, such as a doctor, psychologist, psychiatrist, ophthalmologist, or dentist, and where the practicing medical professional normally consults with, examines and treats patients, and conducts the everyday operational functions of the business. This use does not include medical clinics, surgical centers, and laboratories. 
Property Line. See "Lot line" or "property line." 
"Property owner" means the legal owner(s) of a lot. 
"Proposed parcel(s)" means each separate parcel shown on a tentative map or lot line adjustment, as proposed by an applicant. 
"Protected zone" means a defined area surrounding an oak tree within which work activities are strictly controlled. When shown on a map, the outermost edge of the protected zone will appear as an irregular shaped circle that follows the outline of the drip line of the tree. Using the drip line as a point of reference, the protected zone shall commence at a point five feet outside of the drip line and extend inward to the trunk of the tree. The protected zone shall be no less than fifteen (15) feet from the trunk of an oak tree or fifty (50) feet from the trunk of a heritage oak or five outside of a mass growth of scrub oak. 
"Public right-of-way" means a street or highway owned and maintained by the city or the state. 
"Public road" means a street or highway owned and maintained by the city, the county, the state, or federal government. 
Q.  Definitions, Q. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Queue jump" means a type of roadway geometry typically found in bus rapid transit systems. It consists of an additional travel lane on the approach to a signalized intersection. This lane is often restricted to transit vehicles only, though some variation may permit bicyclists, mopeds, and motorcycles. The intent of the lane is to allow the high-capacity vehicles to cut to the front of the queue, reducing the delay caused by the signal and improving the operational efficiency of the transit system. 
R.  Definitions, R. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Radome" means a structural weatherproof enclosure that protects an antenna. 
"Reclaimed water" means tertiary treated waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation. 
"Reconstruction" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.24, all alterations or repairs made to a commercial building within any twelve-month period which alterations or repairs exceed fifty (50)) percent of the value of an existing commercial building. Reconstruction necessitated by earthquake damage, other natural disasters, or acts of God shall be exempt from this definition. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle or trailer which is capable of human habitation or designed or used for recreational camping or travel use, whether self-propelled or mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, or any structure inspected, approved and designated a recreational vehicle by and bearing the insignia of the state of California or any other state or federal agency having the authority to approve recreational vehicles. For the purposes of this chapter, the following vehicles shall be considered recreational vehicles: (i) Camp trailer, per California Vehicle Code Section 242; (ii) Fifth-wheel travel trailer, per California Vehicle Code Section 324; (iii) House car, per California Vehicle Code Section 362; (iv) Trailer coach, per California Vehicle Code Section 635; (v) Mobilehome, per California Vehicle Code section 396; (vi) Boat, watercraft, and/or boat/watercraft trailer; (vii) Trailers designed for the carrying of persons or property or animals on its own structure and for being drawn by another motor vehicle; and (viii) Recreational vehicle, per California Health and Safety Code section 18010. 
Recycling Facilities. 
1.  "Collection facility" means a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption or purchase of recyclable materials from the public, which may include the following: 
a.  Reverse vending machine(s); 
b.  Small collection facilities which occupy an area of five hundred fifty (550) square feet or less and may include: 
i.  A mobile unit, 
ii.  Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than fifty (50) square feet, and 
iii.  Kiosk-type units which may include permanent structures; 
c.  Large collection facilities which may occupy an area of more than five hundred fifty (550) square feet and may include permanent structures. 
2.  "Recycling facility" means a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor is certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of state law (California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986). A recycling facility does not include storage containers located on a residential, commercial or industrial designated parcel used solely for the recycling of material generated on the parcel. 
3.  "Recycling or recyclable material" means reusable domestic containers including glass, metals, paper and plastic which are intended for reconstitution, remanufacture or reuse f in an altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. 
4.  "Reverse vending machine" means an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including to aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption value as determined by state law. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary. 
A bulk reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than fifty (50) square feet, is designed to accept more than one container at a time and will pay by weight instead of by container. 
"Replacement", for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, means to put something new in place of and shall include any or all of the components that make up a light fixture. 
"Residential accessory uses and structures" means and includes any use that is customarily part of, and clearly incidental and secondary to a residence and does not change the primarily residential character of the residential use. These uses include accessory structures (e.g., garages, gazebos, greenhouses, spas and hot tubs, studios, storage sheds, swimming pools, tennis courts, workshops, other on-site sport courts, and other similar residential facilities). This term does not include secondary housing units or accessory dwelling units, which are defined separately. Lawfully operated home occupations, permitted under Section 17.12.100 are also allowed residential accessory uses. Residential accessory uses do not include any short-term or transient rental or occupancy of any residential property or a portion thereof located in the city for any purpose, including but not limited to a vacation, for less than thirty (30) days if that rental or occupancy occurs in exchange for any form of compensation or consideration. A bed and breakfast inn requires separate permits under the Calabasas Municipal Code section and is not a residential accessory use. 
"Residential care homes" means facilities providing residential social and personal care for children, the elderly, and people with some limits on their ability for self-care, but where medical care is not a major element. Includes: children's homes; halfway houses; orphanages; rehabilitation centers; self-help group homes and hospices. Convalescent homes, nursing homes and similar facilities providing medical care are included under a separate land use. 
Residential Density. See "Density." 
"Residential zone" or "zoning district" means any of the residential zoning districts established by Section 17.10.010 of this development code. 
Restaurant, Counter Service. "Counter service restaurant" means franchised or independently-operated restaurants where customers are served prepared food from a walk-up ordering counter for either on- or off-premise consumption. A restaurant with drive-up or drive-through service is instead included under the definition of "Drive-in and drive-thru sales." 
Restaurant, Table Service. "Table service restaurant" means a retail business selling food and beverages prepared on the site, where most customers are served food at tables for on-premise consumption. These restaurants may also provide food on a take-out basis where take-out is clearly secondary to table service. 
"Review authority" means the individual or official city body (the development review committee, community development director, commission or council) identified by this development code as having the responsibility and authority to review, and approve or disapprove the subdivision applications described in Article IV, permits described in Article V, and appeals and amendments described in Article VI. 
"Ridgeline" means a line connecting the highest points along a ridge and separating drainage basins or small-scale drainage systems from one another. 
"Ridgeline, significant" means those ridgelines depicted on Figure III-4 of the General Plan Open Space Element. 
"Riparian" means lands that are comprised of the vegetative and wildlife areas adjacent to perennial and intermittent streams. Riparian areas are delineated by the existence of plant species normally found near freshwater. 
"Rooming and boarding houses" means the renting of individual bedrooms within a dwelling to three or more people, whether or not meals are provided; or a single-family dwelling occupied by six or more unrelated people, living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
"Routine maintenance" means, with respect to oak trees, actions taken for the continued health of an oak tree such as dead wooding. In special cases fertilization, insect control, limited watering and ground aeration may also be warranted. Routine maintenance shall not include pruning. 
"Rural" means an area characterized by a non-urban or agricultural environment at low densities without typical urban services. Urban services and facilities not normally found in rural areas include curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lighting, landscaping, and commercial centers dependent on large consumer volumes, such as regional shopping centers. 
S.  Definitions, S. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Scrub oak habitat" means either of two separate oak species that form a thicket, three or more, of shrubs or small trees, including Quercus dumosa (Coastal Shrub) and Quercus berbberidifolia (Inland Scrub). 
"Secondary housing unit" means a second permanent dwelling that is accessory to a primary dwelling on the same site. For the purposes of Title 17, a guess house shall be considered a secondary housing unit. A secondary housing unit provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
"Secretary of the Interior Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties" means the most current version of the standards and guidelines prepared by the National Park Service for the preservation, rehabilitation, restoration and reconstruction of historic buildings. 
"Senior citizen" means a person fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
"Senior residential projects" means a multifamily housing project providing housing for senior citizens (fifty-five (55) years of age or more) in an independent living environment. 
"Service station" means a retail business selling gasoline or other motor vehicle fuels, which may also provide vehicle engine maintenance and repair services incidental to fuel sales. 
"Setback" means the distance by which a structure, parking area or other development feature must be separated from a lot line, other structure or development feature, or street centerline. See also "Yard". 
"Shielding" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, a technique or method of construction or manufacture that prevents any light dispersion to shine beyond the horizontal plane from the light emitting point of a fixture. The light emitting, reflecting, or refracting components of the light fixture, (i.e., lamp, lens, and reflective surface), shall not extend beyond the shielding of the fixture. Any structural part of the light fixture providing this shielding shall be permanently affixed to the light fixture. 
"Shrub/hedge" means a plant or number of plants with a compact growth habit and branches coming from the base of the plant cultivated and maintained in a linear fashion to form a barrier similar to a fence or wall. Mature heights of shrubs/hedges may vary from one foot to fifteen (15) feet depending on their species and landscape application. 
"Shopping center" means a group of retail stores and similar complementary commercial establishments on a site, planned and built as a coordinated unit with shared pedestrian and vehicular circulation and off-street parking. 
"Sign" means any visual device or representation (written or pictorial) used to convey information, or to identify, announce, or otherwise direct attention to a premise, product, service, person, organization, business or event, and placed on, suspended from, or in any way attached to, any structure, vehicle or landscape feature. The following are definitions related to signs: 
1.  "Abandoned sign" means a sign that identifies a business, lessor, owner, product, service, or activity which has been discontinued on the premises for a period of ninety (90) days or more. 
2.  "Address sign" means the numeric reference of a structure or use to a street, included as part of a wall or monument sign. 
3.  "Animated or moving sign" means any sign which uses movement, lighting or special materials to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
4.  "Awning or canopy sign" means a sign located on a roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements. 
5.  "Balloon" means an object made of an airtight material, no greater than eighteen (18) inches in diameter at its widest point, filled with air or gas and used as a sign. 
6.  "Banner" means a strip of cloth, thin plastic or other flexible material on which a sign is painted, printed, or otherwise displayed. 
7.  "Bench sign" means copy painted on any portion of a bus stop bench. 
8.  "Billboard or off-site sign" means a sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment, which is not sold, produced, manufactured or furnished at the property on which the sign is located. 
9.  "Building-mounted or wall sign" means a sign painted on or fastened to a building wall, and which does not project more than twelve (12) inches from the wall. 
10.  "Cabinet sign" or "can sign" means a sign that contains all the text and/or logo symbols within a single enclosed cabinet and may or may not be illuminated. 
11.  Canopy sign. See "Awning sign." 
12.  "Channel letters" means three-dimensional individually cut letters or figures, illuminated or non-illuminated, affixed to a structure. 
13.  "Civic event sign" means a temporary sign, other than a commercial sign, posted to advertise a civic event sponsored by a public agency, school, church, civic-fraternal organization, or similar noncommercial organization. 
14.  "Commercial copy or commercial message" means a message displayed on a sign which pertains primarily to the name, location, products or proposed economic transactions of any services or activities carried on for profit or gain. 
15.  "Construction sign" means a temporary sign erected on the parcel on which construction is taking place, limited to the duration of the construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, and the owner, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a major role or interest with respect to the structure or project. 
16.  "Decorative graphics" means any graphic symbol, logo, monogram, words treated as a graphic image or other symbolic device that identifies the specific business, products or services offered on the premises, or which relates to the contents of the building-mounted sign. 
17.  "Directional sign" means an on-site sign which is designed and erected solely for the purposes of directing vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic within a project. 
18.  "Directory sign" means a sign for listing the tenants or occupants and their suite numbers of a structure or center. 
19.  "Double-faced sign" means a single structure monument sign located perpendicular to the street. 
20.  "Flag" means the official flag of a government, religious group or other organization. 
21.  "Flashing sign" means a sign that contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source. 
22.  "Freestanding sign" means a sign which is erected or mounted on its own self-supporting permanent structure or base detached from any supporting elements of a building. 
23.  "Freeway facing sign" means a building mounted sign that is located (a) on a site that directly abuts the 101 Freeway and (b) is located on the one side of the building that is generally parallel to the freeway. 
24.  "Gateway sign" means two (2) monument signs flanking a private access driveway located off a public right-of-way and matching in size, design, and sign area. 
25.  "Illegal sign" means a sign that was not established or is not being maintained in compliance with the applicable provisions of the Los Angeles County Zoning Code or this chapter that applied to the sign at the time it was installed. 
26.  "Illuminated sign" means a sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign. 
27.  "Inflatable sign" means an object made of an airtight material, generally greater than eighteen (18) inches in diameter at its widest point, filled with air or gas to form a three-dimensional shape and used as a sign. 
28.  "Institutional sign" means a sign identifying the premises of a church, school, hospital, rest home, or similar institutional facility. 
29.  "Kiosk" means a free standing structure erected on a foundation and designed to provide advertising space for a group of buildings in a shopping center addressing a pedestrian audience. 
30.  "Logo sign" means an established trademark identifying the use of a structure. 
31.  "Marquee sign" means a sign designed to have changeable copy. Marquee signs may be a freestanding sign or a wall sign. 
32.  "Menu board" means a permanently mounted sign displaying the bill of fare for a drive-through restaurant. 
33.  "Monument sign" means a free-standing sign permanently affixed to the ground by a solid base or by supports so that the sign face, in its entirety, is situated above and between the outermost edges of the supporting base or support structures, and so that the open space, if any, beneath the sign face is not greater than one-fifth the overall sign height. 
34.  "Neon sign" means a sign with tubing that is internally illuminated by neon or other electrically charged gas. 
35.  "Non-appurtenant sign" means any sign which does not relate to, or which relates only incidentally to, the occupant of the site or the principal business conducted within the structure. 
36.  "Noncommercial copy" means a message that does not include commercial copy. 
37.  "Nonconforming sign" means an advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this Zoning Ordinance, and which has subsequently come under the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, but does not now completely comply. 
38.  "Open/closed sign" means an "open" or "closed" window sign. 
39.  "Open house sign" means a temporary sign posted to indicate a salesperson is available to represent the property subject to sale, lease or rent. 
40.  "Pedestrian sign" means an identification and/or directional sign designed and located primarily to inform pedestrians. These signs are usually mounted or suspended from the underside of an eave or canopy, perpendicular to an adjacent store front. 
41.  "Pennants," "streamers," and "flags" means any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar non-rigid material used for advertising purposes attached to any structure, staff, pole, line, framing or vehicle, not including noncommercial flags. 
42.  "Pole sign" means any free-standing sign that is not a monument sign. 
43.  "Political sign" means a temporary sign directly associated with national, state or local elections. 
44.  "Price sign" means a sign limited to the name or identification of items or products for sale on the premises, and the price of the items or products. 
45.  "Projecting sign" means any sign which is attached to a wall and which projects horizontally from a structure or building face or wall by more than twelve (12) inches. 
46.  "Promotional sign" means a temporary sign which serves to promote the sale of new products, new management, new hours of operation, a new service, or to promote a special sale. 
47.  "Reader board sign" means a sign that is designed so that message elements or sign copy may be readily changed through the use of individual letters or characters, separate panels, or electrical messages. 
48.  "Real estate sign" means a temporary sign that relates to the sale, lease, or rental of property or buildings, or to construction activities on a site. 
49.  "Roof sign" means a sign that is mounted on the roof of a building, or which is dependent upon a building for support, and which projects above the highest point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable, or hip roof, or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof. 
50.  "Sign area" means the area in square feet determined by drawing a line around the outer perimeter of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. 
51.  "Sign copy" means the information content of a sign, including text, illustrations, logos and trademarks. 
52.  "Sign face" means the visible portions of a sign including all characters and symbols, but not supporting structures. 
53.  "Sign height" means the vertical distance from average curb height to the top of the sign including the support structure and any design elements. 
54.  "Sign program" means a coordinated program of one (1) or more signs for an individual building or building complexes. 
55.  "Temporary sign" means any sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time and capable of being viewed from any public right-of-way, parking area or neighboring property. A temporary sign is any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, poster board or other light materials, with or without frames, and mounted in a nonpermanent manner. 
56.  "Vehicle-mounted or trailer-mounted sign" means any sign placed or maintained on a stationary automobile, truck, trailer or any other motor-driven vehicle. 
57.  Wall sign. See "Building-mounted sign." 
58.  "Window sign" means a sign posted, painted, placed or affixed in or on a window exposed to public view. An interior sign that faces a window exposed to public view and is located within three (3) feet of the window is also a window sign. 
"Significant feature" means, for purposes of Chapter 17.36, the manmade elements embodying the style or components of an improvement, including the kind and texture of the building materials, and the type and style of windows, doors, lights, signs, and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement. 
"Significant Ecological Area" means an area that possesses one or more of the following features, or classes: 
1.  Is the habitat of rare, endangered, or threatened plant or animal species. 
2.  Represents biotic communities, vegetative associations, or habitat of plant or animal species that are either one-of-a-kind, or are restricted in distribution on a regional basis. 
3.  Represents ecological communities, vegetative associations, or habitat of plant or animal species that are either one-of-a-kind, or are restricted in distribution in Los Angeles County. 
4.  Is habitat that at some point in the life cycle of a species or group of species, serves as a concentrated breeding, feeding, resting, or migrating grounds, and is limited in availability 
5.  Represents biotic resources that are of scientific interest because they are either an extreme in physical/geographical limitations, or they represent an unusual variation in a population or community. 
6.  Is an area important as game species habitat or as fisheries. 
7.  Is an area that would provide for the preservation of relatively undisturbed examples of the natural biotic communities in Los Angeles County. 
8.  Is a special area, worthy of inclusion, but one which does not fit any of the other seven criteria. 
"Single-family housing" means a building containing one dwelling unit located on a single lot. Also includes factory-built housing (modular housing) units, constructed in compliance with Title 15 of this Code. 
"Site" means a lot or adjoining lots under single ownership or single control, considered a unit for the purposes of development or other use. 
"Site coverage" means the percentage of total site area occupied by structures. Site coverage includes the principal structure, all accessory structures (e.g., carports, garages, patio covers, storage sheds, trash dumpster enclosures, and other such structures) and architectural features (e.g., chimneys, balconies, decks above the first floor, porches, stairs, and other such structures). A trellis with a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the roof open is exempt from site coverage calculations. Building coverage is measured from exterior wall to exterior wall. See Figure 8-5. 
  
"Slope" means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a percentage, or as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. 
Small Family Day Care Homes. See "Day care facilities." 
"Soil" means naturally occurring superficial deposits overlying bedrock. 
"Soils engineer (geotechnical engineer)" means an engineer experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of soils (geotechnical) engineering. 
"Soils engineering" means the application of the principles of soils mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection or testing of the construction thereof. 
"Solid waste" shall have the meaning described by Public Resources Code Section 40191, as it may be amended from time to time. 
"South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD)" means the regional authority appointed by the California State Legislature to meet federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the non-desert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino Counties). 
"Special purpose zone" or "zoning district" means any of the special purpose zoning districts established by Section 17.10.010 of this development code. 
"Spill light" means, for the purposes of Chapter 17.27, light that falls outside the area intended to be illuminated. 
"State" means the state of California or any official agency of the state. 
"State Historic Building Code" means Part 2.7 of the California Health and Safety Code, commencing with Section 18950, and the regulations promulgated there under, as they may be amended from time to time (California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 8). 
"Stealth facility" has the meaning set forth in Section 17.12.050(L) of this title. 
"Stock cooperative" means a development defined by Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code and Section 1351(m) of the Civil Code, where a corporation is formed to hold title to improved real property and the shareholders of the corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property. 
"Storage, Outdoor" means the storage of various materials outside of a structure other than fencing, either as an accessory or principal use. 
"Storage, mini storage or personal storage facility" means a structure or group of structures containing generally small, individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers rented as individual storage spaces and characterized by low parking demand. 
"Stored" means putting property away for future use. 
"Storm water" means as any surface or water flow produced by rain, snow or sleet. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected that is placed on the ground or that is attached to something located on the ground. For the purposes of this development code, the term "structure" includes "buildings," "fences," and "walls." 
"Sub-divider" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association, a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or the grantor to any agency, entity, utility or subsidiary, who proposes a subdivision for themselves or for others, except employees and consultants or other persons or entities acting in this capacity. 
Subdivision Improvements. See "Improvements." 
"Subdivision Map Act" or "Map Act" means division 2, Title 7 of the California Government Code, commencing with Section 66410 as presently constituted, and any amendments to those provisions. 
"Subdivision" means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or portion of land shown on the latest equalized Los Angeles County assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Land shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. Subdivision includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. 
"Supportive housing" has the same meaning as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 50675.14 of the Health and Safety Code. 
T.  Definitions, T. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Temporary Structure" means a structure without any foundation or footings, and which is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. 
"Temporary Use" means a use of land that is designed, operated and occupies a site for a limited period of time, in compliance with the terms of the applicable temporary use permit. 
"Tenant" means the lessee of facility space within a development project. 
"Tentative map" means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions within and around it. 
"Traffic safety visibility area" means an area on a corner lot formed by measuring thirty-five (35) feet from the intersection of the front and side property lines, and connecting the two lines across the property. See Section 17.26.060. 
"Transitional housing" has the same meaning as defined in subdivision (h) of Section 50675.2 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Transportation demand management (TDM)" means the alteration of travel behavior—usually on the part of commuters—through programs of incentives, services, and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single-occupant vehicles such as carpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as in the case in telecommuting or compressed work weeks). 
"Trellis" means any framework or structure of crossed wood or other suitable building material open on at least three sides and used to cover open space for aesthetic or shading purposes. For the purposes of lot coverage calculations, the roof of the trellis must be at least fifty (50) percent open. 
"Trip reduction" means reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single occupant vehicles. 
"Turf" means a single blade of grass or sod. 
U.  Definitions, U. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Undeveloped" means a parcel devoid of any structure or utility. 
"Uniform ratio," as used in Chapter 17.27, means the relationship between the maximum and minimum illuminance values over an area. Uniform ratios close to one indicate an area with even illuminance and low shadow. Large ratios indicate areas with uneven illuminance and high shadow. 
"Urban runoff" means any surface water flow produced by non-storm water resulting from residential, commercial and industrial activities involving the use of potable and non-potable water. 
"Urban runoff pollution control plan" means a plan which shall be required to be approved in connection with any new development. 
"Useful life" means, for the purposes of Section 17.30.090, a period of time during which a sign is expected to be usable for the purpose it was erected. The sign may be kept in good repair and maintained in good structural and electrical order. 
"Utility pole" means, for the purposes of Section 17.12.050, a single or segmented structure, with a single continuous footing supporting utility wires. 
V.  Definitions, V. The following definitions are in alphabetical order. 
"Vacant" means a building that is not currently occupied or used for any purpose. 
"Vanpool" means a vehicle carrying seven or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven to fifteen (15) adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis. 
"Variance" means a discretionary entitlement that adjusts or relaxes the development standards of this development code, in compliance with Section 17.62.080. 
"Vehicle" means any motorized form of transportation, including automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles. 
"Viewshed" means the area within view from a defined observation point. 
"Vesting tentative map" means a subdivision map with the words "Vesting tentative map" printed conspicuously on its face, that is filed and processed in the same manner as a tentative map, except as otherwise provided by Article IV or the Subdivision Map Act. 
W.  Definitions, W. The following definitions are in alphabetical order: 
"Wall" means a linear structure primarily of concrete or masonry which provides for separation and/or screening between adjoining sites or areas within a site. Similar structures primarily of wood, or materials other than concrete or masonry, are included under the definition of "Fence." 
"Warehouse retail stores" means retail stores that emphasize the packaging and sale of products in large quantities or volumes, some at discounted prices, where products may be displayed in their original shipping containers. Sites and buildings are usually large and industrial in character. Patrons may or may not be required to pay membership fees. 
"Wetlands" means transitional areas between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface, or the land is covered by shallow water. When all three wetland indicators (hydrophytic vegetation, hydric soil, and/or hydrology) are present, the presumption of wetland existence is conclusive. Where less than three indicators are present, the demonstrable use of wetland areas by wetland associated fish or wildlife resources, related biological activity, and wetland habitat values shall be the determinate. 
"Wildlife corridor" means a portion of habitat, usually linear in nature, which connects two or more habitat patches that would otherwise be fragmented or isolated from one another. Wildlife corridors are usually bounded by developed land areas or other areas unsuitable for wildlife. A corridor generally contains suitable cover, food, and water to support species and facilitate movement while in the corridor. 
"Wildlife-friendly fencing" means fencing that can be easily bypassed by all species of wildlife found within the Santa Monica Mountains, including but not limited to deer, coyotes, bobcats, mountain lions, ground rodents, amphibians, reptiles and birds, and shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  Fences shall be split rail with no more than three horizontal rails. 
2.  The bottom edge of the bottom horizontal rail shall be no lower than eighteen (18) inches from the ground. 
3.  There shall be a minimum two-foot gap between each rail. 
4.  The top edge of the topmost rail shall be no higher than forty-eight (48) inches from the ground. 
5.  Fence material shall be of wood, wood composite or some other similar material. 
6.  Fence posts shall not be hollow at the top or have holes drilled into them near the top. 
7.  Fences shall not be barbed. 
8.  The top of the fence shall not contain spikes of any manner 
"Wireless communication facility" or "wireless communication facilities" mean a structure, antenna, pole, tower, equipment and related improvements established for the purpose of providing wireless transmission of voice data, images or other information, including but not limited to radio, television, cellular phone service, personal communication service and paging services. 
X.  Definitions, X. No definitions of terms beginning with the letter "X" are used at this time. 
Y.  Definitions, Y. The following definitions are in alphabetical order: 
"Yard" means an area between a lot line and a required setback, other than a court, unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward, except for projections permitted by this development code. See Section 17.20.180 and Figure 3-7, Setbacks. 
1.  "Front yard" means an area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the required setback. 
2.  "Rear yard" means an area extending the full width of the lot between a rear lot line and the required setback. 
3.  "Side yard" means an area extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the nearest side lot line and the required setback. 
Z.  Definitions, Z. The following definitions are in alphabetical order: 
"Zoning district" means a portion of the city within which certain uses of land and structures are defined, and regulations are specified by this development code. The zoning districts established by this development code are described in Section 17.10.010. 
(Ord. No. 2010-265, § 3, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 2010-267, § 2, 2-10-2010; Ord. No. 2012-295, § 3(Exh. B), 6-27-2012; Ord. No. 2014-311, § 4(Exh. A) , 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2015-328, § 4(Exh. A), 10-14-2015; Ord. No. 2015-330, § 2(Exh. B) , 1-13-2016; Ord. No. 2018-364 , § 5, 4-25-2018; Ord. No. 2018-366 , § 3, 6-27-2018) 
